TITLE: Exploring optimal outsourcing strategy with and without transfer payment
JOURNAL: Naval_Research_Logistics
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.22178
---

University of Birmingham
Exploring optimal outsourcing strategy with and
without transfer payment
Luo, Zheng; Chen, Xu; Wang, Xiaojun
DOI:
10.1002/nav.22178
License:
Other (please specify with Rights Statement)
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Citation for published version (Harvard):
Luo, Z, Chen, X & Wang, X 2024, 'Exploring optimal outsourcing strategy with and without transfer payment',
Naval Research Logistics, vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 816-830. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.22178
Link to publication on Research at Birmingham portal
Publisher Rights Statement:
This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Use of Self-Archived Versions.
This article may not be enhanced, enriched or otherwise transformed into a derivative work, without express permission from Wiley or by
statutory rights under applicable legislation. Copyright notices must not be removed, obscured or modified. The article must be linked to
Wiley’s version of record on Wiley Online Library and any embedding, framing or otherwise making available the article or pages thereof by
third parties from platforms, services and websites other than Wiley Online Library must be prohibited.
General rights
Unless a licence is specified above, all rights (including copyright and moral rights) in this document are retained by the authors and/or the
copyright holders. The express permission of the copyright holder must be obtained for any use of this material other than for purposes
permitted by law.
•Users may freely distribute the URL that is used to identify this publication.
•Users may download and/or print one copy of the publication from the University of Birmingham research portal for the purpose of private
study or non-commercial research.
•User may use extracts from the document in line with the concept of ‘fair dealing’ under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (?)
•Users may not further distribute the material nor use it for the purposes of commercial gain.
Where a licence is displayed above, please note the terms and conditions of the licence govern your use of this document.
When citing, please reference the published version.
Take down policy
While the University of Birmingham exercises care and attention in making items available there are rare occasions when an item has been
uploaded in error or has been deemed to be commercially or otherwise sensitive.
If you believe that this is the case for this document, please contact UBIRA@lists.bham.ac.uk providing details and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

1 
Exploring optimal outsourcing strategy with and without transfer payment 
 
Zheng Luo1, Xu Chen1*, Xiaojun Wang2 
1. School of Management and Economics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, 611731, P. R. China. 
2. Birmingham Business School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. 
 
Abstract: This study investigates an Original Equipment Manufacturer’s (OEM’s) outsourcing choice 
between a competing manufacturer (CP) and a non-competing manufacturer (NP). We develop a 
benchmark self-produce strategy and two outsourcing strategies to differentiate two manufacturing 
service providers and examine the optimal strategy alongside an analysis of the respective incentives 
(e.g., a lump-sum payment) from the two service providers. The optimal strategy depends on the 
difference in production efficiency, degree of product substitution, and joint effect of the transfer 
payments. The transfer payments contribute to a greater range of Pareto improvement, increasing the 
possibility of outsourcing cooperation while highlighting the role of competition intensity on the model 
and outsourcing cooperation partner. Effect analysis shows that in the absence of transfer payment, the 
optimal strategy is beneficial to social welfare. With transfer payment, the optimal strategy is changed, 
and the firms will be more profitable, but at the expense of customers’ surplus, which may result in 
worse social welfare. An extended analysis of mixed strategies, in which the OEM produces part of the 
products and outsources the rest to CP/NP, shows that while the mixed-CP strategy can be an optimal 
choice, the mixed-NP strategy will degenerate to either self-produce or complete outsourcing to NP 
under certain conditions. 
Keywords: outsourcing service; strategy selection; transfer payment; competition intensity. 
 
* Corresponding author 
 
 

2 
1 Introduction 
More and more original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) outsource their production operations when 
seeking cost advantage or focusing on their core business. This manufacturing paradigm shift is further 
accelerated by the offering of improved manufacturing service with the support of Industry 4.0 
technologies such as the Internet of Things, Autonomous Robots, and big data analytics (Xu et al. 2018; 
Ivanov et al. 2021). Consequently, outsourcing has been widely embraced in operation strategy and 
supply chain management over recent decades (Tsay et al., 2018; Niu et al, 2021). Surveys of industry 
practices and theoretical studies both suggest that outsourcing production to service-oriented 
manufacturers can allow OEMs to reduce costs (Pisano and Shih, 2012; Xiao and Gaimon, 2013). This 
explains why there is a growing preference for production outsourcing among OEMs. 
For OEMs, the two most representative types of manufacturers providing production services are 
competitive manufacturers (CPs) and non-competitive manufacturers (NPs). CPs are service providers 
who not only offer production services to OEMs but also produce and sell their own brand products to 
compete with the OEMs. For instance, despite being fierce rivals in the smartphone market, Apple has 
outsourced certain production operations (e.g., manufacturing displays, processors, and memory chips 
for Apple’s iPhones) to Samsung, due to its expertise and advanced manufacturing capabilities. NPs do 
not engage in end market competition but only focus on providing production services. For example, 
Foxconn can be regarded as a non-competitive manufacturer that focuses on providing production 
services to many leading technology firms, such as Apple, Dell, and Hewlett Packard (Li et al., 2020). 
Given the simultaneous existence of CPs and NPs, a natural question for OEMs in these settings is 
whether to outsource their production operation and, if so, to whom. It is generally understood that 
OEMs are required to take the initiative to seek out the optimal manufacturing service provider. However, 
it is illustrative to attempt to understand manufacturing service provider selection as two-way behavior, 
which can bring both the OEMs and the outsourced manufacturers into a multi-win situation (Chen et 
al., 2021). In some cases, both the CP and NP would rather use incentives, such as a lump-sum payment 
through profit redistribution to the OEMs, to attract the OEMs’ production outsourcing cooperation. To 
some extent, the transfer payment behaviors offered by the CP and NP can be regarded as a means to 
compete for outsourcing business. 
Despite the considerable attention given to the topic both in practice and research, we are far from 
a complete understanding of the factors that influence the selection decision of manufacturing service 
providers and the overall impact of various outsourcing strategies. Drawing from the academic literature 
and several real-world examples, we examine OEMs’ outsourcing strategy decisions in relation to cost 
consideration, competition factors, and the incentive behaviors of CP and NP. Specifically, this paper 
addresses the following key questions: 
 
Should an OEM outsource its production operations to CP or NP, or produce in-house? 
 
What is the optimal decision on manufacturing service provider selection both without and 
with the incentives (a lump-sum payment) offered by CP and NP? 

3 
 
What impact does the optimal selection decision have on customers and social welfare? 
To answer these questions, we consider a market structure in which the OEM is the dominant player 
and competes with the CP in the end product market. The OEM can manufacture products in-house or 
outsource to a competing or non-competing manufacturer. Based on the competitive relationship 
between the OEM and the service-oriented manufacturers, several outsourcing strategies exist: (i) 
outsourcing to a CP that sells partially substitutable products and competes with the OEM; (i) 
outsourcing to an NP that only manufactures products for the OEM and does not sell own-brand 
substitutable products; and (iii) the OEM producing part of the products by itself and simultaneously 
outsourcing the rest of the products to a CP or NP. The scenario in which the OEM manufactures 
produces in-house is referred to as the self-produce strategy, and the cases in which the OEM opts to 
procure products from a CP or an NP are referred to as the outsourcing-to-CP strategy or the 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy. 
The key contributions of our study can be summarized as follows. First, our work contributes to 
the literature on outsourcing by investigating horizontal production outsourcing to a competing 
manufacturer and vertical outsourcing to a non-competing manufacturer, with explicit consideration of 
the incentives of lump-sum transfer payments from the CP and NP to the OEM; this fills a gap in the 
literature. This problem differs from conventional outsourcing problems that tend to concentrate on 
decision-making optimization in either a horizontal or a vertical production outsourcing model. In 
contrast, our work examines both models simultaneously and focuses on the effect of transfer payment 
on both the Pareto improvement region and the strategy informing manufacturing service provider 
selection. The effect analysis highlights the nature of production outsourcing and the dynamic factors 
that result in the selection of different manufacturing service providers. Second, our work provides 
several useful insights that complement the findings of previous studies. For example, the optimal 
outsourcing strategy is determined not only by competition intensity and the production cost difference, 
but also by the interactive effect of the transfer payment incentive offered by the CP and NP. Aside from 
effectively improving the possibility that outsourcing will enhance the Pareto improvement region, the 
presence of an incentive can change the model and outsourcing partner. The optimal outsourcing strategy 
under a certain condition without transfer payment (i.e., outsourcing to an NP) has a positive impact on 
social welfare. However, transfer payment will change the manufacturing service provider’s decision 
and become a negative impact, leading to high retail prices and low social welfare. 
This paper is organized as follows. We present a literature review in Section 2, and the model 
descriptions and assumption in Section 3. Section 4 provides the models and equilibrium analysis. The 
optimal strategy of outsourcing provider selection and its effect on customers and social welfare are 
studied in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Section 7 examines an extended model of mixed strategies and 
robust analysis of pricing competition. Finally, we present our research findings in Section 8. 
 

4 
2 Literature review 
This study relates to several research streams, including production outsourcing from horizontal and 
vertical sources, as well as research into supply chain structure issues with competitive partners. 
Depending on the relationship between the OEMs and their outsourcing partners, production 
outsourcing can be either vertical or horizontal in direction. Vertical production outsourcing concerns 
processes that are similar to those revealed in studies of supply chain integration problems, albeit with 
the specific caveat that the provider tends to be the upstream partner of the OEMs with whom they work 
cooperatively in order to integrate into a supply chain. In their investigation into how two competitive 
firms outsource their production processes to a common supplier with scale economies, Cachon and 
Harker (2002) found that outsourcing can be attractive under this condition as it mitigates downstream 
price competition. In their examination of the impact of outsourcing on innovation, capacity, and 
profitability when original equipment manufacturers sell production facilities to contract manufacturers, 
Plambeck and Taylor (2005) discovered that contract manufacturing can increase capacity utilization 
but weaken innovation incentives, and thereby potentially lead to lower profitability. Feng and Lu (2012) 
examined production outsourcing in one-to-one and one-to-two supply chain channels. Their results 
showed that a win-lose outcome may exist with low-cost outsourcing. In order to understand the effect 
of low-cost outsourcing on profitability, Feng and Lu (2013) also investigated the impact of contracts 
and industry structure (i.e., outsourcing to a common supplier or an exclusive supplier) in production 
outsourcing. More recently, Bolandifar et al. (2016) examined the delegation of procurement in 
production outsourcing within the structure of a common contract manufacturer and two competing 
OEMs. All these studies focus on the process of production outsourcing within vertical supply chains. 
Generally, modeling tends to focus upon the structures of a common supplier and an exclusive supplier 
to examine the impact of different structures on operational and outsourcing decisions. Our work is 
different as we look at what happens when the OEM outsources the installed vertical outsourcing 
structures to a third-party contract manufacturer to form an integrated supply chain, and then the OEM 
competes with a manufacturer who produces substitutable products without outsourcing. 
With respect to horizontal production outsourcing, the OEMs and service-oriented manufacturers 
form a coopetitive relationship. The coexistence of competition and cooperation inherent in certain 
instances of horizontal production outsourcing has attracted widespread scholarly attention. Wang et al. 
(2013) considered the particular circumstance in which an OEM outsources the entire manufacturing 
process to a competitive contract manufacturer in order to discuss issues of quantity leadership and 
bargaining power. Li and Jiang (2018) looked at instances of subcontracting, signed before and after 
demand realization, in order to analyze horizontal production outsourcing in uncertain market conditions. 
Complementarily, Niu et al. (2019) analyzed the production decision before and after a technology 
specification and market acceptance uncertainty. 
Another perspective can be considered: namely, the differences in outsourcing strategy decisions 
depending on their horizontal or vertical direction. In our modeling of three outsourcing strategies, our 

5 
work is closely related to the studies conducted by Li et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2023). Li et al. (2020) 
considered the quality difference between the OEM and the competitive contract manufacturer. When 
Li et al. (2023) considered uncertain delivery and technology spillover, they found that the outsourcing 
decision is affected by the investment cost, consumers’ product preference level, and manufacturing 
level. Our work enlightens these findings by focusing upon the effects of different outsourcing strategies 
in certain scenarios with and without incentives, all with a view to understanding how incentives might 
influence optimal outsourcing strategy decisions. 
Our work also relates to, and supplements, research into supply chain structure issues featuring a 
competitive partner. Essentially, outsourcing to a competitive contract manufacturer changes the supply 
chain structure from competition to coopetition. Another way to understand this shift is to see a move 
away from two single channels (featuring a self-production strategy and outsourcing to a non-
competitive contract manufacturer) in favor of a dual channel (featuring a competitive contract 
manufacturer coopetition strategy, whereby the competitive contract manufacturer can also sell through 
a direct channel) (Tsay and Agrawal, 2004; Deng et al. 2021; Li et al., 2021b). In contrast to other studies, 
which have discussed the supply chain/channel structure decision from the perspective of one core firm, 
our work considers the incentive from perspective of non-core partners who may affect the outsourcing 
strategy/supply chain channel structure decisions, by focusing on the production-outsourcing supply 
chain channel structure. 
3 Model descriptions and assumption 
In this paper, we consider an OEM and two service-oriented manufacturers (i.e., a competing 
manufacturer [CP] and a non-competing manufacturer [NP]). The CP can not only provide production 
services to OEMs, but also produce and sell its own products that can substitute for the OEM’s products; 
the NP only provides production services to OEMs. Regardless of whether the OEM cooperates with 
the CP, the OEM and the CP will always engage in quantity-setting competition. We adopt the inverse 
demand function that has been used and tested in several other inquiries into product competition in 
economics, marketing, and operations (Niu et al., 2019, 2021; Chen et al., 2019; Heese et al., 2021). The 
inverse demand functions for the differentiated products sold by the CP and the OEM are 𝑝𝑐= 𝛼−
𝑞𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜 and 𝑝𝑜= 𝛼−𝑞𝑜−𝛽𝑞𝑐. Thus, the market retail prices of products are determined by the CP 
and OEM’s production quantities. 𝛼 represents the maximum retail price (𝛼> 0). 𝛽 represents the 
degree of product substitution (0 < 𝛽< 1), which measures the cross-effect of the change in the OEM’s 
(CP’s) product demand caused by a change in that of the CP (OEM). A low 𝛽 value implies a low 
degree of product substitution. In contrast, a high 𝛽 value indicates high degree of product substitution, 
which leads to more intense market competition (Wang et al., 2013; Qing et al., 2017). All the parameters 
and variables for model development are shown in Table 1. 
 
 

6 
Table 1. Parameters and variables 
Notation 
Descriptions 
𝑐𝑜, 𝑐 
Unit production cost for the OEM and CP/NP, respectively 
𝑤𝑐, 𝑤𝑛 
Unit wholesale price for the CP and NP, respectively 
𝑞𝑜, 𝑞𝑐 
Production quantity for the OEM and CP, respectively 
𝑝𝑜, 𝑝𝑐 
Unit retail price for the OEM and CP, respectively 
𝑘 
Index of outsourcing cost advantage 
𝜋𝑜𝑠, 𝜋𝑐𝑠 
Profit for the OEM and the CP under the self-produce strategy 
𝜋𝑜𝑐, 𝜋𝑐𝑐 
Profit for the OEM and the CP under the outsourcing-to-CP strategy 
𝜋𝑜𝑛, 𝜋𝑐𝑛, 𝜋𝑛𝑛 
Profit for the OEM, the CP, and the NP under the outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy 
We consider that the OEM can produce by itself or cooperate with a service-oriented manufacturer, 
thus enabling three possible strategies for the OEM: the self-produce strategy, the outsourcing-to-CP 
strategy, and the outsourcing-to-NP strategy. For the self-produce strategy, the OEM produces in-house, 
and the CP manufactures its own products. The OEM and the CP engage in a purely competitive 
relationship, as they sell and compete in the same end market. For the outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the 
OEM outsources the production function to the CP; that is, the CP helps the OEM to manufacture 
products, and the OEM then labels their own brands and sells to customers. Thus, in addition to their 
competitive relationship in the end market, the OEM and CP also have a cooperative supplier-buyer 
relationship in the upstream supply chain. For the outsourcing-to-NP strategy, the OEM outsources the 
production function to the NP, and the OEM then sells to the end market to compete with the CP. 
 
Figure 1. Three outsourcing strategies 
In this study, we assume that the CP and the NP have the same production efficiency (i.e., that the 
unit production costs are equal to 𝑐). This assumption is made to focus on the strategy structure and 
eliminate the impact of different service-oriented manufacturers’ cost differences on the outsourcing 
strategy decision. The unit production cost for the OEM is 𝑐𝑜. We define the index of outsourcing cost 
CP 
OEM 
Customer 
(a) Self-produce strategy 
𝑞𝑐 
𝑞𝑜 
CP 
OEM 
(b) Outsourcing-to-CP strategy 
Customer 
𝑞𝑐 
𝑞𝑜 
𝑤𝑐 
CP 
OEM 
NP 
(c) Outsourcing-to-NP strategy 
Customer 
𝑞𝑜 
𝑞𝑐 
𝑤𝑛 

7 
advantage as 𝑘=
𝛼−𝑐
𝛼−𝑐𝑜. This index expresses the cost difference between the CP/NP and the OEM in 
terms of the potential maximum margin profit captured by 𝛼−𝑐 and 𝛼−𝑐𝑜 . Without loss of 
generality, we assume 𝛼> 𝑐𝑜> 𝑐> 0 by referring to Feng and Lu (2012), and thus 𝑘=
𝛼−𝑐
𝛼−𝑐𝑜> 1. 
The index of outsourcing cost advantage will increase when the CP/NP’s unit production cost 𝑐 
decreases and/or when the OEM’s unit production cost 𝑐𝑜 increases. Additionally, to ensure the 
feasibility of the models and equilibrium solutions, specifically the non-negativity of the production 
quantity decisions examined in Section 4, the index of outsourcing cost advantage is assumed to satisfy 
1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽. 
4 The models and equilibrium analysis 
4.1 Self-produce strategy model 
The self-produce strategy is explored as a benchmark, which allows us to draw a comparison to the 
equilibria of the other two strategies and thereby observe the effect of outsourcing strategies. Hence, the 
CP’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑞𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑐 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
Similarly, for the self-produce strategy, the OEM’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑞𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑐𝑜)𝑞𝑜 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
For the self-produce strategy, the OEM and the CP determine their production quantities to 
maximize their profits independently and simultaneously. Thus, the self-produce strategy process can 
be described as follows: 
{
max
𝑞c 𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑞𝑐)
max
𝑞o 𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑞𝑜) 
Note that the non-competitive service-oriented manufacturer NP is not involved in the self-produce 
strategy structure and gains zero profit, so we denote the profit of NP under self-produce strategy as 
𝜋𝑛𝑠= 0. 
4.2 Outsourcing-to-CP strategy model 
For the outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the OEM and the CP cooperate for production but compete for the 
same market. Thus, the CP’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑐+ (𝑤𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑜 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
The first part relates the profit from product sales, whereas the second part describes the profit from 
providing the outsourcing service to the OEM. 
Similarly, for the outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the OEM’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑞𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑐)𝑞𝑜 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
The decision sequence of the OEM and the CP for the outsourcing-to-CP strategy is as follows. 
First, the OEM decides to outsource to the CP and determines the outsourcing production quantity 𝑞𝑜. 
Next, after observing the OEM’s decision, the CP determines the wholesale price 𝑤𝑐 to the OEM and 

8 
production quantity 𝑞𝑐 for their own products. Finally, when the customers’ demand is realized, the 
OEM and the CP obtain their profits accordingly. Thus, the outsourcing-to-CP strategy process can be 
described as follows: 
max
𝑞o 𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑞𝑜) →max
𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) 
Note that in the outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the NP is not involved either, so the NP profit in the 
outsourcing-to-CP strategy is denoted by 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. 
4.3 Outsourcing-to-NP strategy model 
In the outsourcing-to-NP strategy, the OEM outsources to the NP and competes with the CP within the 
same market. Thus, the CP’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑐 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
The NP’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛) = (𝑤𝑛−𝑐)𝑞𝑜 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
And the OEM’s profit function is: 
𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑞𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑛)𝑞𝑜 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
For the outsourcing-to-NP strategy, the decision sequence of the OEM, the CP, and the NP can be 
described as follows. First, the OEM decides to outsource to the NP and determines the outsourcing 
production quantity 𝑞𝑜. Next, after observing the OEM’s decision, the NP determines the wholesale 
price 𝑤𝑛 to the OEM, and the CP determines the production quantity 𝑞𝑐. Finally, when the customers’ 
demand is realized, the OEM, the CP, and the NP obtain their profits accordingly. Thus, the outsourcing-
to-NP strategy process can be described as follows: 
max
𝑞o 𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑞𝑜) →{
max
𝑞c 𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐)
max
𝑤𝑛𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛) 
Table 2 lists the optimal solutions for the three strategies. The derivation is provided in the 
Appendix. According to Table 2, in the self-produce strategy, the aforementioned assumption 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 ensure that the optimal production quantities for the OEM is positive. While 𝑘≥
2
𝛽 means that the 
unit production cost to the OEM is so large that the OEM cannot make any profit and would exit the 
market. In the following section, the feasible zone when selecting outsourcing strategy should be 1 <
𝑘<
2
𝛽. Note that for the outsourcing-to-CP strategy, if the 𝛽>
2
√5, then there are no feasible solutions 
for the CP (see proof of Table 2 in Appendix). Thus, the feasible zone for the outsourcing-to-CP strategy 
is 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 . This in turn means that the following analysis will be within the feasible zone 
{(𝛽, 𝑘)|0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽}. 
 

9 
Table 2. Equilibrium solutions under quantity competition 
 
Self-produce strategy 
Outsourcing-to-CP strategy 
Outsourcing-to-NP strategy 
𝑤𝑐 
/ 
𝑐+
(2+4𝛽+𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)
8(1+𝛽)
 
/ 
𝑤𝑛 
/ 
/ 
𝑐+
(2−𝛽)(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐)
2(4−3𝛽2)
 
𝑞𝑐 
2(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 
(4+3𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐)
8(1+𝛽)
 
(8−2𝛽−5𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)
4(4−3𝛽2)
 
𝑞𝑜 
2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 
𝛼−𝑐
4(1+𝛽) 
(2−𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐)
2(4−3𝛽2) 
𝑝𝑐 
𝑐+
2(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 
𝑐+
(4+3𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐)
8(1+𝛽)
 
𝑐+
(8−2𝛽−5𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)
4(4−3𝛽2)
 
𝑝𝑜 
𝑐𝑜+
2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 
𝑐+
(6+4𝛽−3𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)
8(1+𝛽)
 
𝑐+
(2−𝛽)(6−5𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)
4(4−3𝛽2)
 
 
5 Selection of an optimal outsourcing strategy 
In this section, we consider two cases to show the behavior of CP and NP. The first is determining, in 
the scenario that does not have transfer payment, the optimal outsourcing strategy among the self-
produce, outsourcing-to-CP, and outsourcing-to-NP options. The second examines the scenario with 
transfer payment to determine how an optimal outsourcing strategy might differ. Here, the transfer 
payment is considered a lump-sum payment that can be transferred from the NP and CP to the OEM. 
This lump-sum payment is more like a profit-redistribution mechanism, which occurs after the changed 
outsourcing strategy decisions. Therefore, the lump-sum transfer payment will be an olive branch to 
influence the OEM’s outsourcing strategy. A more detailed explanation of the transfer payment can be 
found in Section 5.2. 
An outsourcing strategy is available as long as it benefits both parties, i.e., the OEM and the CP/NP. 
It is obvious that only the outsourcing-to-NP strategy can make the NP a positive profit, i.e., 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠=
𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. The following Lemma shows the CP’s profit according to different strategies, and we can know 
the CP’s preference. 
Lemma 1. (1) 𝝅𝒄𝒄> 𝐦𝐚𝐱{𝝅𝒄𝒏, 𝝅𝒄𝒔}; ; 2) ; If; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟎; ; hen ; 𝝅𝒄𝒏> 𝝅𝒄𝒔; ; n ; ff; 𝒌𝟎< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷; ; hen ;
𝝅𝒄𝒏< 𝝅𝒄𝒔 ;wenrn; 𝒌𝟎=
𝟏𝟔−𝟏𝟐𝜷𝟐
𝟖+𝟒𝜷−𝟐𝜷𝟐−𝟓𝜷𝟑.; 
The CP not only provides outsourcing service to the OEM but also sells its own substitutable 
product. Thus, the CP is involved in all the three strategies. It is intuitive, as Lemma 1 shows, that the 
outsourcing-to-CP strategy is the most profitable for the CP among the three strategies. Therefore, 
according to the statement before Lemma 1, for both the CP and NP, outsourcing business can bring 
them better economic performance, which foreshadows their competition in outsourcing business and 
the motivation to offer transfer payment and gain outsourcing business. 

10 
5.1 The case without transfer payment 
Here we examine a scenario in which the CP and the NP only provide a manufacturing service based on 
the OEM’s strategy preference, but do not offer any transfer payment incentive to attract the OEM’s 
outsourcing business. Therefore, without transfer payment, the conditions under which a specific 
strategy is the optimal one are as follows. The self-produce strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛 ; the outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 , 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑛 , 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 , and 
𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛; and the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠, 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐, 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠, and 
𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑐 . Thus, without transfer payment, the optimal strategy choice is given by the following 
proposition: 
Proposition 1. Ten;ophfmnl;shrnhngy;for;mn ufnchurf g;snrvfcn;provf nr;snlnchfo ;wfheouh;hrn sfnr;
pnymn h;fs:;(1) If; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟏 ;hen ;snlf-pro ucn;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy.;(2) If; 𝒌𝟏< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ;
ouhsourcf g;ho;NP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy.; 
Wenrn; 𝒌𝟏=
𝟒[−𝟏𝟔𝜷+𝟏𝟐𝜷𝟑+(𝟐−𝜷)𝟐(𝟐+𝜷)√𝟐(𝟒−𝟑𝜷𝟐)]
𝟔𝟒−𝟔𝟒𝜷−𝟒𝟖𝜷𝟐+𝟑𝟐𝜷𝟑+𝟐𝟎𝜷𝟒−𝟒𝜷𝟓+𝜷𝟔.; 
For the case without transfer payment, the optimal strategy is determined by a comprehensive 
comparison of the respective profit among different strategies. According to Lemma 1, providing 
production service to the OEM can earn more profits for both the CP and NP. Thus, in the absence of 
any exogenous transfer payment from the CP and NP, the OEM’s profit directly leads the outsourcing 
strategy decision, namely which agent to outsource to. As Proposition 1 shows, the optimal outsourcing 
strategy choice is mainly affected by the outsourcing cost advantage index. The feasible zone is divided 
into two main decision areas as illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Outsourcing strategy selection without transfer payment 
The results of Proposition 1 verify the intuition that low cost will trigger outsourcing. Region A 
𝑘= 2
𝛽 
2
√5
 
𝛽 
𝑘 
4 
1 
B:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-NP;shrnhngy 
𝑘= 𝑘1 
√2 
A:;Snlf-pro ucn;shrnhngy 
0 

11 
illustrates the zone offering little advantage in unit production cost for the CP or the NP, which translates 
to a relatively low outsourcing cost advantage index (1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1). As the marginal cost of outsourcing 
remains higher for the OEM than the cost associated with the self-produce strategy, the OEM will not 
seek to outsource to the CP or the NP, although the CP and NP both want to acquire the OEM’s 
outsourcing business. Instead, the OEM will continue to produce in-house and compete with the CP. 
Thus, without a transfer payment in Region A, only the OEM achieves the maximum profit with the 
self-produce strategy. For Region B, as the outsourcing cost advantage index increases (𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽), 
the OEM’s optimal strategy is to outsource to the NP. The OEM and the outsourcing partner NP integrate 
into a supply chain to compete with the CP and achieve a win-win outcome, i.e., 𝜋𝑜𝑛> max{𝜋𝑜𝑠, 𝜋𝑜𝑐} 
and 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. 
This analysis clearly illustrates that, in the absence of transfer payment, the optimal strategy for the 
OEM is either to produce in-house or otherwise to outsource to the non-competing manufacturer NP. As 
the OEM’s profit tends to diminish when the OEM outsources to CP, it is therefore the case that without 
transfer payment, outsourcing to the NP will always be the dominant outsourcing strategy for the OEM. 
Consequently, if only based on the cost factor, the OEM will not cooperate with the competing 
manufacturer, because the outsourcing cooperation will change the competitive relationship from 
competition to co-opetition, which will affect the OEM’s profit. 
5.2 The case with transfer payment 
Based on the analysis of the CP’s and NP’s profits under different strategies at the beginning of Section 
5, we know that it is always more profitable for the CP (NP) when the CP (NP) obtains the outsourcing 
business. That is to say, the OEM’s outsourcing service demand becomes a competitive business 
between the CP and NP. Both the CP and NP are highly motivated to offer the OEM an incentive to carry 
out outsourcing cooperation. Therefore, the magnitude of incentive is an important factor driving the 
OEM to change decision compared with the case without incentive. In this paper, the “incentives” are 
designed as a form of profit redistribution, by which a lump-sum payment transferred from the NP/CP 
to the OEM leads to a change in the OEM’s outsourcing decision and achieves a Pareto improvement 
after the “transferred” outsourcing strategy. 
The NP’s behavior will influence the OEM’s strategy selection to outsource to the NP. With the 
self-produce and outsourcing-to-CP strategies, we know that the NP makes no profit (𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0). 
Instead, only the outsourcing-to-NP strategy can earn the positive profit 𝜋𝑛𝑛 . Thus, in order to get 
outsourcing business and improve profit, the NP can offer a lump-sum payment, 𝑡𝑛, to the OEM, of 
which the upper bound is 𝜋𝑛𝑛 (after the profit-redistribution lump-sum payment, the NP’s profit is 
𝜋𝑛𝑛−𝑡𝑛 ). For the OEM, with a lump-sum payment from the NP, the total maximum profit for the 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy can be 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝑡𝑛. However, acceptance of offer by the NP also depends on 
the CP’s offer of possible transfer payment. 
The CP can not only provide an outsourcing service to the OEM but also sell its own competitive 

12 
product. Although the CP is involved in all the three strategies, Lemma 1 suggests that the outsourcing-
to-CP strategy generates the greatest profit for the CP. As a result, the CP has a strong motivation to 
influence the OEM into the outsourcing-to-CP strategy. Thus, from the CP’s perspective, based on the 
strategy choice without payment transfer shown in Proposition 1 and Figure 2, the CP’s incentive aim 
is to change the OEM from the initial self-produce or outsourcing-to-NP strategy to the outsourcing-to-
CP strategy. For the case of the initial self-produce strategy, the CP can offer a lump-sum payment 𝑡𝑐𝑠 
to the OEM, of which the upper bound of 𝑡𝑐𝑠 is 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠 (after the profit-redistribution lump-sum 
payment, the final CP’s profit is 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝑡𝑐𝑠). Therefore, in the case of changing from an initial self-produce 
strategy to an outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the total maximum profit for the OEM under the outsourcing-
to-CP strategy can be 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ 𝑡𝑐𝑠. In the case of an initial outsourcing-to-NP strategy, the CP can offer a 
lump-sum payment 𝑡𝑐𝑛 to the OEM, of which the upper bound of 𝑡𝑐𝑛 is 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛 (after the profit-
redistribution lump-sum payment, the final CP’s profit is 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝑡𝑐𝑛). Therefore, in the case of changing 
from an initial outsourcing-to-NP strategy to an outsourcing-to-CP strategy, the total maximum profit of 
the OEM under the outsourcing-to-CP strategy can be 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ 𝑡𝑐𝑛. However, the OEM’s acceptance of the 
CP’s offer also depends on the NP’s incentive behavior. 
To compete for the outsourcing business, the profit-redistribution lump-sum payments 𝑡𝑛, 𝑡𝑐𝑛, and 
𝑡𝑐𝑠 become key factors that influence the OEM’s strategy selection. Their upper bounds determine the 
maximal capability to compete for the outsourcing business and they also lead to the OEM’s final 
strategy selection. Thus, with transfer payment, based on the maximal capability of profit-redistribution 
lump-sum payments, we propose the conditions that determine if a specific strategy is the optimal one: 
if the self-produce strategy is optimal, it must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠); if the 
outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal, it must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) >
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛; and if the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal, it must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+
𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) . Thus, with transfer payment, the optimal strategy choice is given by the 
following proposition: 
Proposition 2. Ten; ophfmnl; shrnhngy; for; mn ufnchurf g; snrvfcn; provf nr; snlnchfo ; wfhe; hrn sfnr;
pnymn h;fs:; 
(1) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝜷𝟏; n ; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟐 ;hen ;snlf-pro ucn;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
(2) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝜷𝟐;; n 𝐦𝐚𝐱{𝟏, 𝒌𝟐} < 𝒌< 𝒌𝟑; ; or; ff; 𝜷𝟐< 𝜷<
𝟐
√𝟓;; n ; 𝟏< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷; ; hen ;
ouhsourcf g;ho;CP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy.; 
(3) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝜷𝟐; n ; 𝒌𝟑< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ;ouhsourcf g;ho;NP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
Wenrn;
𝒌𝟐=
𝟖[−𝟑𝟐𝜷(𝟏+𝜷)𝟐+(𝟐−𝜷)(𝟏+𝜷)(𝟐+𝜷)√𝟒𝟖−𝟐𝟒𝜷𝟐+𝟑𝟐𝜷𝟑+𝟑𝜷𝟒]
𝟏𝟗𝟐−𝟒𝟗𝟔𝜷𝟐−𝟑𝟖𝟒𝜷𝟑−𝟔𝟎𝜷𝟒+𝟑𝟐𝜷𝟓+𝟑𝜷𝟔
;
 ;
𝒌𝟑=
𝟒[−𝟒𝜷(𝟒−𝟑𝜷𝟐)
𝟐+(𝟐−𝜷)𝟐(𝟐+𝜷)(𝟒−𝟑𝜷𝟐)√𝟐(𝟔−𝟓𝜷𝟐)]
𝟑𝟖𝟒−𝟑𝟖𝟒𝜷−𝟓𝟒𝟒𝜷𝟐+𝟓𝟏𝟐𝜷𝟑+𝟐𝟒𝟖𝜷𝟒−𝟏𝟖𝟒𝜷𝟓−𝟒𝟔𝜷𝟔+𝟐𝟎𝜷𝟕−𝟓𝜷𝟖 ; 𝜷𝟏≈𝟎. 𝟔𝟐 ;n ; 𝜷𝟐= √𝟖𝟗−𝟏
𝟏𝟏.; 
Obviously, in the case with transfer payment, outsourcing become a competitive business, and the 

13 
upper bound of the CP’s and NP’s transfer payment will influence the OEM’s optimal strategy of 
manufacturing service provider selection. In this scenario, the final choice for the OEM not only depends 
on the outsourcing cost advantage index but also the degree of product substitution. Indeed, both factors 
collectively influence the maximal available transfer payment and further change the OEM’s 
outsourcing strategy selection. According to Proposition 2, the feasible zone is divided into three main 
decision regions, which are illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Optimal outsourcing strategy selection with transfer payment 
With transfer payment, the decision regions have changed significantly from the case without 
transfer payment. Note that in Figure 2, 𝑘= 𝑘1 is the dividing line to different strategy choices 
between self-produce strategy and outsourcing strategy under the case without transfer payment. 
However, in the case with transfer payment, the self-produce strategy in Region A (pink area) is 
compressed by a new dividing line 𝑘= 𝑘2, as shown in Figure 3. That is to say, the feasible region for 
the self-produce strategy is much narrower under the influence of transfer payment. This also shows that 
the incentive transfer payments from CP or NP work out in particular cases. In Region A, it is not difficult 
to understand that, when facing a relatively low outsourcing cost advantage (𝑘< 𝑘2), neither the CP nor 
the NP has enough transferable payment to influence the OEM’s strategy choice. Thus, it is more 
profitable for the OEM to produce by itself. 
As the outsourcing cost advantage increases (𝑘> 𝑘2), at least one of the CP and NP has enough 
profit margin to facilitate transferable payment to attract the OEM’s outsourcing business. Specifically, 
when the outsourcing cost advantage satisfies max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 , the CP’s transfer payment can 
enable the OEM to profit more than it would with the self-produce strategy but the NP cannot, due to 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. The relatively low outsourcing cost advantage does not provide the 
NP with sufficient capability to compete with the CP for outsourcing business. Therefore, for the narrow 
𝑘= 2
𝛽 
2
√5
 
𝛽 
𝑘 
4 
1 
𝛽2 
B:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-NP;shrnhngy 
2NP; omf nhns;ovnr;CP 
𝑘= 𝑘3 
C:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-CP;shrnhngy
2CP; omf nhns;ovnr;NP 
𝑘= 𝑘1 
√2 
𝛽1 
𝑘= 𝑘2 
A:;Snlf-pro ucn;shrnhngy 
0 

14 
region max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 , the CP’s transferable payment will motivate the OEM to enter into 
outsourcing cooperation with it. On the other hand, as the outsourcing cost advantage further increases 
(𝑘> 𝑘3), both the NP and CP can influence the OEM’s preference, due to 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. Facing intense market competition (𝛽> 𝛽2), outsourcing to a competitive CP will be 
beneficial to the OEM in the case with transfer payment, because the CP’s transferable payment is 
dominant over the NP’s. The Pareto improvement that occurs because of the adoption of the outsourcing-
to-CP strategy is more significant than it would be under the outsourcing-to-NP strategy. Therefore, 
based on the above two aspects, in the Region C (green area), the outsourcing-to-CP strategy with 
transfer payment will lead to the greatest profits for both the OEM and CP, achieving a win-win outcome 
compared to the case without transfer payment. 
Similarly, a greater outsourcing cost advantage (𝑘> 𝑘3) triggers more transferable payment and 
leads to the increased competition between the CP and NP. When facing non-intense market competition 
(𝛽< 𝛽2), the NP is capable of offering more transfer payment than the CP. Therefore, in Region B (blue 
area) with transfer payment, the NP dominates over the CP, making the outsourcing-to-NP strategy the 
optimal choice. 
However, in the whole Region B, the selected optimal outsourcing-to-NP strategy with transfer 
payment may not always achieve an improvement when compared to the case without transfer payment. 
Recall that 𝑘= 𝑘1 is the dividing line between the self-produce strategy and the outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy (shown in Figure 2) under the case without transfer payment. On the one hand, for the area 
below 𝑘= 𝑘1 in Region B of Figure 3, the optimal strategy choice changes from the self-produce 
strategy (without transfer payment) to outsourcing-to-NP (with transfer payment). Obviously, the 
OEM’s profit will be improved due to transfer payment 𝑡𝑛 from the NP, while the NP can also keep a 
reasonable profit 𝜋𝑛𝑛−𝑡𝑛 after transferring. The CP can also obtain more profit under the outsourcing-
to-NP strategy than under self-produce strategy according to Lemma 1 and Proposition 3 (𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 for 
1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 when 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽11). Therefore, within the area below 𝑘= 𝑘1 in Region B of Figure 3, 
the OEM, NP, and CP can achieve a Pareto improvement and a win-win-win outcome compared to the 
case without transfer payment. 
On the other hand, for the area above 𝑘= 𝑘1 in Region B of Figure 3, the optimal strategy 
choice—the outsourcing-to-NP strategy—remain unchanged for the cases with and without transfer 
payment. We also find 𝜋𝑜𝑛< 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛); that is, if the NP does not transfer payment to the OEM, 
the moderate payment from CP can drive the OEM to cooperate with the CP. Therefore, this is an area 
in which the CP aims to gain outsourcing business and the NP aims to retain outsourcing business by 
using transfer payment. Finally, the NP dominates over the CP. Only the OEM can improve profit with 
transfer payment from the NP. Therefore, in the area above 𝑘= 𝑘1 in Region B of Figure 3, the OEM, 
 
1 Lemma 1 shows that 𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 for 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘0. For 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2, we have 𝑘0 −𝑘1 > 0. Therefore, for the area below 
𝑘= 𝑘1 in Region B of Figure 3 (namely, {0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1}), we have 𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠. 

15 
NP, and CP can achieve a win-loss-draw outcome compared to the case without transfer payment. Here 
the “loss” refers to the NP having to transfer payment to the OEM to retain outsourcing cooperation and 
maintain positive profit, otherwise the OEM will cooperate with the CP and the NP will gain nothing. 
We can also explain the above conclusions through the lens of competition intensity and the need 
to ensure maximum marginal profit from particular outsourcing strategies. Intuitively, when the 
outsourcing cost advantage is not significant enough to support outsourcing, then the OEM will 
manufacture products in-house in direct competition with the CP. When the outsourcing cost advantage 
is significant enough, outsourcing will increase profit, but the extent of that increase is largely 
determined by competition intensity. Where a low degree of product substitution leads to weak 
competition intensity, the presence of greater disposable profit ensures that the NP is dominant over the 
CP. With a transfer payment mechanism, the outsourcing-to-NP strategy can at least result in a win 
outcome for the OEM. On the contrary, where a higher degree of product substitution leads to stronger 
competition intensity, the formation of a relationship based upon coopetition with the —where an 
incentive transfer payment exists and a profit-sharing mechanism is in place—can lead to better profits 
for both the OEM and the CP than would be the case when outsourcing to the NP. At this point, the CP’s 
incentive dominates the OEM’s strategy decision to outsource to the CP, and contributes to a win-win 
outcome. This is the opposite result to the finding of Feng and Lu (2012), where outsourcing was shown 
to lead to a win-lose outcome. 
By comparing Figure 2 with Figure 3, we can clearly see that in Figure 2, the dividing line 𝑘= 𝑘1 
is critical to distinguishing the self-produce strategy and outsourcing strategy. In Figure 3, the dividing 
line 𝑘= 𝑘2 is much lower than the threshold 𝑘= 𝑘1 . That is, the available region of outsourcing 
strategies with transfer payment is much larger than that without transfer payment. Therefore, this 
illustrates the role of transfer payment in the outsourcing strategy: through the use of an additional 
cooperation mechanism, such as a lump-sum profit-redistribution contract offered by the CP or NP, the 
outsourcing strategy can achieve a more extended Pareto improvement and increase the possibility of 
cooperation. Additionally, transfer payment also changes the outsourcing strategy decision: when facing 
intense market competition, outsourcing to CP will be superior to other strategies. In sum, the 
outsourcing cost advantage determines the strategic choice between outsourcing and producing in-house: 
a significant outsourcing cost advantage makes outsourcing attractive. The question of who should be 
outsourced to is determined by the presence and extent of the lump-sum profit-redistribution payment 
available to the CP and NP, and the competition intensity between the OEM and CP. These incentives 
highlight the role of competition intensity and the importance of a coopetition relationship that can 
determine the outsourcing strategy decision of whether to outsource to the CP horizontally (in 
coopetition with the CP) under high-intensity competition, or to outsource to the NP vertically (in 
competition with the CP) under low-intensity competition. 
 

16 
6 Effect of outsourcing strategy 
In this section, examining supplementary perspectives from customers and society, we aim to discover 
the effect of the optimal outsourcing strategy with and without transfer payment on retail prices and 
social welfare, respectively. 
6.1 Effect on retail prices 
Based on Propositions 1 and 2, and the comparison analysis of Figures 2 and 3, we obtain the following 
proposition, which shows the effect of optimal outsourcing strategy on the retail prices. 
Proposition 3. Rngnr f g;rnhnfl;prfcns:; 
(1) For;hen;cnsn;wfheouh;hrn sfnr;pnymn h ;hen;ophfmnl;ouhsourcf g;shrnhngy;lownrs;hen;rnhnfl;prfcns;
o ly;wen ;fncf g;f hn sn;compnhfhfo ;n ;efge;ouhsourcf g;cosh;n vn hngn ;f.n. ;ff; 𝟎< 𝜷≤√𝟐
𝟑;
n ; 𝒌𝟎< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷 ;or; √𝟐
𝟑< 𝜷<
𝟐
√𝟓; n ; 𝒌𝟏< 𝒌<
𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ; 𝒑𝒄𝒏< 𝒑𝒄𝒔 and; 𝒑𝒐𝒏< 𝒑𝒐𝒔. 
(2) For;hen;cnsn;wfhe;hrn sfnr;pnymn h ;hen;cen gn;of;ouhsourcf g;shrnhngy;wfll;lnn ;ho;efgenr;rnhnfl;
prfcns;for;hen;CP;n ;OEM.; 
Under the case without transfer payment, Proposition 1 provides that the OEM’s optimal strategy 
choice is outsourcing to NP above a certain outsourcing cost advantage. Thus, we aim to know the effect 
of the outsourcing-to-NP strategy on the retail prices for both the OEM and CP. Part (1) of Proposition 
3 indicates that both of the retail prices charged by the OEM and CP may be lower under the optimal 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy. Specifically, according to the proof, when facing a high outsourcing cost 
advantage and/or intense competition, the lower retail prices will be achieved. The price-cutting 
behavior can be explained in two ways. From a pricing point of view, the OEM, through low-cost 
outsourcing and integrating with the NP, is motivated by the lower marginal cost to reduce the retail 
price to maximum their profit. Meanwhile, the competitor CP has to lower their retail price in order to 
maintain market share. From a competition point of view, the outsourcing-to-NP strategy reduces the 
cost differences between the OEM and CP, which leads to intensified competition. Therefore, we can 
conclude that the outsourcing-to-NP strategy will increase the price competition between the OEM and 
CP. This result is opposite to the findings of McGuire and Staelin (1983), Feng and Lu (2013), and 
Cachon and Harker (2002), who held that outsourcing mitigates against price competition. Therefore, 
according to Proposition 1 and part (1) of Proposition 3, under the case without transfer payment, the 
much lower prices resulting from the outsourcing-to-NP strategy can be beneficial both to the firms and 
customers. 
Part (2) of Proposition 3 presents the case with transfer payment. Our analysis focuses on the 
outsourcing strategy changes based on the comparison between Figures 2 and 3. In the subregion 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽2 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, the optimal strategy switches from self-produce to outsourcing-to-NP, and 
we find that the retail prices of both the OEM and CP increase, i.e., 𝑝𝑜𝑛> 𝑝𝑜𝑠 and 𝑝𝑐𝑛> 𝑝𝑐𝑠. Though the 
CP’s retail price is increasing, however, it does not stop the CP from gaining more profit through the 

17 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy (𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 for 
𝛽
2 < 𝑘< 𝑘0 according to Lemma 1). Subregion C in Figure 
3 indicates that the outsourcing strategy changes in two ways: with the relatively low outsourcing cost 
advantage (max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 if 𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5), the transfer payment from the 
CP drives the strategy to switch from self-produce to outsourcing-to-CP; with the relatively high 
outsourcing cost advantage (𝑘1 < 𝑘<
𝛽
2), it drives the strategy to switch from outsourcing-to-NP to 
outsourcing-to-CP. We find that changing to the outsourcing-to-CP strategy will always lead to higher 
retail prices for both the OEM and CP, i.e., 𝑝𝑐𝑐> 𝑝𝑐𝑖 and 𝑝𝑜𝑐> 𝑝𝑜𝑖 where 𝑖= 𝑠, 𝑛. In conclusion, for 
the case with transfer payment, although changing to the outsourcing-to-CP strategy will be more 
profitable for both the OEM and CP, this will be at the consumer’s expense due to the higher retail price 
for the CP’s products and the possible higher retail price for the OEM’s products. 
6.2 Effect on social welfare 
In this subsection, we aim to learn the effect of strategy changes on social welfare. The following 
proposition can be obtained: 
Proposition 4. Rngnr f g;socfnl;wnlfnrn: 
(1) For;hen;cnsn;wfheouh;hrn sfnr;pnymn h ;hen;ophfmnl;ouhsourcf g;shrnhngy;wfll;gn nrnhn;morn;socfnl;
wnlfnrn. 
(2) For;hen;cnsn;wfhe;hrn sfnr;pnymn h ;hen;cen gn;of;ouhsourcf g;shrnhngy;mny;lnn ;ho;lnss;socfnl;
wnlfnrn. 
Part (1) of Proposition 4 examines the case without transfer payment. We find that selecting the 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy will bring greater social welfare performance than the self-produce strategy. 
This can be partially explained by Propositions 1 and 3. For the case without transfer payment, the 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy will not only bring more profits to both the OEM and NP, but also result to 
relatively lower retail prices for customers when facing intense competition and a high outsourcing cost 
advantage. These two aspects contribute considerably to social welfare under the outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy. 
Part (2) of Proposition 4 presents the effect analysis for the case with transfer payment. Similarly, 
the analysis focuses on the changed outsourcing strategy regions based on the comparison between 
Figures 2 and 3. In the subregion 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, the optimal strategy switches from 
self-produce to outsourcing-to-NP. The change of outsourcing strategy may lead to less social welfare, 
which depends on the outsourcing cost advantage. Within this subregion, there exists a threshold, 𝑘𝑎2, 
that means that only when the outsourcing cost advantage is relatively high (𝑘𝑎< 𝑘< 𝑘1) will the 
optimal outsourcing strategy bring greater social welfare performance. The explanation is as follows. 
According to Propositions 2 and 3, the increase in profit for the OEM and NP mainly comes from the 
 
2 𝑘𝑎=
16𝛽(8−𝛽2)(4−3𝛽2)−4(4−𝛽2)√(4−3𝛽2)(336−432𝛽+120𝛽2+36𝛽3−23𝛽4)
−448+576𝛽+368𝛽2−288𝛽3−228𝛽4+36𝛽5+25𝛽6
 

18 
benefit to customers. Thus, when the outsourcing cost advantage is low, the increased profit does not 
come from the cost saving but mainly from customer surplus, which in turn means that the loss in 
customer surplus is more than the gain in profits of OEM and NP, so social welfare will decrease. On 
the other hand, when the outsourcing cost advantage is relatively high, the increased profit is mainly 
from the cost saving rather than customer surplus, meaning that the loss in customer surplus is less than 
the gain in profits for OEM and NP, so social welfare will increase. 
With transfer payment for the region C in Figure 3, the optimal strategy switches from self-produce 
(subregion 𝑘2 < 𝑘< 𝑘3 and subregion 𝛽1 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 ) and outsourcing to NP 
(subregion 𝛽1 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽) to outsourcing to CP. This change of outsourcing strategy 
will always lead to less social welfare. With transfer payment, although both the CP and OEM are much 
more profitable, consumer benefit is compromised because of higher retail prices triggered by the 
weakened competition between CP and OEM. As a result, the loss in customer surplus exceeds the profit 
gain of the CP and OEM, so social welfare will decrease under this change of strategy to outsourcing to 
CP. 
In conclusion, according to Propositions 1 and 2, for the case without transfer payment, the optimal 
strategy—outsourcing to NP—which increases the market competition, will be not only profitable for 
both the OEM and NP, but also beneficial to social welfare. However, with transfer payment between 
the OEM and CP/NP, although the firms participating in outsourcing will be more profitable, it is at the 
expense of customers’ surplus, resulting in decreased social welfare. Under the outsourcing-to-CP 
strategy, both the customers and social welfare will be worse off. 
7 Extended models 
In this section, we examine two extended models: a mixed strategy and a pricing competition setting. 
7.1 A mixed strategy 
In this extension, we consider the scenario in which the OEM may adopt a mixed strategy, through 
which the OEM can produce part of the products by itself and simultaneously outsource the rest of the 
products to CP or NP. If the OEM applies partial outsourcing to CP, we denote it a mixed-CP strategy 
for simplicity; if the OEM applies partial outsourcing to NP, we denote it a mixed-NP strategy. 
7.1.1 Mixed-CP strategy 
For the mixed-CP strategy, we assume that the proportion of outsourcing to CP is 𝜆𝑐 and the 
proportion of self-produce is 1 −𝜆𝑐, where 0 < 𝜆𝑐< 1. The profit function of the OEM is then: 
𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑐𝑜)(1 −𝜆𝑐)𝑞𝑜+ (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑐)𝜆𝑐𝑞𝑜 
The profit function of the CP is: 
𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑐+ (𝑤𝑐−𝑐)𝜆𝑐𝑞𝑜 
Under the mixed-CP strategy, the decision sequence of the OEM and the CP is described as follows. 
First, the OEM announces the mixed-CP strategy, that is, the proportion of outsourcing to CP 𝜆𝑐. Second, 
the OEM determines the total quantity of self-produce and outsourcing 𝑞𝑜. Third, after observing the 

19 
OEM’s decision, the CP determines the wholesale price 𝑤𝑐 for the OEM and production quantity 𝑞𝑐 
for his own products simultaneously. Finally, when the demand is realized, the OEM and the CP obtain 
their profits accordingly. Thus, the process of the mixed-CP strategy can be described as follows: 
max
𝜆𝑐𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜) →max
𝑞𝑜𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜) →max
𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) 
We then arrive at the following proposition. 
Proposition 5. Ten;mfxn -CP;shrnhngy;cn ;bn;n ;ophfmnl;ceofcn; npn f g;o ; 𝜷 ; 𝝀𝒄 ;n ; 𝒌: 
(1) If; 𝟎< 𝜷<
𝟐
√𝟓; ;
𝜷𝟐
𝟒−𝟒𝜷𝟐< 𝝀𝒄< 𝟏; ;n ; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝒎𝒄; ;hen ;hen;mfxn -CP;shrnhngy;fs;n ;ophfmnl;
ceofcn ;n ;hen;corrnspo f g;proporhfo ;of;ouhsourcf g;fs; 𝝀𝒄∗=
𝜷𝟐
𝟒−𝟒𝜷𝟐.; 
(2) Ohenrwfsn ;hen;mfxn -CP;shrnhngy;fs; oh;n ;ophfmnl;shrnhngy.; 
Wenrn; 𝒌𝒎𝒄=
−𝟒𝜷+𝜷𝟐+𝟒𝜷𝟑+(𝟏−𝜷)√𝟐(𝟏−𝜷)(𝟏+𝜷)(𝟒−𝟑𝜷𝟐)
𝟐−𝟒𝜷−𝟑𝜷𝟐+𝟒𝜷𝟑+𝟐𝜷𝟒
. 
The adoption of the mixed-CP strategy is influenced not only by outsourcing cost advantage index 
𝑘 but also the degree of product substitution 𝛽 and proportion of outsourcing, because the OEM and 
CP form a coopetitive relationship under the mixed-CP strategy. On the one hand, within the feasible 
area of the mixed-CP strategy and when the CP cannot offer enough outsourcing cost advantage (1 <
𝑘< 𝑘𝑚𝑐 ), it is optimal for the OEM to adopt mixed-CP strategy (i.e., 𝜆𝑐∗ of the total quantity are 
outsourced to the CP while the OEM produces 1 −𝜆𝑐∗). The outsourcing proportion 𝜆𝑐∗ increases with 
competition intensity 𝛽. Thus, the enhanced market competition will motivate the OEM to improve the 
proportion of outsourcing, through which the OEM can reduce the marginal cost, leading to lower retail 
prices3 . Additionally, when the outsourcing cost advantage is more substantial (𝑘𝑚𝑐< 𝑘<
2
𝛽 ), the 
mixed-CP strategy becomes non-optimal, and outsourcing to CP completely becomes the obvious, better 
alternative. In other words, a feasible area for the mixed-CP strategy does not exist. 
7.1.2 Mixed-NP strategy 
For the mixed-NP strategy, we assume the proportion of outsourcing to NP is 𝜆𝑛 and the 
proportion of self-produce is 1 −𝜆𝑛 . The profit function of the OEM is then: 
𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑐𝑜)(1 −𝜆𝑛)𝑞𝑜+ (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑛)𝜆𝑛𝑞𝑜 
The profit function of the NP is: 
𝜋𝑛𝑚𝑛(𝑤𝑛) = (𝑤𝑛−𝑐)𝜆𝑛𝑞𝑜 
The profit function of the CP is: 
𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑛(𝑞𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑐 
Under the mixed-NP strategy, the decision sequence for the OEM, the CP, and the NP can be 
described as follows. First, the OEM announces the mix-NP strategy, that is, the proportion of 
 
3 With a 𝜆𝑐 , the OEM’s retail price is 𝑝𝑜𝑚𝑐= 𝑐𝑜+
[−2+3𝛽2−6𝜆𝑐+5𝛽2𝜆𝑐+𝑘(−𝛽3+2𝜆𝑐+2𝛽𝜆𝑐−𝛽2𝜆𝑐−2𝛽3𝜆𝑐)](𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
4(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(1+𝜆𝑐)
 , so 
𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑑𝜆𝑐=
(2−𝑘−𝑘𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
4(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(1+𝜆)2. When 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑚𝑐, then 
𝑑𝑝𝑜𝑚𝑐
𝑑𝜆𝑐> 0. 

20 
outsourcing to NP 𝜆𝑛. Second, the OEM determines the total quantity of self-produce and outsourcing 
𝑞𝑜. Third, after observing the OEM’s decision, the NP determines the wholesale price 𝑤𝑛 for the OEM 
and the CP determines the production quantity 𝑞𝑐. Finally, when the demand is realized, the OEM, the 
CP, and the NP obtain their profits accordingly. Thus, the process for the mixed-CP strategy can be 
described as follows: 
max
𝜆𝑛𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜) →max
𝑞𝑜𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜) →{
max
𝑞c 𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑛(𝑞𝑐)
max
𝑤𝑛𝜋𝑛𝑚𝑛(𝑤𝑛) 
This leads to the following proposition. 
Proposition 6. Ten;mfxn -NP;shrnhngy;wfll; nvnr;bn;n ;ophfmnl;ceofcn.; 
Based on the analysis and proof, we find that the mixed-NP strategy will never be an optimal equilibrium 
strategy for the OEM, and that either the self-produce strategy or the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is 
superior to the mixed-NP strategy based on the outsourcing cost advantage index. Intuitively, as a non-
competing outsourcing service provider, if the NP can offer a low wholesale price to the OEM (i.e., a 
greater outsourcing cost advantage), the OEM will undoubtedly outsource to the NP completely instead 
of engaging in producing itself. On the contrary, if the NP’s outsourcing wholesale price cannot bring 
enough outsourcing cost advantage, a partial outsourcing will not be economically viable for the OEM. 
7.2 Pricing competition 
This subsection investigates an extended case under a pricing competition setting to check the robustness 
of the results we get in Section 5. Based on the inverse demand functions modeled in Section 3, we can 
obtain the price-dependent demand functions by inversion, namely 𝑞𝑐=
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 and 𝑞𝑜=
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2, in which 𝛼 and 𝛽 still represent the maximum retail price (𝛼> 0) and the degree 
of product substitution (0 < 𝛽< 1). The definitions of the other parameters remain the same as those 
in the quantity competition setting. The profit functions and the decision sequence under the different 
strategies are similar to the quantity competition setting. The equilibrium solutions under pricing 
competition are presented in Table 3. 
Under the self-produce strategy, the OEM’s production quantities should be positive, and therefore 
the following condition should be satisfied: 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽. Next, to check the robustness of the results 
under a pricing competition setting, we discuss the selection of outsourcing strategies without and with 
transfer payment, respectively. First, we analyze the profits of CP and NP under different strategies. For 
the NP, it is easy to know 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. Lemma 2 shows the results with respect to the CP. 
Lemma 2. (1) 𝝅𝒄𝒄> 𝐦𝐚𝐱{𝝅𝒄𝒏, 𝝅𝒄𝒔}. (2) If; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟎
𝒑 ;hen ; 𝝅𝒄𝒏> 𝝅𝒄𝒔 ;n ;ff; 𝒌𝟎
𝒑< 𝒌<
𝟐−𝜷𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ;
𝝅𝒄𝒔> 𝝅𝒄𝒏 ;wenrn; 𝒌𝟎
𝒑=
𝟐(𝟐−𝜷𝟐)
(𝟐−𝜷)(𝟏+𝜷). 

21 
 
Table 3. Equilibrium solutions under pricing competition 
 
Self-produce strategy 
Outsourcing-to-CP strategy 
Outsourcing-to-NP strategy 
𝑤𝑐 
/ 
𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1+𝛽)
4
 
/ 
𝑤𝑛 
/ 
/ 
𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)
2(2−𝛽) 
𝑞𝑐 
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(1−𝛽2)(4−𝛽2)
 
(𝛼−𝑐)(2+𝛽)
4(1+𝛽) 
(𝛼−𝑐)(4+𝛽−2𝛽2)
2(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2−𝛽2) 
𝑞𝑜 
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(1−𝛽2)(4−𝛽2)
 
𝛼−𝑐
4(1+𝛽) 
𝛼−𝑐
2(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽) 
𝑝𝑐 
𝑐+
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4−𝛽2
 
𝑐+
𝛼−𝑐
2 
𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)(4+𝛽−2𝛽2)
2(2−𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
 
𝑝𝑜 
𝑐𝑜+
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
4−𝛽2
 
𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(3−𝛽)
4
 
𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)(3−𝛽2)
(2−𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
 
As Lemma 2 shows, with pricing competition, the CP’s strategy preference is the same as with 
quantity competition. The CP is always more profitable when it obtains the outsourcing business. The 
NP also profits when it gains outsourcing, so both the CP and NP have motivation to compete for the 
outsourcing business. 
The following paragraphs will discuss the selection of an outsourcing strategy for the case without 
and with transfer payment, respectively. For the case without transfer payment under a pricing 
competition setting, we can obtain the following proposition: 
Proposition 7. For;hen;cnsn;wfheouh;hrn sfnr;pnymn h;u nr;prfcf g;compnhfhfo :; 
(1) If; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟏
𝒑 ;hen ;snlf-pro ucn;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy.; 
(2) If; 𝒌𝟏
𝒑< 𝒌<
𝟐−𝜷𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ;ouhsourcf g;ho;NP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
Wenrn; 𝒌𝟏
𝒑=
𝟐[𝟖𝜷−𝟖𝜷𝟑+𝟐𝜷𝟓−(𝟏−𝜷)(𝟐+𝜷)(𝟐−𝜷𝟐)√(𝟐−𝜷)(𝟐+𝜷)(𝟐−𝜷𝟐)]
−𝟏𝟔+𝟏𝟔𝜷+𝟐𝟒𝜷𝟐−𝟏𝟐𝜷𝟑−𝟏𝟏𝜷𝟒+𝟐𝜷𝟓+𝜷𝟔
.; 
Proposition 7 outlines the conditions for selecting the optimal outsourcing strategy under pricing 
competition without transfer payment. The conclusions have the similar properties to Proposition 1 
(under quantity competition); that is, the outsourcing cost advantage index determines the strategy 
choice. But the critical value and feasible region are different, as shown in Figure 4. 
As Figure 4 shows, the line 𝑘= 𝑘1
𝑝 divides the feasible region into the self-produce strategy and 
the outsourcing-to-NP strategy. In Region A (pink area), faced with a low outsourcing cost advantage, 
it is optimal for the OEM to produce in-house instead of outsourcing. However, in the face of sufficient 
outsourcing cost advantage, outsourcing becomes a superior strategy, as shown as Region B (blue area). 
As with Figure 2, in Region B, the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is superior to the outsourcing-to-CP and 
self-produce strategies. Thus, in a pricing competition setting, although the whole feasible area is smaller 
than in a quantity competition setting, the criteria for the optimal strategy choice is similar. 

22 
 
Figure 4. Outsourcing strategy selection under pricing competition without transfer payment 
Next, we check the robustness by discussing the case with transfer payment in a pricing competition 
setting. The conditions under which a specific strategy is chosen are the same as those in a quantity 
competition setting, which are also based on the maximal capability of profit-redistribution lump-sum 
payments. Thus, for pricing competition with transfer payment, the optimal strategy choice is given by 
the following proposition: 
Proposition 8. For;hen;cnsn;wfhe;hrn sfnr;pnymn h;u nr;prfcf g;compnhfhfo :; 
(1) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝜷𝟏
𝒑; n ; 𝟏< 𝒌< 𝒌𝟐
𝒑 ;hen ;snlf-pro ucn;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
(2) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝟏;; n ; 𝐦𝐚𝐱{𝟏, 𝒌𝟐
𝒑} < 𝒌< 𝒌𝟑
𝒑; ; or; ff; 𝜷𝟐
𝒑< 𝜷< 𝟏;; n ; 𝒌𝟑
𝒑< 𝒌<
𝟐−𝜷𝟐
𝜷; ; hen ;
ouhsourcf g;ho;CP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
(3) If; 𝟎< 𝜷< 𝜷𝟐
𝒑; n ; 𝒌𝟑
𝒑< 𝒌<
𝟐−𝜷𝟐
𝜷 ;hen ;ouhsourcf g;ho;NP;fs;hen;ophfmnl;shrnhngy. 
Wenrn;
𝒌𝟐
𝒑=
𝟒[𝟏𝟔𝜷−𝟖𝜷𝟑−(𝟒−𝜷𝟐)√𝟏𝟐−𝟐𝟒𝜷+𝟕𝜷𝟐+𝟏𝟖𝜷𝟑−𝟔𝜷𝟒−𝟔𝜷𝟓−𝜷𝟔]
−𝟒𝟖+𝟗𝟔𝜷+𝟐𝟒𝜷𝟐−𝟒𝟖𝜷𝟑+𝜷𝟒+𝟔𝜷𝟓+𝜷𝟔
;
 ;
𝒌𝟑
𝒑=
𝟖𝜷−𝟖𝜷𝟑+𝟐𝜷𝟓−(𝟐−𝜷𝟐)(𝟐−𝜷−𝜷𝟐)√𝟐(𝟔−𝟓𝜷𝟐+𝜷𝟒)
(−𝟐+𝜷)[6+𝛽(−3−10𝛽+4𝛽3+𝛽4)]
 ; 𝜷𝟏
𝒑≈𝟎. 𝟒𝟐 ;n ; 𝜷𝟐
𝒑≈𝟎. 𝟒𝟕. 
By following the same conditions for each strategy under the quantity competition setting, we find 
that for the case with transfer payment, the OEM’s decision on outsourcing strategy also depends on 
both the outsourcing cost advantage index and the degree of product substitution, as Proposition 8 shows. 
The feasible zone is divided into three main decision regions. As illustrated in Figure 5, under a pricing 
competition setting with transfer payment, the optimal strategy choice follows criteria similar to those 
of the quantity competition setting. Specifically, the degree of the outsourcing cost advantage mainly 
determines whether the OEM decides to outsource or not. However, with whom they choose to cooperate, 
CP or NP, depends on the presence and extent of the transferable payment available to the CP and the 
B:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-NP;shrnhngy 
𝑘= 𝑘1
𝑝 
𝑘=
2−𝛽2
𝛽 
1 
𝛽 
𝑘 
4 
0 
1 
√2 
A:;Snlf-pro ucn;shrnhngy 

23 
NP, as well as the competition intensity between the OEM and CP. 
 
Figure 5. Outsourcing strategy selection under pricing competition with transfer payment 
So far, we have discussed the optimal strategy choice without and with transfer payment in quantity 
and pricing competition settings. The propositions indicate that the conclusions of optimal outsourcing 
strategy selection and its selection principle have assured robustness. However, between the two 
competition settings, the feasible areas are slightly different. Firstly, the feasible area under the quantity 
competition setting (1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽) is larger than that under the pricing competition setting (1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽). 
As a result, in the case without transfer payment, the areas of self-produce and outsourcing strategies 
are narrower for pricing competition (comparing the red and blue areas in Figures 2 and 4). However, 
in the case with transfer payment, the feasible areas for the self-produce and outsourcing-to-NP 
strategies are reduced further (comparing red and blue areas in Figures 3 and 5). In comparison, the 
feasible areas for the outsourcing-to-CP strategy under pricing competition are expanded (green areas 
in Figures 3 and 5). We can conclude that the pricing competition between the OEM and CP offers more 
possibility of outsourcing cooperation than the quantity competition. 
 
8 Conclusion 
This study examined the OEM’s optimal outsourcing strategy with and without incentive transfer 
payment. Based on the benchmark model of the self-produce strategy, we examine the effect of different 
outsourcing strategies by comparing the strategies’ potential profits with and without transfer payment. 
We find that outsourcing strategies are beneficial to the OEM, which depends on the cost advantage 
between outsourcing and self-produce. The optimal outsourcing strategy is also influenced by the degree 
of product substitution and the maximal capacity of profit-redistribution lump-sum payments. 
B:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-NP;
shrnhngy 
2NP; omf nhns;ovnr;CP 
𝑘= 𝑘1
𝑝 
𝑘=
2−𝛽2
𝛽 
1 
𝛽 
𝑘 
4 
0 
𝛽2
𝑝 
𝑘= 𝑘3
𝑝 
1 
√2 
𝑘= 𝑘2
𝑝 
𝛽1
𝑝 
A:;Snlf-pro ucn;shrnhngy 
C:;Ouhsourcf g-ho-CP;
shrnhngy 
2CP; omf nhns;ovnr;NP 

24 
Specifically, we demonstrate the following: 
 
As both the CP and NP seek greater profits, they are therefore incentivized to acquire outsourcing 
business by exhibiting competitive behavior. The optimal outsourcing strategy depends on external 
and internal factors, including the competition intensity (degree of product substitution 𝛽 ), 
production cost difference (outsourcing cost advantage index 𝑘), and the transfer payments offered 
by the CP and NP. Essentially, whereas a lower outsourcing cost advantage index ensures that the 
self-produce strategy will be the optimal selection, a higher outsourcing cost advantage index 
ensures that outsourcing will be the better choice. The transfer payment highlights the two 
outsourcing strategies. Under a high degree of product substitution and fierce competition intensity, 
the CP’s incentive is dominant and outsourcing to CP is the optimal strategy. Aside from effectively 
improving the possibility of outsourcing cooperation, the presence of the transfer payment can 
change outsourcing decisions. 
 
Without transfer payment, the optimal outsourcing strategy (outsourcing to NP) can result in lower 
retail prices to customers when facing intense competition and high outsourcing cost advantage, 
consequently improving social welfare. With transfer payment, the optimal outsourcing strategy 
will change, which may also harm the customers and reduce social welfare. 
 
The analysis of mixed strategies indicates that the mixed-CP strategy will be an optimal choice 
under certain conditions. The mixed-NP strategy, on the other hand, will degenerate to either a self-
produce or outsourcing-to-NP strategy. Furthermore, examination of another extended model under 
the pricing competition setting shows the robustness of the outsourcing strategy selection findings 
derived under the quantity competition setting. 
Outsourcing behaviors are complex problems for both OEMs and service-oriented manufacturers. 
To examine the outsourcing decisions, this paper focused on the competition structure inherent to two 
types of manufacturing service providers but assumed that the production costs of the two service-
oriented manufacturers were identical. In practice, production costs can be very different. This will make 
the model more complex, but it retains the potential to offer useful insights. Additionally, this research 
uses linear inverse determinist demand function, which does not capture demand or supply uncertainty. 
One valuable future extension is to incorporate a random variable to capture the demand uncertainty 
under a linear inverse demand (Chen et al. 2023; Fan et al. 2023). Alternatively, using a stochastic model 
to incorporate demand and supply uncertainty in examining outsourcing strategies is also a meaningful 
future research direction. 
 
References: 
Bolandifar, E., Kouvelis, P., & Zhang, F. (2016). Delegation vs. control in supply chain procurement 
under competition. Production and Operations Management, 25(9), 1528-1541. 
Cachon, G. P., & Harker, P. T. (2002). Competition and outsourcing with scale economies. Management 

25 
Science, 48(10), 1314-1333. 
Chen, J., Hu, Q., Shi, D., & Zhang, F. (2023). Quick response under strategic manufacturer. 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. DOI: 10.1287/msom.2021.0561. 
Chen, X., Wang, X., & Xia, Y. (2019). Production coopetition strategies for competing manufacturers 
that produce partially substitutable products. Production and Operations Management, 28(6), 
1446-1464. 
Deng, S., Guan, X. and Xu, J., (2021). The coopetition effect of learning-by-doing in outsourcing. 
International Journal of Production Research, 59(2), 516-541. 
Fan, X., Chen, K., & Chen, Y. J. (2023). Is price commitment a better solution to control carbon 
emissions and promote technology investment?. Management Science, 69(1), 325-341. 
Feng, Q., & Lu, L. X. (2012). The strategic perils of low cost outsourcing. Management Science, 58(6), 
1196-1210. 
Feng, Q., & Lu, L. X. (2013). The role of contract negotiation and industry structure in production 
outsourcing. Production and Operations Management, 22(5), 1299-1319. 
Heese, H. S., Kemahlıoğlu-Ziya, E., & Perdikaki, O. (2021). Outsourcing under competition and scale 
economies: When to choose a competitor as a supplier. Decision Sciences. 52(5), 1209-1241. 
Ivanov, D., Tang, C.S., Dolgui, A., Battini, D. and Das, A., (2021). Researchers' perspectives on Industry 
4.0: multi-disciplinary analysis and opportunities for operations management. International 
Journal of Production Research, 59(7), 2055-2078. 
Li, G., Wu, H., & Dai, J. (2023). Production sourcing strategy for an apparel original brand manufacturer 
in the presence of technology spillover. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. 70(4): 
1283-1294. 
Li, L., & Jiang, L. (2018). Horizontal subcontracting from competitors: When and what? Production 
and Operations Management, 27(7), 1320-1333. 
Li, J., Yi, L., Shi, V., & Chen, X. (2021b). Supplier encroachment strategy in the presence of retail 
strategic inventory: centralization or decentralization? Omega, 98, 102213. 
Li, W., Chen, J., & Chen, B. (2020). Sourcing strategy of original equipment manufacturer with quality 
competition. Decision Sciences, 51(5), 1110-1130. 
McGuire, T. W., & Staelin, R. (1983). An industry equilibrium analysis of downstream vertical 
integration. Marketing Science, 2(2), 161-191. 
Niu, B., Chen, K., Fang, X., Yue, X., & Wang, X. (2019). Technology specifications and production 
timing in a co-opetitive supply chain. Production and Operations Management, 28(8), 1990-2007. 
Niu, B., Mu, Z., & Shen, Z. (2023). The role of retail information link in MNF's coordination of profit 
and social welfare via procurement outsourcing. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
70(3): 1225-1238. 
Pisano, G. P., & Shih, W. C. (2012). Does America really need manufacturing? Harvard Business Review, 
90(3), 94-102. 

26 
Plambeck, E. L., & Taylor, T. A. (2005). Sell the plant? The impact of contract manufacturing on 
innovation, capacity, and profitability. Management Science, 51(1), 133-150. 
Qing, Q., Deng, T., & Wang, H. (2017). Capacity allocation under downstream competition and 
bargaining. European Journal of Operational Research, 261(1), 97-107. 
Tsay, A. A., & Agrawal, N. (2004). Channel conflict and coordination in the e-commerce age. Production 
and Operations Management, 13(1), 93-110. 
Tsay, A. A., Gray, J. V., Noh, I. J., & Mahoney, J. T. (2018). A review of production and operations 
management research on outsourcing in supply chains: Implications for the theory of the firm. 
Production and Operations Management, 27(7), 1177-1220. 
Xiao, W., & Gaimon, C. (2013). The effect of learning and integration investment on manufacturing 
outsourcing decisions: A game theoretic approach. Production and Operations Management, 22(6), 
1576-1592. 
Xu, L.D., Xu, E.L. and Li, L., (2018). Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. International 
Journal of Production Research, 56(8), 2941-2962. 
Wang, Y., Niu, B., & Guo, P. (2013). On the advantage of quantity leadership when outsourcing 
production to a competitive contract manufacturer. Production and Operations Management, 22(1), 
104-119. 
 
 

27 
Appendix 
Proof of Optimal solutions under quantity competition (Table 2) 
(1) Self-produce strategy: From (1), we obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑞𝑐)
𝑑𝑞𝑐2
= −2 < 0 , so 𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑞𝑐) is a concave 
function of 𝑞𝑐. Similarly, from (2), we obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜2
= −2 < 0 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑞𝑜) is a concave function 
of 𝑞𝑜. Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑞𝑐)
𝑑𝑞𝑐
=
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜
= 0, we have 𝑞𝑐𝑠=
2(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 and 𝑞𝑜𝑠=
2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
, then 𝑝𝑐𝑠=
𝑐+
2(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 and 𝑝𝑜𝑠= 𝑐𝑜+
2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
. 
(2) Outsourcing-to-CP strategy: According to the demand functions 𝑝𝑐= 𝛼−𝑞𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜 and 
𝑝𝑜= 𝛼−𝑞𝑜−𝛽𝑞𝑐, we obtain 𝑞𝑐=
−𝛼+𝛼𝛽+𝑝𝑐−𝛽𝑝𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) and 𝑞𝑜=
−𝛼+𝛼𝛽−𝛽𝑝𝑐+𝑝𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) . Because 𝑝𝑜= 𝑤𝑐+ 𝑚 
where 𝑚 is retail margin, then 
𝜕𝑞𝑐
𝜕𝑤𝑐=
𝛽
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) and 
𝜕𝑞𝑜
𝜕𝑤𝑐= −
1
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽). For a given 𝑞𝑜, from (3), 
we 
obtain 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐
= −𝑐+ 𝛼−2𝑞𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜 
, 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐2
= −2 < 0 
, 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
=
𝜕((𝛼−𝑞𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜−𝑐)𝑞𝑐+(𝑤𝑐−𝑐)𝑞𝑜)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
= (𝛼−𝑞𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜−𝑐) 𝜕𝑞𝑐
𝜕𝑤𝑐+ (−
𝜕𝑞𝑐
𝜕𝑤𝑐−𝛽
𝜕𝑞𝑜
𝜕𝑤𝑐) 𝑞𝑐+ 𝑞𝑜+ (𝑤𝑐−𝑐) 𝜕𝑞𝑜
𝜕𝑤𝑐=
−𝑐+𝑤+𝑐𝛽−𝛼𝛽+𝛽𝑞𝑐−𝑞𝑜+2𝛽2𝑞𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)
 , 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐2
=
2
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) , and 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐𝜕𝑤𝑐
=
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐𝜕𝑞𝑐
= −
𝛽
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) , 
then the value of hessian matrix is 
4−5𝛽2
(1−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)2 , so only when 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 , 𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) is joint 
concave in 𝑤𝑐 and 𝑞𝑐 . Let 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐
=
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
= 0 , we get 𝑞𝑐(𝑞𝑜) =
−𝑐+𝛼−𝛽𝑞𝑜
2
 and 𝑤𝑐(𝑞𝑜) =
2𝑐−𝑐𝛽+𝛼𝛽+2𝑞𝑜−3𝛽2𝑞𝑜
2
. Replace 𝑞𝑐(𝑤𝑐) and 𝑤𝑐(𝑞𝑜) in (4), we have 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜2
= −4(1 −𝛽)(1 + 𝛽) <
0, so 𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑞𝑜) is a concave in 𝑞𝑜. Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜
= 0, we get 𝑞𝑜=
𝛼−𝑐
4(1+𝛽), then 𝑤𝑐= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(2+4𝛽+𝛽2)
8(1+𝛽)
, 
𝑞𝑐𝑐=
(𝛼−𝑐)(4+3𝛽)
8(1+𝛽)
, 𝑝𝑐𝑐= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(4+3𝛽)
8(1+𝛽)
 and 𝑝𝑜𝑐= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(6+4𝛽−3𝛽2)
8(1+𝛽)
. 
(3) Outsourcing-to-NP strategy: From (5), 
𝑑2𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐)
𝑑𝑞𝑐2
= −2 < 0, so 𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐) is a concave in 𝑞𝑐. Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐)
𝑑𝑞𝑐
= 0, we get 𝑞𝑐(𝑞𝑜) =
𝛼−𝑐−𝛽𝑞𝑜
2
. Similar with the proof of outsourcing-to-CP strategy, we have 
𝜕𝑞𝑜
𝜕𝑤𝑛= −
1
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) . From (6), 
𝑑𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛
=
𝑑(𝑞𝑜(𝑤𝑛−𝑐))
𝑑𝑤𝑛
= 𝑞𝑜+ (𝑤𝑛−𝑐) 𝜕𝑞𝑜
𝜕𝑤𝑛= 𝑞𝑜−
(𝑤𝑛−𝑐)
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) and 

28 
𝑑2𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛2
= −
2
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0, so 𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛) is a concave in 𝑤𝑛. Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛
= 0, we get 𝑤𝑛(𝑞𝑜) = 𝑐+
𝑞𝑜−𝛽2𝑞𝑜. Replace 𝑞𝑐(𝑞𝑜) and 𝑤𝑛(𝑞𝑜) in (7), we obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜2
= −4 + 3𝛽2 < 0, so 𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑞𝑜) is 
a concave in 𝑞𝑜 . Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑞𝑜)
𝑑𝑞𝑜
= 0 , we get 𝑞𝑜𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)(2−𝛽)
2(4−3𝛽2) , 𝑞𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)(8−2𝛽−5𝛽2)
4(4−3𝛽2)
 , 𝑤𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(2−𝛽)(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)
2(4−3𝛽2)
, 𝑝𝑐𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(8−2𝛽−5𝛽2)
4(4−3𝛽2)
, and 𝑝𝑜𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(2−𝛽)(6−5𝛽2)
4(4−3𝛽2)
. 
Proof of Lemma 1 
From Table 2, we can get the maximum profit of CP under self-produce strategy is 𝜋𝑐𝑠=
[2(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)]2
(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2
 , under outsourcing-to-CP strategy is 𝜋𝑐𝑐=
(2+𝛽)(10+11𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐)2
64(1+𝛽)2
 , and under 
outsourcing-to-NP strategy is 𝜋𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2[−8+𝛽(2+5𝛽)]2
16(4−3𝛽2)2
 . Then: (i) 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹1(𝑘)
64(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2 , 
where 
𝐹1(𝑘) = −64𝛽2 −128𝛽3 −64𝛽4 + 𝑘(256𝛽+ 512𝛽2 + 256𝛽3) + 𝑘2(64 −240𝛽2 −
256𝛽3 −68𝛽4 + 32𝛽5 + 11𝛽6) , and the relationship between 𝜋𝑐𝑠 and 𝜋𝑐𝑐 depends on 𝐹1(𝑘) . Let 
𝐹1(𝑘) = 0 
, 
we 
get 
two 
roots: 
𝑘𝑟1 =
8(−16𝛽−32𝛽2−16𝛽3−√320𝛽2+1152𝛽3+1360𝛽4+288𝛽5−564𝛽6−360𝛽7+7𝛽8+54𝛽9+11𝛽10)
64−240𝛽2−256𝛽3−68𝛽4+32𝛽5+11𝛽6
 
 and 
𝑘𝑟2 =
8(−16𝛽−32𝛽2−16𝛽3+√320𝛽2+1152𝛽3+1360𝛽4+288𝛽5−564𝛽6−360𝛽7+7𝛽8+54𝛽9+11𝛽10)
64−240𝛽2−256𝛽3−68𝛽4+32𝛽5+11𝛽6
 . We know that the 
feasible zone is 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , when 64 −240𝛽2 −256𝛽3 −68𝛽4 + 32𝛽5 + 11𝛽6 > 0 , we have 
𝑘𝑟1 < 𝑘𝑟2 < 1 , thus for any 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , we get 𝐹1(𝑘) > 0 ; when 64 −240𝛽2 −256𝛽3 −68𝛽4 +
32𝛽5 + 11𝛽6 < 0 , we have 𝑘𝑟2 < 1 <
2
𝛽< 𝑘𝑟1 , thus for any 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , we get 𝐹1(𝑘) > 0 . 
Therefore, 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 . (ii) 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(64+128𝛽−112𝛽3−40𝛽4+8𝛽5−𝛽6)
64(1+𝛽)2(4−3𝛽2)2
 , for any 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 , then 
64 + 128𝛽−112𝛽3 −40𝛽4 + 8𝛽5 −𝛽6 > 0 
, 
thus, 
𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛 
. 
(3) 
𝜋𝑐𝑠−𝜋𝑐𝑛=
−
𝛽(−8𝑘+16−4𝑘𝛽+2𝑘𝛽2−12𝛽2+5𝑘𝛽3)(64𝑘−8𝑘𝛽−16𝛽−52𝑘𝛽2+2𝑘𝛽3+12𝛽3+5𝑘𝛽4)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
16(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2(−4+3𝛽2)2
, in the feasible region 
0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , we have if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘0 =
16−12𝛽2
8+4𝛽−2𝛽2−5𝛽3 , then 𝜋𝑐𝑠< 𝜋𝑐𝑛 , and if 𝑘0 <
𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑐𝑠> 𝜋𝑐𝑛. 

29 
Therefore, to sum up, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘0, then 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠; and if 𝑘0 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠>
𝜋𝑐𝑛. 
Proof of Proposition 1 
From Table 2, 𝜋𝑜𝑠=
[2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)]2
(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2
 , 𝜋𝑜𝑐=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(1−𝛽)
8(1+𝛽)
 , and 𝜋𝑜𝑛=
(𝛼−c)2(2−𝛽)2
8(4−3𝛽2) . Among the 
strategies, the optimal one must satisfy the following conditions. 
Scenario 1: The self-produce strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐 , 𝜋𝑜𝑐−𝜋𝑜𝑠= −
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹2(𝑘)
8(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 , where 𝐹2(𝑘) =
32 + 32𝛽+ 𝑘(−32𝛽−32𝛽2) + 𝑘2(−16 + 16𝛽+ 16𝛽2 −𝛽4 + 𝛽5) , and the relationship between 
𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑐 depends 
on 
𝐹2(𝑘) . 
Let 
𝐹2(𝑘) = 0 , 
we 
get 
two 
roots: 
𝑘𝑟3 =
4(4𝛽+4𝛽2−√2√16−24𝛽2+9𝛽4−𝛽6)
−16+16𝛽+16𝛽2−𝛽4+𝛽5
 and 𝑘𝑟4 =
4(4𝛽+4𝛽2+√2√16−24𝛽2+9𝛽4−𝛽6)
−16+16𝛽+16𝛽2−𝛽4+𝛽5
 . We find the root 𝑘𝑟3 
satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟3 <
2
𝛽, so for both positive and negative −16 + 16𝛽+ 16𝛽2 −𝛽4 + 𝛽5. So, if 1 <
𝑘< 𝑘𝑟3, then 𝐹2(𝑘) > 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑐< 𝜋𝑜𝑠; and if 𝑘𝑟3 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝐹2(𝑘) < 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛 , 𝜋𝑜𝑛−𝜋𝑜𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹3(𝑘)
8(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2(4−3𝛽2) , where 𝐹3(𝑘) =
−128 + 96𝛽2 + 𝑘(128𝛽−96𝛽3) + 𝑘2(64 −64𝛽−48𝛽2 + 32𝛽3 + 20𝛽4 −4𝛽5 + 𝛽6) , and the 
relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑛 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠 depends on 𝐹3(𝑘) . Let 𝐹3(𝑘) = 0 , we get two roots: 𝑘𝑟5 =
4[−16𝛽+12𝛽3+(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)√2(4−3𝛽2)]
64−64𝛽−48𝛽2+32𝛽3+20𝛽4−4𝛽5+𝛽6 and 𝑘𝑟6 =
4[−16𝛽+12𝛽3−(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)√2(4−3𝛽2)]
64−64𝛽−48𝛽2+32𝛽3+20𝛽4−4𝛽5+𝛽6 . We find that root 
𝑘𝑟5 satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟5 <
2
𝛽, so if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟5, then 𝐹3(𝑘) < 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑛< 𝜋𝑜𝑠; and if 𝑘𝑟5 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, 
then 𝐹3(𝑘) > 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. For the relationship of thresholds 𝑘𝑟3 and 𝑘𝑟5, through mathematical 
deduction by using Mathematics 12.2, we can compute that 𝑘𝑟3 > 𝑘𝑟5. 
Therefore, when 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟5, then 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛 hold, then the self-produce strategy 
is optimal. 
Scenario 2: The outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠, 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑛, 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠, 
and 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛. As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛, 𝜋𝑜𝑐−𝜋𝑜𝑛= −
(𝛼−c)2𝛽(2−𝛽2)
4(1+𝛽)(4−3𝛽2), we know for 

30 
any 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑐< 𝜋𝑜𝑛. That is to say, outsourcing-to-CP strategy will never be the optimal 
one without transfer payment. Therefore, there is no need to prove 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 or not, and the scenario 2 
does not exist. 
Scenario 3: The outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠, 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐, 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠, 
and 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑐. Based on the model, we know 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. According to the Scenario 2, we 
know that 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 always holds. And according to Scenario 1, we know if 𝑘𝑟5 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑛𝑛>
𝜋𝑛𝑠 . Therefore, when 𝑘𝑟5 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 hold, then the outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy is optimal. 
To sum up, define 𝑘1 = 𝑘𝑟5 =
4[−16𝛽+12𝛽3+(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)√2(4−3𝛽2)]
64−64𝛽−48𝛽2+32𝛽3+20𝛽4−4𝛽5+𝛽6 , based on the above three 
scenarios, we get when 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, the OEM’s optimal strategy is self-produce; when 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, 
the OEM’s optimal strategy is outsourcing to NP. 
Proof of Proposition 2 
With transfer payment, the strategies choice analysis is based on the following three scenarios: 
Scenario 1: The self-produce strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) and 𝜋𝑜𝑠>
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) , 𝜋𝑜𝑠−[𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠)] =
−
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹4(𝑘)
64(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2 , 
where 
𝐹4(𝑘) = −256 −512𝛽−320𝛽2 −128𝛽3 −64𝛽4 + 𝑘(512𝛽+
1024𝛽2 + 512𝛽3) + 𝑘2(192 −496𝛽2 −384𝛽3 −60𝛽4 + 32𝛽5 + 3𝛽6). Let 𝐹4(𝑘) = 0, we get two 
roots: 
𝑘𝑟7 =
8[−32𝛽−64𝛽2−32𝛽3+(4+4𝛽−𝛽2−𝛽3)√48−24𝛽2+32𝛽3+3𝛽4]
192−496𝛽2−384𝛽3−60𝛽4+32𝛽5+3𝛽6
 
 and 
𝑘𝑟8 =
8[−32𝛽−64𝛽2−32𝛽3−(4+4𝛽−𝛽2−𝛽3)√48−24𝛽2+32𝛽3+3𝛽4]
192−496𝛽2−384𝛽3−60𝛽4+32𝛽5+3𝛽6
. We find only the root 𝑘𝑟7 satisfies that if 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽1 (𝛽1 ≈0.62), then 𝑘𝑟7 > 1, and if 𝛽1 < 𝛽<
2
√5, then 𝑘𝑟7 < 1, and 𝑘𝑟7 <
2
𝛽 for both positive 
and negative 192 −496𝛽2 −384𝛽3 −60𝛽4 + 32𝛽5 + 3𝛽6 . So, if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟7 , 
then 𝐹4(𝑘) < 0 , thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) , and if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1 and 𝑘𝑟7 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , or 𝛽1 < 𝛽<
2
√5 

31 
and 1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝐹4(𝑘) > 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠< 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠). 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 , 𝜋𝑜𝑠−(𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛) =
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹5(𝑘)
8(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2(4−3𝛽2)2 , 
where 
𝐹5(𝑘) = 512 −768𝛽2 + 288𝛽4 + 𝑘(−512𝛽+ 768𝛽3 −288𝛽5) + 𝑘2(−384 + 384𝛽+
544𝛽2 −512𝛽3 −248𝛽4 + 184𝛽5 + 46𝛽6 −20𝛽7 + 5𝛽8) . Let 𝐹5(𝑘) = 0 , we get two roots: 
𝑘𝑟9 =
4[−64𝛽+96𝛽3−36𝛽5+(2−𝛽)2(8+4𝛽−6𝛽2−3𝛽3)√2(6−5𝛽2)]
384−384𝛽−544𝛽2+512𝛽3+248𝛽4−184𝛽5−46𝛽6+20𝛽7−5𝛽8 
 and 
𝑘𝑟10 =
4[−64𝛽+96𝛽3−36𝛽5−(2−𝛽)2(8+4𝛽−6𝛽2−3𝛽3)√2(6−5𝛽2)]
384−384𝛽−544𝛽2+512𝛽3+248𝛽4−184𝛽5−46𝛽6+20𝛽7−5𝛽8. We find only the root 𝑘𝑟9 satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟9 <
2
𝛽. 
If 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 ; and if 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑠< 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 . For the thresholds, 
through mathematical deduction, we get 𝑘𝑟7 < 𝑘𝑟9 . Thus, for max{1, 𝑘𝑟7} < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+
(𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
Therefore, based on the above analysis, only when 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟7 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑠>
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 hold, then with transfer payment the self-produce strategy is 
optimal. 
Scenario 2: The outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
According to the scenario 1, we know if max{1, 𝑘𝑟7} < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 for any 0 < 𝛽< 1, then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+
(𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 . More specifically, when max{1, 𝑘𝑟7} < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠>
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 . And when 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 . So within 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , we analyze the 
relationship 
of 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) 
 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 
, 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) −(𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛) =
(𝛼−c)2𝛽(2+𝛽)(−8+2𝛽+11𝛽2)
64(1+𝛽)2(4−3𝛽2)
. Define 𝐺(𝛽) = −8 + 2𝛽+ 11𝛽2. Let 𝐺(𝛽) = 0, for 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5, we get 
only one root 𝛽2 = √89−1
11 , and if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2, then 𝐺(𝛽) < 0, so 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) < 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛; and if 
𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5, then 𝐺(𝛽) > 0, so 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
Therefore, based on the above analysis, when max{1, 𝑘𝑟7} < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9, or when 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 and 
𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 hold, then with transfer 

32 
payment the outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal. 
Scenario 3: The outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal only when 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+
𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛). 
According to the scenario 1, we know if 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 . According to the 
scenario 2, we know if 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2, then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛). Therefore, 
when 𝑘𝑟9 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) hold, 
then with transfer payment the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal. 
To sum up, define 𝑘2 = 𝑘𝑟7 and 𝑘3 = 𝑘𝑟9, based on the above three scenarios, we get when 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽1 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘2, the OEM’s optimal strategy is self-produce; when max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3, or 
when 𝑘3 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 and 𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5, the OEM’s optimal strategy is outsourcing to CP; when 𝑘3 <
𝑘<
2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2, the OEM’s optimal strategy is outsourcing to NP. 
Proof of Proposition 3 
(1) For the case without transfer payment, the optimal outsourcing strategy is outsourcing to NP 
within the region 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽. Then we analyze the retail prices between the strategies of self-produce 
and outsourcing to NP, then 𝑝𝑐𝑛−𝑝𝑐𝑠=
𝛽(−8𝑘+16−4𝑘𝛽+2𝑘𝛽2−12𝛽2+5𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)(−4+3𝛽2)
 and 𝑝𝑜𝑛−𝑝𝑜𝑠=
(2−𝛽2)(−8𝑘+16−4𝑘𝛽+2𝑘𝛽2−12𝛽2+5𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)(−4+3𝛽2)
 . Within the feasible zone of optimal outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, we get if 0 < 𝛽≤√2
3 and 
16−12𝛽2
8+4𝛽−2𝛽2−5𝛽3 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, or √2
3 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 𝑘1 <
𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝑝𝑐𝑛< 𝑝𝑐𝑠 and 𝑝𝑜𝑛< 𝑝𝑜𝑠; and if 0 < 𝛽≤√2
3 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
16−12𝛽2
8+4𝛽−2𝛽2−5𝛽3, then 𝑝𝑐𝑛> 𝑝𝑐𝑠 
and 𝑝𝑜𝑛> 𝑝𝑜𝑠. 
(2) For the case with transfer payment, the selection of outsourcing strategy has changed. By 
comparing Figures 2 and 3, we focus on the areas that have changed. 
Within the subregion 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, the strategy from self-produce changes to 
outsourcing to NP, according to 𝑝𝑐𝑛−𝑝𝑐𝑠=
𝛽(−8𝑘+16−4𝑘𝛽+2𝑘𝛽2−12𝛽2+5𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)(−4+3𝛽2)
 and 𝑝𝑜𝑛−𝑝𝑜𝑠=

33 
(−8+4𝛽2+28𝑘−10𝑘𝛽−6𝑘𝛽2+𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)
 , within the subregion 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 , we have 
𝑝𝑐𝑛> 𝑝𝑐𝑠 and 𝑝𝑜𝑛> 𝑝𝑜𝑠. 
Within the subregion max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 and the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 , 
the strategy from self-produce changes to outsourcing to CP, according to 𝑝𝑐𝑐−𝑝𝑐𝑠=
𝛽(−8𝑘+16+2𝑘𝛽2−10𝛽2+3𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
2(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)(−8+5𝛽2)
 and 𝑝𝑜𝑐−𝑝𝑜𝑠=
(2−𝛽2)(−8𝑘+16+2𝑘𝛽2−10𝛽2+3𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
2(−2+𝛽)(2+𝛽)(−8+5𝛽2)
 , within the 
two subsections, we have 𝑝𝑐𝑐> 𝑝𝑐𝑠 and 𝑝𝑜𝑐> 𝑝𝑜𝑠. 
Within the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, the strategy from outsourcing to NP changes 
to outsourcing to CP, according to 𝑝𝑐𝑐−𝑝𝑐𝑛=
(2+𝛽)𝛽2(𝛼−𝑐)
8(1+𝛽)(4−3𝛽2) and 𝑝𝑜𝑐−𝑝𝑜𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)𝛽(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
8(1+𝛽)(4−3𝛽2)
, within 
the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, we have 𝑝𝑐𝑐> 𝑝𝑐𝑛 and 𝑝𝑜𝑐> 𝑝𝑜𝑛. 
Proof of Proposition 4 
Under the strategies of self-produce and outsourcing to CP, the social welfare is defined as 𝑆𝑊𝑖=
𝐶𝑆𝑖+ 𝜋𝑜𝑖+ 𝜋𝑐𝑖, 𝑖= 𝑠, 𝑐, where 𝐶𝑆 is the customer surplus, is can be calculated with equation 𝐶𝑆=
𝑞𝑐2+2𝛽𝑞𝑐𝑞𝑜+𝑞𝑜2
2
 
 by 
referring 
to 
Singh 
and 
Vives 
(1984). 
Then, 
𝑆𝑊𝑠=
(12𝑘2+12−16𝑘𝛽−𝑘2𝛽2−𝛽2+2𝑘𝛽3)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
2(−2+𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2
 and 𝑆𝑊𝑐=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(76+104𝛽+27𝛽2)
128(1+𝛽)2
 . Under outsourcing-to-NP 
strategy, the social welfare is defined as 𝑆𝑊𝑛= 𝐶𝑆𝑛+ 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑐𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(76−36𝛽−25𝛽2)
32(4−3𝛽2)
. 
(1) For the case without transfer payment, in the optimal outsourcing-to-NP strategy region 𝑘1 <
𝑘<
𝛽
2 
, 
𝑆𝑊𝑛−𝑆𝑊𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
32(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2(−4+3𝛽2) [768 −640𝛽2 + 48𝛽4 + 𝑘(−1024𝛽+ 896𝛽3 −
96𝛽5) + 𝑘2(−448 + 576𝛽+ 368𝛽2 −288𝛽3 −228𝛽4 + 36𝛽5 + 25𝛽6)] , we find that in the 
feasible zone 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, 𝑆𝑊𝑛> 𝑆𝑊𝑠 is satisfied. 
(2) For the case with transfer payment, we focus on the areas that have changed. Within the 
subregion 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 in Figure 3, the outsourcing strategy switches from self-
produce to outsourcing to NP, then we compare the social welfares between these two strategies, we 
have 
𝑆𝑊𝑛−𝑆𝑊𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
32(−2+𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2(−4+3𝛽2) [768 −640𝛽2 + 48𝛽4 + 𝑘(−1024𝛽+ 896𝛽3 −

34 
96𝛽5) + 𝑘2(−448 + 576𝛽+ 368𝛽2 −288𝛽3 −228𝛽4 + 36𝛽5 + 25𝛽6)] , in the subregion 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽2 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 we can get that when 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑎, then 𝑆𝑊𝑛< 𝑆𝑊𝑠, and if 𝑘𝑎< 𝑘<
𝑘1, then 𝑆𝑊𝑛> 𝑆𝑊𝑠, where 𝑘𝑎=
16𝛽(8−𝛽2)(4−3𝛽2)−4(4−𝛽2)√(4−3𝛽2)(336−432𝛽+120𝛽2+36𝛽3−23𝛽4)
−448+576𝛽+368𝛽2−288𝛽3−228𝛽4+36𝛽5+25𝛽6
. 
Within the subregion max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 and the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, in 
Figure 3, the outsourcing strategy switches from self-produce to outsourcing to CP, then we compare 
the 
social 
welfares 
between 
these 
two 
strategies, 
we 
have 
𝑆𝑊𝑐−𝑆𝑊𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
128(−2+𝛽)2(1+𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2 [−768 −1536𝛽−704𝛽2 + 128𝛽3 + 64𝛽4 + 𝑘(1024𝛽+ 2048𝛽2 +
896𝛽3 −256𝛽4 −128𝛽5) + 𝑘2(448 + 128𝛽−880𝛽2 −704𝛽3 −76𝛽4 + 104𝛽5 + 27𝛽6)] . we 
can get that within subregion max{1, 𝑘2} < 𝑘< 𝑘3 and the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘3 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, 
we have 𝑆𝑊𝑐< 𝑆𝑊𝑠. 
Within the subregion 𝛽2 < 𝛽< 1 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽 in Figure 3, the outsourcing strategy switches 
from outsourcing to NP to outsourcing to CP, then we compare the social welfares between these two 
strategies, we have 𝑆𝑊𝑐−𝑆𝑊𝑛=
𝛽(2+𝛽)(24+6𝛽−19𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)2
128(1+𝛽)2(−4+3𝛽2)
, we find that in the feasible zone 𝛽2 <
𝛽< 1 and 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, 𝑆𝑊𝑐< 𝑆𝑊𝑛 is satisfied. 
Proof of Proposition 5 
Based on the decision sequence and according to the backward induction derivation, we find that 
the feasible area for the mixed-CP strategy satisfies 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 < 𝜆𝑐< 1. Otherwise, the 
mixed-CP strategy is infeasible and not an alternative strategy. 
For 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 < 𝜆𝑐< 1: Induction derivation back to the stage max
𝜆𝑐𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜), 
we get 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑐)) =
[(𝜆𝑐−𝛽)𝑘+1−𝜆𝑐]2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
4(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(1+𝜆𝑐)
 . Because 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐,𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑐))
𝑑𝜆𝑐2
=
(𝑘−2+𝑘𝛽)2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
2(1−𝛽2)(2−𝜆𝑐)3
> 0 , 
thus 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(𝜆𝑐, 𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑐)) is a convex function in 𝜆𝑐 and there is no optimal maximum point within 
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 < 𝜆𝑐< 1. Now we should compare the endpoint value when 𝜆𝑐=
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 and 𝜆𝑐= 1. 
When 𝜆𝑐=
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 , the mixed-CP strategy is available. Although 𝜆𝑐=
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 leads to the 
determinant of Hessian matrix of 𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) with respect to 𝑤𝑐 and 𝑞𝑐 is zero, but the second 

35 
derivative 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐2
< 0 for given 𝑞𝑐 and 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐2
< 0 for given 𝑤𝑐 , thus, the (𝑤𝑐, 𝑞𝑐) 
which makes 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
=
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑚𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑞𝑐)
𝜕𝑞𝑐
= 0 can still maximum the profit. Thus, the profit of the OEM 
is 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2) =
[(4−5𝛽2)+𝑘𝛽(−4+𝛽+4𝛽2)]
2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
16(1−𝛽2)2(4−3𝛽2)
 . And when 𝜆𝑐= 1 , the mixed-CP strategy 
degenerates to outsourcing-to-CP strategy and the profit of the OEM is 𝜋𝑜𝑐=
𝑘2(1−𝛽)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
8(1+𝛽)
 . Since 
𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2) −𝜋𝑜𝑐=
(−4+5𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
16(−1+𝛽)2(1+𝛽)2(4−3𝛽2)[−4 + 5𝛽2 + 𝑘(8𝛽−2𝛽2 −8𝛽3) + 𝑘2(2 −4𝛽−
3𝛽2 + 4𝛽3 + 2𝛽4)], we can get if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑚𝑐, then 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2) > 𝜋𝑜𝑐, and if 𝑘𝑚𝑐< 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 
𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑐(
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2) < 𝜋𝑜𝑐, where 𝑘𝑚𝑐=
−4𝛽+𝛽2+4𝛽3+(1−𝛽)√2(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(4−3𝛽2)
2−4𝛽−3𝛽2+4𝛽3+2𝛽4
. 
Therefore, to sum up, for 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 < 𝜆𝑐< 1, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑚𝑐, then the mixed-CP 
strategy is better, and the corresponding proportion of outsourcing to CP is 
β2
4−4β2; and if 𝑘𝑚𝑐< 𝑘<
2
𝛽, 
then the mixed-CP strategy is not an better one and it degenerates to outsourcing-to-CP strategy. For the 
case beyond 0 < 𝛽<
2
√5 and 
𝛽2
4−4𝛽2 < 𝜆𝑐< 1, the mixed-CP strategy is infeasible. 
Proof of Proposition 6 
Based on the decision sequence and according to the backward induction derivation, the feasible 
area for the mixed-NP is 0 < 𝛽< 1 and 0 < 𝜆𝑛< 1 . Induction derivation back to the stage 
max
𝜆𝑛𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜) , we get 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑛)) =
[(2−𝛽−2𝜆𝑛)𝑘+2𝜆𝑛]2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
8(4−3𝛽2−2𝜆𝑛+2𝛽2𝜆𝑛)
 . Because 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛,𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑛))
𝑑𝜆𝑛2
>
0, then 𝜋𝑜𝑚𝑛(𝜆𝑛, 𝑞𝑜(𝜆𝑛)) is convex in 𝜆𝑛, and there is no optimal maximum point within 0 < 𝜆𝑛<
1. Now we should compare the endpoint value when 𝜆𝑐= 0 and 𝜆𝑐= 1. When 𝜆𝑐= 0, the mixed-
NP strategy degenerates to self-produce strategy and the profit of the OEM is 𝜋𝑜𝑠=
(𝛽𝑘−2)2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
(2−𝛽)2(2+𝛽)2 . 
When 𝜆𝑐= 1, the mixed-NP strategy degenerates to outsourcing-to-NP strategy and the profit of the 
OEM is 𝜋𝑜𝑛=
(2−𝛽)2𝑘2(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
8(4−3𝛽2)
 . The relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛 can be found in the proof of 
Proposition 1 (in Scenario 1). That is, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1, then 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛, and if 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑜𝑠<
𝜋𝑜𝑛. 

36 
Therefore, to sum up, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1 , then the mixed-NP strategy degenerates to self-produce 
strategy. If 𝑘1 < 𝑘<
2
𝛽, then the mixed-NP strategy degenerates to outsourcing-to-NP strategy. So, the 
mixed-NP strategy will never be an optimal choice. 
Proof of Optimal solutions under pricing competition (Table 3) 
We use 𝑞𝑐=
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 and 𝑞𝑜=
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 to replace the demand functions 
in equations (1)-(7) in Section 4, and we get the profit functions under different strategies. 
For the self-produce strategy: The profit functions are 
𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑝𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
(A1) 
𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑐𝑜) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
(A2) 
From (A1), we obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑝𝑐)
𝑑𝑝𝑐2
=
−2
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0 , so 𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑝𝑐) is a concave function of 𝑝𝑐 . 
Similarly, from (A2), we obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜2
=
−2
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜) is a concave function of 𝑝𝑜. 
Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑐𝑠(𝑝𝑐)
𝑑𝑝𝑐
=
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜
= 0 
, 
we 
have 
𝑝𝑐𝑠= 𝑐+
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
4−𝛽2
 
 and 
𝑝𝑜𝑠= 𝑐𝑜+
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
4−𝛽2
, then. 𝑞𝑐𝑠=
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)
(1−𝛽2)(4−𝛽2)
 and 𝑞𝑜𝑠=
(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)
(1−𝛽2)(4−𝛽2)
. 
For the outsourcing-to-CP strategy: The profit functions are 
𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑝𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2) + (𝑤𝑐−𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2) 
(A3) 
𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑝𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
(A4) 
Similar with the proof of optimal solution under quantity competition, we define 𝑝𝑜= 𝑤𝑐+ 𝑚 
where 𝑚 is retail margin, then 𝑝𝑜 must be considered in the differentiation with respect to 𝑤𝑐. For a 
given 𝑞𝑜 , from (A3), we obtain 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑝𝑐
−𝑐−𝛼+𝑐𝛽−𝑤𝑐𝛽+𝛼𝛽+2𝑝𝑐−𝛽𝑝𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)
 , 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑝𝑐2
=
2
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0 , 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
=
−𝑐+𝑤𝑐−𝛼+𝑐𝛽+𝛼𝛽−2𝛽𝑝𝑐+𝑝𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)
 , 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐2
=
2
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) , and 
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑝𝑐𝜕𝑤𝑐
=
𝜕2𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐𝜕𝑝𝑐
=
−
2𝛽
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽), then the value of hessian matrix is 
4
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) > 0, then 𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐, 𝑝𝑐) is joint concave in 
𝑤𝑐 and 𝑝𝑐. Let 
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑝𝑐
=
𝜕𝜋𝑐𝑐(𝑤𝑐,𝑝𝑐)
𝜕𝑤𝑐
= 0, we get 𝑝𝑐=
𝑐+𝛼
2 and 𝑤𝑐(𝑞𝑜) = 𝑐+ 𝛼−𝑝𝑜. Replace 𝑝𝑐 

37 
and 𝑤𝑐(𝑞𝑜) in (A4), we have 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜2
=
4
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0 , so 𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑝𝑜) is a concave in 𝑝𝑜 . Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑐(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜
= 0, we get 𝑝𝑜𝑐= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(3−𝛽)
4
, then 𝑤𝑐= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1+𝛽)
4
, 𝑝𝑐𝑐= 𝑐+
𝛼−𝑐
2 , 𝑞𝑐𝑐=
(𝛼−𝑐)(2+𝛽)
4(1+𝛽) , 
and 𝑞𝑜𝑐=
𝛼−𝑐
4(1+𝛽). 
For the outsourcing-to-NP strategy: The profit functions are 
𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑝𝑐) = (𝑝𝑐−𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
(A5) 
𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛) = (𝑤𝑛−𝑐) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
(A6) 
𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑝𝑜) = (𝑝𝑜−𝑤𝑛) (
𝛼
1+𝛽−
𝑝𝑜
1−𝛽2 +
𝛽𝑝𝑐
1−𝛽2) 
 
 
 
 
 
(A7) 
From (A5), 
𝑑2𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑝𝑐)
𝑑𝑝𝑐2
=
2
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0, so 𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑝𝑐) is a concave in 𝑝𝑐. Similar with the proof of 
outsourcing-to-CP 
strategy, 
from 
(A6), 
𝑑𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛
=
−𝑐+𝑤𝑛−𝛼+𝛼𝛽−𝛽𝑝𝑐+𝑝𝑜
(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)
 and 
𝑑2𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛2
=
−
2
(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽) < 0 , so 𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛) is a concave in 𝑤𝑛 . Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑐𝑛(𝑞𝑐)
𝑑𝑞𝑐
=
𝑑𝜋𝑛𝑛(𝑤𝑛)
𝑑𝑤𝑛
= 0 , we get 𝑝𝑐(𝑝𝑜) =
𝑐+𝛼−𝛼𝛽+𝛽𝑝𝑜
2
 and 𝑤𝑛(𝑝𝑜) =
2𝑐+2𝛼+𝑐𝛽−𝛼𝛽−𝛼𝛽2−2𝑝𝑜+𝛽2𝑝𝑜
2
 . Replace 𝑝𝑐(𝑝𝑜) and 𝑤𝑛(𝑝𝑜) in (7), we 
obtain 
𝑑2𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜2
= −
(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
2(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)
< 0 , so 𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑝𝑜) is a concave in 𝑝𝑜 . Let 
𝑑𝜋𝑜𝑛(𝑝𝑜)
𝑑𝑝𝑜
= 0 , we get 
𝑝𝑜𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)(3−𝛽2)
(2−𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
 , 𝑤𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)
2(2−𝛽)
 , 𝑝𝑐𝑛= 𝑐+
(𝛼−𝑐)(1−𝛽)(4+𝛽−2𝛽2)
2(2−𝛽)(2−𝛽2)
 , 𝑞𝑜𝑛=
𝛼−𝑐
2(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽) , 
and 𝑞𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)(4+𝛽−2𝛽2)
2(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2−𝛽2). 
Proof of Lemma 2 
From Table 3, we can get the maximum profit of CP under different strategies are 𝜋𝑐𝑠=
[(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)]
2
(2−𝛽)2(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 , 𝜋𝑐𝑐=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(5+3𝛽)
16(1+𝛽)
 , and 𝜋𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(1−𝛽)(4+𝛽−2𝛽2)
2
4(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)2 . Then: (i) 𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠=
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘)
4(2−𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2(8+𝛽2) , 
where 
𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘) = 16𝛽2 + 𝑘(−64𝛽+ 32𝛽3) + 𝑘2(−16 + 32𝛽+
24𝛽2 −16𝛽3 −13𝛽4 + 2𝛽5 + 3𝛽6) , and the relationship between 𝜋𝑐𝑠 and 𝜋𝑐𝑐 depends on 𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘) . 
Let 𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘) = 0, we get two roots: 𝑘𝑟1
𝑝=
4(8𝛽−4𝛽3−√80𝛽2−32𝛽3−88𝛽4+16𝛽5+29𝛽6−2𝛽7−3𝛽8)
−16+32𝛽+24𝛽2−16𝛽3−13𝛽4+2𝛽5+3𝛽6
 and 𝑘𝑟2
𝑝=
4(8𝛽−4𝛽3+√80𝛽2−32𝛽3−88𝛽4+16𝛽5+29𝛽6−2𝛽7−3𝛽8)
−16+32𝛽+24𝛽2−16𝛽3−13𝛽4+2𝛽5+3𝛽6
 . We know that the feasible zone is 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , 

38 
when −16 + 32𝛽+ 24𝛽2 −16𝛽3 −13𝛽4 + 2𝛽5 + 3𝛽6 < 0 , we have 𝑘𝑟2
𝑝< 𝑘𝑟1
𝑝<
𝛽
2−𝛽2 , thus for 
any 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, we get 𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘) < 0; when −16 + 32𝛽+ 24𝛽2 −16𝛽3 −13𝛽4 + 2𝛽5 + 3𝛽6 > 0, 
we have 𝑘𝑟1
𝑝< 1 <
2
𝛽< 𝑘𝑟2
𝑝, thus for any 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, we get 𝐹1
𝑝(𝑘) < 0. Therefore, 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠. (ii) 
𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(16−16𝛽2+16𝛽4−4𝛽5−7𝛽6+3𝛽7)
16(−2+𝛽)2(1+𝛽)(−2+𝛽2)2
 , for any 0 < 𝛽< 1 , 16 −16𝛽2 + 16𝛽4 −4𝛽5 −
7𝛽6 + 3𝛽7 > 0 
, 
thus, 
𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛 
. 
(3) 
𝜋𝑐𝑠−𝜋𝑐𝑛=
𝛽(−2𝑘+4−𝑘𝛽+𝑘𝛽2−2𝛽2)(16𝑘−2𝑘𝛽−4𝛽−17𝑘𝛽2+𝑘𝛽3+2𝛽3+4𝑘𝛽4)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2
4(2−𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2(2−𝛽2)2
 , let 𝜋𝑐𝑠= 𝜋𝑐𝑛 and in the feasible 
region 0 < 𝛽< 1 and 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , we have if 1 < 𝑘<
2(2−𝛽2)
(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽) = 𝑘0
𝑝 , then 𝜋𝑐𝑠< 𝜋𝑐𝑛 , and if 
𝑘0
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑐𝑠> 𝜋𝑐𝑛. 
Therefore, to sum up, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘0
𝑝 , then 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛> 𝜋𝑐𝑠 ; and if 𝑘0
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , then 𝜋𝑐𝑐>
𝜋𝑐𝑠> 𝜋𝑐𝑛. 
Proof of Proposition 7 
Similar with the proof of Proposition 1 under quantity competition setting, we analyze the maximal 
profits of the NP, CP, and OEM between self-produce and outsourcing strategies under a pricing 
competition setting. From Table 3, the maximum profits under a pricing competition setting are denoted 
as 𝜋𝑛𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(1−𝛽)
4(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽) , 𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0 , 𝜋𝑐𝑠=
[(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)]
2
(−2+𝛽)2(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 , 𝜋𝑐𝑐=
(𝑐−𝛼)2(5+3𝛽)
16(1+𝛽)
 , 𝜋𝑐𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(1−𝛽)(−4−𝛽+2𝛽2)
2
4(2−𝛽)2(1+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)2
 , 
𝜋𝑜𝑠=
[(2−𝛽2)(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)−𝛽(𝛼−𝑐)]
2
(−2+𝛽)2(1−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 , 
𝜋𝑜𝑐=
(𝑐−𝛼)2(1−𝛽)
8(1+𝛽)
 , 
and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛=
(𝛼−𝑐)2(1−𝛽)(2+𝛽)
4(2−𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2−𝛽2). Among the strategies, the optimal one must satisfy the following conditions. 
Scenario 1: The self-produce strategy is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐 , we have 𝜋𝑜𝑐−𝜋𝑜𝑠= −
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹2
𝑝(𝑘)
8(−2+𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 , 
where 𝐹2
𝑝(𝑘) = −32 + 32𝛽2 −8𝛽4 + 𝑘(32𝛽−16𝛽3) + 𝑘2(16 −32𝛽+ 16𝛽3 −7𝛽4 −2𝛽5 + 𝛽6) , 
and the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐 depends on 𝐹2
𝑝(𝑘). Let 𝐹2
𝑝(𝑘) = 0, we get two roots: 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝=
2(−8𝛽+4𝛽3+(2−𝛽)(1−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)√2)
16−32𝛽+16𝛽3−7𝛽4−2𝛽5+𝛽6
 and 𝑘𝑟4
𝑝=
2(−8𝛽+4𝛽3−(2−𝛽)(1−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)√2)
16−32𝛽+16𝛽3−7𝛽4−2𝛽5+𝛽6
. We find the root 

39 
𝑘𝑟3
𝑝 satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝<
2−𝛽2
𝛽. So, if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝, then 𝐹2(𝑘) < 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑐< 𝜋𝑜𝑠; and if 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝐹2
𝑝(𝑘) > 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. 
As 
to 
the 
relationship 
between 
𝜋𝑜𝑠 
 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛 
, 
we 
have 
𝜋𝑜𝑛−𝜋𝑜𝑠=
−
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘)
4(−2+𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2(−2+𝛽2) , 
where 
𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘) = 32 −48𝛽2 + 24𝛽4 −4𝛽6 + 𝑘(−32𝛽+
32𝛽3 −8𝛽5) + 𝑘2(−16 + 16𝛽+ 24𝛽2 −12𝛽3 −11𝛽4 + 2𝛽5 + 𝛽6) , and the relationship between 
𝜋𝑜𝑛 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑠 depends 
on 
𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘) . 
Let 
𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘) = 0 , 
we 
get 
two 
roots: 
𝑘𝑟5
𝑝=
2(8𝛽−8𝛽3+2𝛽5−(1−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)√(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2))
−16+16𝛽+24𝛽2−12𝛽3−11𝛽4+2𝛽5+𝛽6
 
 and 
𝑘𝑟6
𝑝=
2(8𝛽−8𝛽3+2𝛽5+(1−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2)√(2−𝛽)(2+𝛽)(2−𝛽2))
−16+16𝛽+24𝛽2−12𝛽3−11𝛽4+2𝛽5+𝛽6
. We find that root 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝 satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, so 
if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝, then 𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘) > 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑛< 𝜋𝑜𝑠; and if 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝐹3
𝑝(𝑘) < 0, thus 𝜋𝑜𝑛>
𝜋𝑜𝑠 . For the relationship of thresholds 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝 and 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝 , through mathematical deduction by using 
Mathematics 12.2, we can compute that 𝑘𝑟3
𝑝> 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝 for any 0 < 𝛽< 1. 
Therefore, when 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝, then 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛 hold, then the self-produce strategy 
is optimal. 
Scenario 2: The outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑠, 
𝜋𝑜𝑐> 𝜋𝑜𝑛, 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑠, and 𝜋𝑐𝑐> 𝜋𝑐𝑛. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑐 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛 , we have 𝜋𝑜𝑐−𝜋𝑜𝑛= −
(𝛼−c)2(−1+𝛽)𝛽(−4−2𝛽+𝛽2)
8(−2+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(−2+𝛽2)
<
0 for any 0 < 𝛽< 1 , thus, 𝜋𝑜𝑐< 𝜋𝑜𝑛 . That is to say, outsourcing-to-CP strategy will never be the 
optimal one without transfer payment. Therefore, scenario 2 does not exist. 
Scenario 3: The outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠, 
𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐, 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠, and 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑐. Based on the model, we know 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑛𝑠= 𝜋𝑛𝑐= 0. According to 
the Scenario 2, we know that 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 always holds. And according to Scenario 1, we know if 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝<
𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. Therefore, when 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐 hold, then 
the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal. 
To sum up, define 𝑘1
𝑝= 𝑘𝑟5
𝑝 , based on the above three scenarios, under a pricing competition 

40 
setting and without transfer payment, we get when 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘1
𝑝, the OEM’s optimal strategy is self-
produce; when 𝑘1
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, the OEM’s optimal strategy is outsourcing to NP. 
Proof of Proposition 8 
Similar with the proof of Proposition 2 under quantity competition setting with transfer payment, 
we analyze the strategies choice analysis is based on the following three scenarios: 
Scenario 1: The self-produce strategy is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) and 
𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
As to the relationship between 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) , 𝜋𝑜𝑠−[𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠)] =
−
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹4
𝑝(𝑘)
16(−2+𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2 
, 
where 
𝐹4
𝑝(𝑘) = 64 −48𝛽2 + 16𝛽4 + 𝑘(−128𝛽+ 64𝛽3) +
𝑘2(−48 + 96𝛽+ 24𝛽2 −48𝛽3 + 𝛽4 + 6𝛽5 + 𝛽6) . Let 𝐹4
𝑝(𝑘) = 0 , we get two roots: 𝑘𝑟7
𝑝=
4[16𝛽−8𝛽3+(4−𝛽2)√12−24𝛽+7𝛽2+18𝛽3−6𝛽4−6𝛽5−𝛽6]
−48+96𝛽+24𝛽2−48𝛽3+𝛽4+6𝛽5+𝛽6
 
 and 
𝑘𝑟8
𝑝=
4[16𝛽−8𝛽3−(4−𝛽2)√12−24𝛽+7𝛽2+18𝛽3−6𝛽4−6𝛽5−𝛽6]
−48+96𝛽+24𝛽2−48𝛽3+𝛽4+6𝛽5+𝛽6
. We find only the root 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝 satisfies that if 0 < 𝛽<
𝛽1
𝑝 (𝛽1
𝑝≈0.42 ), then 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝> 1 , and if 𝛽1
𝑝< 𝛽< 1 , then 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝< 1 , for both positive and negative 
768 −1536𝛽−64𝛽2 + 128𝛽3 + 16𝛽4 + 96𝛽5 −56𝛽6 + 24𝛽7 −19𝛽8 −8𝛽9 + 3𝛽10 . So if 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝 , then 𝐹4
𝑝(𝑘) > 0 , thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) , and if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 
1 < 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , or if 𝛽1
𝑝< 𝛽< 1 and 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , then 𝐹4(𝑘) < 0 , thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠< 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−
𝜋𝑐𝑠). 
As 
to 
the 
relationship 
between 
𝜋𝑜𝑠 
 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 
, 
𝜋𝑜𝑠−(𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛) =
(𝛼−𝑐𝑜)2𝐹5
𝑝(𝑘)
2(2−𝛽)2(−1+𝛽)(1+𝛽)(2+𝛽)2(−2+𝛽2) , where 𝐹5
𝑝(𝑘) = 16 −24𝛽2 + 12𝛽4 −2𝛽6 + 𝑘(−16𝛽+ 16𝛽3 −
4𝛽5) + 𝑘2(−12 + 12𝛽+ 17𝛽2 −10𝛽3 −8𝛽4 + 2𝛽5 + 𝛽6) . Let 𝐹5
𝑝(𝑘) = 0 , we get two roots: 
𝑘𝑟9 =
8𝛽−8𝛽3+2𝛽5−(2−𝛽2)(2−𝛽−𝛽2)√2(6−5𝛽2+𝛽4)
(−2+𝛽)[6+𝛽(−3−10𝛽+4𝛽3+𝛽4)]
 
 and 
𝑘𝑟10 =
8𝛽−8𝛽3+2𝛽5+(2−𝛽2)(2−𝛽−𝛽2)√2(6−5𝛽2+𝛽4)
(−2+𝛽)[6+𝛽(−3−10𝛽+4𝛽3+𝛽4)]
. We find only the root 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝 satisfies 1 < 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, so for 
both positive and negative (−2 + 𝛽)(6 + 𝛽(−3 −10𝛽+ 4𝛽3 + 𝛽4)) . So if 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝 , then 

41 
𝐹5
𝑝(𝑘) > 0 , thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 , and if 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , then 𝐹5
𝑝(𝑘) < 0 , thus 𝜋𝑜𝑠< 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 . For 
the thresholds, through mathematical deduction by using Mathematics 12.2, we can compute that 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝<
𝑘𝑟9
𝑝. Thus, for max{1, 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝} < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝, then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
Therefore, based on the above analysis, only when 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑠>
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) and 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 hold, then with transfer payment the self-produce strategy is 
optimal. 
Scenario 2: The outsourcing-to-CP strategy is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 
and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
According to the scenario 1, we know if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , or if 𝛽1
𝑝< 𝛽< 1 
and 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠. More specifically, when max{1, 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝} < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝, then 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠> 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. And when 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. So within 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, we analyze the relationship of 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛, 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) −(𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛) =
(𝛼−c)2𝛽𝐺𝑝(𝛽)
16(−2+𝛽)2(1+𝛽)(−2+𝛽2)2 , where 
𝐺𝑝(𝛽) = −16 + 32𝛽+ 16𝛽2 −24𝛽3 −4𝛽4 + 3𝛽5 + 𝛽6 . Let 
𝐺𝑝(𝛽) = 0, for 0 < 𝛽< 1, we get only one root 𝛽2
𝑝≈0.47, and if 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2
𝑝, then 𝐺(𝛽) > 0, so 
𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) < 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛; and if 𝛽2
𝑝< 𝛽< 1, then 𝐺(𝛽) < 0, so 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛. 
Therefore, based on the above analysis, when 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝< 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝, or when 𝛽1
𝑝<
𝛽< 𝛽2
𝑝 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝 , or when 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 and 𝛽2
𝑝< 𝛽< 1 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑠) > 𝜋𝑜𝑠 
and 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) > 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛 hold, then with transfer payment the outsourcing-to-CP strategy is 
optimal. 
Scenario 3: The outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal, which must satisfy 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 
𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛). 
According to the scenario 1, we know if 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽, then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠. According to the 
scenario 2, we know if 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+ (𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) . 

42 
Therefore, when 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 , then 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑠 and 𝜋𝑜𝑛+ 𝜋𝑛𝑛> 𝜋𝑜𝑐+
(𝜋𝑐𝑐−𝜋𝑐𝑛) hold, then with transfer payment the outsourcing-to-NP strategy is optimal. 
To sum up, define 𝑘2
𝑝= 𝑘𝑟8
𝑝 and 𝑘3
𝑝= 𝑘𝑟9
𝑝, based on the above three scenarios, we get when 0 <
𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘2
𝑝, the OEM’s optimal strategy is self-produce; when 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽1
𝑝 and 𝑘2
𝑝<
𝑘< 𝑘3
𝑝 , or when 𝛽1
𝑝< 𝛽< 𝛽2
𝑝 and 1 < 𝑘< 𝑘3
𝑝 , or when 𝛽2
𝑝< 𝛽< 1 and 1 < 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 , the 
OEM’s optimal strategy is outsourcing to CP; when 𝑘3
𝑝< 𝑘<
2−𝛽2
𝛽 and 0 < 𝛽< 𝛽2
𝑝 , the OEM’s 
optimal strategy is outsourcing to NP.