TITLE: Business analytics in service operations—Lessons from healthcare operations
JOURNAL: Naval_Research_Logistics
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.22011
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics in Service Operations—
Lessons from Healthcare Operations 
 
Opher Baron 
 
 
Version Post-print or Accepted manuscript 
 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Baron, O. (2021). Business analytics in service operations—Lessons 
from healthcare operations. Naval Research Logistics (NRL), 68(5), 517-
533. 
 
 
 
Publisher’s Statement This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: 
Baron, O. (2021). Business analytics in service operations—
Lessons from healthcare operations. Naval Research Logistics 
(NRL), 68(5), 517-533, which has been published in final form at 
https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.22011. This article may be used for 
non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and 
Conditions for Use of Self-Archived Versions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 
 

Business Analytics in Service Operations—Lessons from 
Healthcare Operations 
Opher Baron, 
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto 
opher.baron@rotman.utoronto.ca 
Abstract 
We present an expanded framework for the use of business analytics in projects. To the 
commonly used descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics, we add comparative 
analytics, wherein we compare the performance of systems under different interventions. This 
framework provides a conceptual roadmap for the implementation of business analytics 
projects. We then demonstrate this framework using recent operations research literature on 
analytics in healthcare, summarizing papers focusing on one of these aspects. Next, we discuss 
queue mining as an example of theory and practice illustrative of these aspects. We conclude 
there is room for further work by operations researchers and management scientists within 
business analytics projects generally and the healthcare industry more specifically. We argue 
future work should consider both theory and practice, especially within prescriptive analytics 
projects, where analysis through the lens of operations research and management science is 
imperative. We provide some thoughts on the current and future state of operations research 
and management science in business analytics. 
1. Framework for Business Analytics 
Recent advancements in computing and analytics suggest that both the practice and theory of 
service operations have been dramatically changed and will continue to shift in the near and 
more distant future. The availability of data and efficient tools for visualization and analysis 
opens several possibilities for research and practice in service operations. (Cohen 2018) 
presents a modern view of the impact of big data on service operations. Business analytics in 
service operation is very broad as it includes, for example, revenue management for services, 
shared economy, and post-purchase services. 
To improve our understanding of the different paths towards implementing analytics, we 
surveyed the literature on analytics in services. As this is a vast literature, we only discuss the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

literature on business analytics in healthcare operations, with a focus on work related to 
queueing in this sector. Importantly, the trends and approaches discussed are applicable to 
business analytics in many services, as well as in other sectors. 
A common theme of analytics is that it uses quantitative analytical tools, such as statistics, 
econometrics, computer science, and operations research, to analyze specific problems. 
Moreover, these analytic tools are used to analyze and model data. Finally, business analytics 
uses analytics to support decision making in businesses. Similar to the decision-centric 
definition of analytics in (Rose 2016), we offer the following concise definition: 
• Business Analytics: Usage of data-driven analytical methodologies to support decisions. 
1.1 Defining Descriptive, Predictive, Comparative, and Prescriptive Analytics 
Quantifiable performance measures of different business objectives for different business units 
are often required to support business decisions. Therefore, every business analytics project 
benefits from familiarity with the application and its modeling. Analytics is discussed by (Lustig 
et al. 2010) in terms of descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics. There are several 
definitions for these different aspects of analytics. Nevertheless, based on our literature review, 
we find these terms do not capture the complexity of how business analytics works and are 
thus insufficient. Specifically, business analytics should differentiate between existing systems 
and systems with different interventions, i.e., under different decisions. To emphasize this 
important distinction, we add the term comparative analytics. Figure 1 depicts these four 
aspects of business analytics projects and their intersection. We define them as follows: 
• Descriptive analytics describes past performance of existing systems. 
• Predictive analytics predicts future performance of systems. 
• Comparative analytics compares performance of systems under different interventions. 
• Prescriptive analytics prescribes interventions to improve future performance of systems. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

Figure 1: Descriptive, Predictive, Comparative, and Prescriptive Business Analytics 
 
The aim of descriptive analytics is to describe and understand systems’ past performance. In 
the lingo of statistics, descriptive analytics studies performance in-sample. While there is full 
certainty of what happened, there may be many different interpretations of the best way to 
describe it. Descriptive analytics is focused on data analysis, reporting, and visualization. A 
common descriptive analytics problem is the clustering of patients based on their 
comorbidities. Some of the main challenges in descriptive analytics are related to the 
interpretation of available records and the problem of dealing with missing and inaccurate 
data. Importantly, appropriate descriptive analytics is the building block for predictive, 
comparative, and prescriptive analytics. For example, in some cases, the right visualization 
makes the best interventions clear. 
The aim of predictive analytics is to predict systems’ future performance. It requires inductive 
reasoning to yield out-of-sample results. Predictive analytics often ignores the causal effect, or 
assumes it is clear. Therefore, predictive analytics captures the impact of interventions on 
performance by changing the values of inputs into the model. A common predictive analytics 
problem is demand forecasting. Predictive analytics is focused on finding trends and 
relationships in data that the user believes will continue to hold true in the future. The main 
challenges in predictive analytics are thus related to these beliefs. Two important concepts of 
predictive analytics that substantiate such beliefs are: (i) modeling the physical system - if users 
trust the model and the insights gained from its analysis, they are more likely to trust its 
predictive results, and (ii) testing how a prediction model developed on training data (in-
 
Future 
 
 Past 
 
 
 
Existing Systems 
Systems with Different Interventions 
Descriptive 
Analytics 
Predictive 
Analytics 
Comparative 
Analytics 
Prescriptive 
Analytics 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

sample) performs on prediction data (out-of-sample). Good performance on the prediction data 
demonstrates that the analysis has predictive power. Predictive analytics models may suffer 
from overfitting: a complex model that explains all training data may be useless out-of-sample. 
Therefore, simple models that capture only a few important effects are often preferable. 
Finally, appropriate predictive analytics is often a building block for prescriptive analytics. 
The aim of comparative analytics is to compare the performances of different systems under 
different interventions. Such a comparison can be done either retrospectively or prospectively, 
using inductive reasoning to yield results under different interventions. Retrospective 
comparative analytics focuses on expressing performance that would have occurred under 
different interventions. This analytics manipulates existing data as if different interventions 
were made. Two examples of retrospective comparative analytics are expressing 
counterfactuals and benchmarking. Expressing counterfactuals, e.g., measuring the impact of a 
completed project, is an example of retrospective comparative analytics when a single business 
unit is analyzed. Benchmarking, e.g., comparing the performance of different branches 
(exposed to different intervention), is an example when several units are analyzed. The main 
challenges in retrospective comparative analytics are establishing causality, using the 
appropriate causal inference tools, and that data on a specific system under different 
interventions do not exist. (Even in benchmarking, we only have data on each system under its 
own interventions.) Prospective comparative analytics focuses on predicting performance that 
would occur under different interventions. It can be thought of as performance analysis in the 
future. Thus, just like predictive analytics, it requires inductive reasoning to out-of-sample 
results. After establishing causality, such analysis is often achieved by combining models and 
data. An important tool in prospective comparative analytics is simulation, as it permits the 
estimation of the impact of different interventions on relevant performances without the cost 
of implementing such changes in practice. (Simulation is also used for retrospective 
comparative analytics as part of verifying and validating the simulation model with managerial 
judgement.) Proper simulation models are built, validated, and verified using existing data. 
Simulation models may contain specific machine learning (ML) components to mimic building 
blocks that generate data. Another approach to comparative analytics is a controlled 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

experiment (or A/B testing in the context of user experience) that records enough data on 
systems exposed to different interventions. To some extent, controlled experiments transform 
comparative analytics questions to descriptive analytics ones. Comparative analytics also 
emphasizes the importance of planning data collection to improve analytics in the future. In 
some cases when interventions are simple, e.g., go no-go with a project, the performance 
evaluation supplied by comparative analytics is sufficient to prescribe interventions. Note that 
even when prescriptive analytics is challenging, e.g., in the context of more complex 
interventions, comparative analytics serves as an essential building block. 
The aim of prescriptive analytics is to prescribe interventions that would improve systems’ 
performance. The holy grail of analytics is finding such a novel intervention. Prescriptive 
analytics requires inductive reasoning to out-of-sample results under different interventions. 
Decision makers who use prescriptive analytics properly to develop recommendations no 
longer require a leap of faith when they implement them, as they consider and understand the 
important factors that affect relevant performance measures. Indeed, prescriptive analytics 
that is well supported by descriptive, predictive, and comparative analytics not only allows the 
decision maker to reduce risks from new interventions but also allows her to manage these 
risks. Fundamental prescriptive analytics problems have complex relationships between 
interventions and performance. Such complexities are especially common when these 
relationships cannot be measured without making specific assumptions or when they are 
subject to high uncertainty. In these cases, tools that model the relationships are essential to 
prescribe effective decisions. Prescriptive analytics can use robust optimization guided by 
existing data to compare and predict the potential impact of different interventions on 
performance. The challenges in prescriptive analytics include the challenges of descriptive, 
predictive, and comparative analytics. 
We note that these four aspects of analytics are helpful conceptually but are typically too 
narrow to encompass the scope of any analytics project in practice. For example, a descriptive 
analytics project can be thought of as the study of history. History is interesting, but much of 
the motivation to study it comes from the light it sheds on future events. Similarly, descriptive 
analytics is interesting, but much of the motivation to perform it comes from the light it sheds 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

on future effective management interventions. As another example, much of the focus of 
predictive analytics, including artificial intelligence and ML, is on expressing how changes to 
some variables affect dependent variables, i.e., a relevant performance measure. Once 
managers trust the predictive model and the causal effects behind it, they can compare the 
effect of different interventions on the dependent variable and may prescribe interventions. 
1.2 Phases in Business Analytics Projects: From Descriptive to Prescriptive Analytics 
Another important factor in the conceptualization of these four aspects of business analytics is 
their timing within the progression of a business analytics project, as depicted in Figure 2. Most 
business analytics projects progress over time, from descriptive to predictive, comparative, and 
prescriptive phases. Nevertheless, business analytics may focus on one of these and use tools 
and models tailored to pursue it. 
Consider the phases in a business analytics project focusing on a congested service system. The 
descriptive analytics phase of the project will examine past observed performance measures of 
the system and address such questions as: “Is the process performing as designed? Do the main 
flows in practice tightly correspond to the intended flows? Are bottlenecks where we expect 
them to be?” In a hospital emergency department (ED), descriptive analytics can lead to 
observations such as: demand is highest on Mondays from 4pm-8pm, pulmonary embolism 
(i.e., blood clot that blocks an artery in the lung) pain is the most common complaint, and 
performance measures (such as length of stay, waits, and time to physician initial assessment, 
all for different patient types) depend on the ED census and the nurse to patient ratio. 
The predictive analytics phase will consider future performance of the system and address such 
questions as: “What throughput can we expect? When we expect the system to be the busiest? 
What would the state of the system be in the future, in terms of arrival processes and 
distributions of performance measures?” In an ED, predictive analytics would predict 
performance measures, for example, using a simultaneous equation model, as a function of the 
time (e.g., Monday, 4pm-8pm, winter), patient mix (e.g., percent of patients with pulmonary 
embolism), the ED census, the nurse to patient ratio, and number of busy beds in the wards. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

Figure 2: Timing of Descriptive, Predictive, Comparative, and Prescriptive Business Analytics 
 
The comparative analytics phase will consider how various changes would have impacted 
(retrospective) or will impact (prospective) performance measures and address such 
retrospective questions as: “What would the performance of the system have been if a specific 
improvement project had not been implemented (i.e., express counterfactuals)?” Prospective 
analytics will address such questions as: “What impact can be achieved by adding new 
resources to the system? What impact can be achieved from workflow changes?” In an ED, 
comparative analytics would consider various new workflows and staffing changes. New 
workflows can include adding a dedicated track for patients with pulmonary embolism, 
reducing the census and waiting times, or having a physician perform triage, reducing the time 
to physician initial assessment. Staffing changes can include different shift schedules for nurses 
and doctors and/or hiring nonmedical personnel to ease the load of medical personnel during 
rush hours. The analysis of such changes could use a causal model or simulation (calibrated 
with data) to capture their respective impacts on performance measures. 
At the prescriptive analytics phase, the expert will consider how to best manage future 
performance of the system and will address such questions as: “What is the best staffing 
procedure to follow? What is the best customer routing?” In an ED, prescriptive analytics would 
search for the optimal nurse and doctor shift schedules and provide guidelines on when to call 
and pay for extra medical or nonmedical personnel. The creation of this flexible staffing process 
requires the knowledge obtained from the descriptive, predictive, and comparative phases of 
the project. The prescriptive model aiming at cost minimization subject to constraints on 
 
Project 
Progress 
 
 
Timing 
in 
Project 
Descriptive 
Analytics 
Predictive 
Analytics 
Comparative 
Analytics 
Prescriptive 
Analytics 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

performance measures would be informed by current data (e.g., census), an arrival prediction 
model, and established dependencies of performance measures in the patient mix, number of 
busy beds in the wards, nurse to patient ratio, and so on. 
Good progress through the descriptive, predictive, and comparative analytics phases of the 
project will help decision makers understand the possible and preferred trade-offs among 
different performance measures and the cost of achieving them. Such an understanding is 
essential to ensure the prescriptive analytics phase of the project is effective. Without such an 
understanding, analysts may fall into the trap of optimizing the performance, given a predictive 
model, a simplistic approach that is often inappropriate. 
1.3 Outline 
In the next sections, we stratify our discussion of analytics research in healthcare along 
descriptive, predictive, comparative, and prescriptive lines, with the caveat that papers focusing 
on, say, descriptive analytics often include predictive, comparative, and prescriptive analytics as 
well. We then discuss research on queue mining and show how this line of research progresses 
from descriptive to prescriptive analytics. We conclude with thoughts on the future 
contributions of operations research and management science (ORMS) to business analytics. 
2. Descriptive Analytics 
Descriptive analytics traditionally focused on studying well-stated existing problems. During the 
study, we often found alternative relevant problems, but data analysis was thought as a part of 
solving a given problem. In contrast, (Simchi-Levi, 2014) suggests modern data analysis allows 
us to define and find hidden problems and to learn from best practices. 
The first step in learning from practice is being able to map practical phenomena. Some of this 
mapping raises the need for theoretical models and their study. Below, we discuss descriptive 
analytic work on cost estimation, the interaction between service and waiting times, scheduling 
policies, and patients’ service path. 
2.1 Estimating the Cost of Delay 
One of the most fundamental questions in services is “What is the cost of delay?” Indeed, the 
cost of providing service or delaying it is often not easy to express. Access to data on decision 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

making allows us to impute such cost. That is, rather than calculating the cost of delay, we can 
compare delays in practice and reverse engineer from them the delay cost that would make the 
practice optimal, i.e., the implied delay cost of the current practice. We believe similar 
approaches can be used to estimate the imputed cost and implication of different decisions. 
(Ding et al. 2019) addressed this question for EDs. They investigated patient routing and 
prioritization and how these are affected by patients’ triage levels. They considered patient 
level data for 20 months of visits in four EDs and reverse engineered the delay cost the 
hospitals attributed to patients based upon their observed prioritization. They discovered that 
different triage levels imply different delays, and the current practices reflect a piecewise linear 
and concave delay cost. Specifically, while within a triage level, service is typically administered 
in a first come first serve fashion (FCFS), once patients’ wait is too long (e.g., above the wait 
time required), their priority decreases. Moreover, it does not appear that the level of 
complexity of the treatment (measured as total service time) impacts patients’ priorities. This 
study does not relate specific delay cost to different patients, but quantifies the relative cost of 
wait for different patient classes. Understanding these relative costs allows decision makers to 
improve the incentives provided to service providers. The example provided highlights the 
inadequacy of using thresholds on waiting times as the sole measure of the performance of 
EDs. 
2.2 Service and Wait Times 
Analyzing service systems requires an understanding of arrival, service, and wait times. 
Standard assumptions of queueing theory are that arrival and service times are independent of 
each other, and the realized delay of previous and current customers. However, several studies 
show that service times and exceptional services impact wait times and future service times. 
The study of the impact of delay in entering ICU on the service time, captured via length of stay, 
in (Chan, Farias, Escobar, 2016) showed that, for some patient types, there is a positive 
correlation between delay and service times. As longer service times increase congestion and 
delay, a dangerous positive feedback in ICU systems is created. These researchers developed 
theoretical and simulation models to show that the positive correlation between delays and ICU 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

service time increases congestion. This finding suggests ICU managers should not ignore this 
correlation and the feedback it creates. 
(Deo and Jain, 2019) studied an eye care provider in south India with a transient service 
network. That is, all people arriving during a day are served and leave that day. (This differs 
than, say, an ED, where the next shift may complete work left over from a previous one.) They 
investigated control of resources and arrivals in view of balancing wait times with hours and 
effort of work. They used four months of data for visits at several branches and different 
doctors. Their patient level regression analysis showed that clinics work more slowly at the 
beginning of the day and faster later in the day. The motivation for this policy is that the 
beginning of the day is used to fill all buffers, such that later in the day the faster system has no 
idling within the network. Such a change of speed implies busier systems would have worked 
faster (than less busy systems) during their slow period. An important implication of this policy 
is that patients who arrive earlier in the day typically wait longer than patients who arrive later 
during the day. The researchers’ data-calibrated simulation showed that such a change in work 
speed reduces the time to complete all work and the average length of stay compared to fixed 
work speed. 
Another interesting finding was reported by (Bavafa and Jónasson 2020). They found that 
ambulance teams who treated disturbing cases, e.g., with death, slowed down their work 
during the rest of the shift as a method of coping. The slowdown occurred more in less 
standard parts of their service and depended on the team’s years of experience. 
2.3 Scheduling Policies 
Scheduling policies that dictate customers’ priority and routing represent interventions with a 
potentially strong impact on performance in service systems. In this section, we discuss how 
best practices inform theory on potential scheduling policies. 
The data analysis reported in (Baron et al. 2017) for a firm providing annual healthcare 
checkups enables learning from practice. The annual checkup process reported by these 
researchers involved patients visiting several (12-20) different service centers, for such 
procedures as blood tests, stress tests, hearing tests, reviews with a doctor etc. The transaction 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

level data on waiting and service times showed some “strange” practices. Specifically, in many 
cases, patients were waiting for a service center while it was idle, or to use the opposite 
terminology, a service center was waiting for a patient while she was idle. The authors dubbed 
this practice “strategic idling”. 
Queueing theory establishes that non-idle policies are optimal in reducing the total wait and 
sojourn times, so this documented practice of strategic idling raises questions about its possible 
benefits. (Baron et al. 2017) argued the psychology of queues implies that the perception of 
wait may differ from the objective wait. In the context of patients (customers) moving through 
several service centers, the perception of wait is affected by two aspects. The first is the macro 
measure of total wait in the system, i.e., aggregated over all service centers; the second is the 
micro measure of wait for any specific center. When customers experience an increase in 
waiting for a specific center, they become unhappy. In this case, an in-depth study of the data 
showed that while, as predicted by queueing theory, eliminating strategic idleness would 
reduce the total wait, it would significantly increase the percentage of long waits at specific 
centers. Indeed, (Baron et al. 2014) established that strategic idling could improve the micro 
level and thus perceived service level. 
The suggestion that strategic idling may improve the perceived service level raises the question 
of how to implement it in practice. (Baron et al. 2014) presented a family of threshold-based 
controls to balance long waits among several sequential centers. In later work, (Baron et al. 
2017) extended this family to allow such a balance in a general network of service centers. 
In-depth descriptive analytics pointed to the phenomenon of strategic idling, a previously 
unknown practice and broadly considered to be counter-productive. To understand the 
motivation for strategic idling, the authors used a comparative analytics approach: they found 
simulation and queueing analysis of stylized models helped to quantify the benefit of strategic 
idling. The insights generated by the comparative analytics supported prescriptive analytics. 
Overall, the business analytics approach demonstrated in (Baron et al. 2014) and (Baron et al. 
2017) allowed a solution to be prescribed: a systematic and effective method to implement 
strategic idling to improve the service quality as perceived by customers. Importantly, this work 
highlights the interaction among the different aspects of analytics discussed in Section 1. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

In many cases, the planned scheduling policy and the realized one differ. This possibility has 
been investigated by both (Ibanez et al 2018) and (Chan et al 2021) in the context of doctors 
who read radiological (e.g., CT, X-rays) images off-site. In (Ibanez et al 2018), the doctors were 
assigned random images; they were expected to process these in an FCFS manner, and their 
compensation scheme was unclear. The researchers tested several hypotheses using 
transaction level data on teleradiology for over 2.75 million cases from July 2005 to December 
2007. Their main conclusion was that the radiologists deviated from the FCFS scheduling over 
40% of time. These deviations were mainly motivated by doctors’ wish to work on shorter jobs 
first or to batch similar tasks. Their econometric analysis used instrumental variables to show 
that such deviations harm productivity. They suggested the seeking time required to deviate 
may cause this degrading performance. Moreover, they found that more experienced doctors 
deviated less and were less harmed by deviation. However, their analysis ignored the 
implication of deviation in work on waiting time. 
In contrast, in (Chan et al 2021), the doctors chose images from a common pool, were expected 
to process images in accordance to priority requirements (i.e., waiting times are relevant), and 
were compensated based on work completed. They used about 2.65 million cases processed by 
over 150 radiologists at close to 100 hospitals from January 2014 to July 2017. They found the 
imbalance between pay and workload could cause low priority jobs to overtake high priority 
ones. Using instrumental variables, they showed that waits decreased (increased) in the pay-to-
workload ratio for low (high) priority jobs. Their results suggest the design of payments scheme 
should consider a “bang for the buck”, or here, dollar per minute, compensation for jobs. When 
incentive structures ignore this strategy, service providers may change the order in which they 
process jobs. 
2.4 Service Path 
Much effort, both in literature and in practice, has been dedicated to understanding customers’ 
lifetime value as it relates to customer pathways and customer segmentation. In the context of 
healthcare, customer pathways often depend on segmentation based on diagnostic stage, such 
as triage. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

For example, in EDs, the first segmentation occurs at the triage level. Triage decisions and their 
connection to load was investigated by (Chen et al. 2020). They used patient level data for over 
65,000 visits. They found an increase in load caused a significant increase in triage level 
assignment. Patients were triaged as more severe, and the common disposition was “to be 
admitted.” These findings contrast with those of (Richardson 1998) for an Australian hospital. 
An important takeaway from (Chen et al. 2020) is that an increased load in the ED creates a 
positive feedback that further increases the load. Admitting more patients increases bed 
blocking from the wards, and this increases the load in the ED. Therefore, it is important to 
have accurate triage that is independent of load. 
In healthcare, a best treatment pathway is often provided to doctors as a recommended course 
of action. (Diamant et al. 2014) considered what impacts patients’ clinical pathway towards 
bariatric surgery, a common tool in fighting obesity. The process leading to bariatric surgery 
includes several pre-surgery steps, where attrition may occur. Using three years of data, the 
authors demonstrated that specific groups of patients may be less likely to complete the entire 
process. Better management of the process for these groups can improve healthcare outcomes. 
3. Predictive Analytics 
Much of predictive analysis is focused on forecasting. As forecasts support long- and short-term 
business planning, forecasting is one of the fundamental activities of any business. Social 
platforms and the Internet provide new data sources that, when properly combined with 
operational data, improve both accuracy and interpretability of forecasting models. Moreover, 
modern algorithms, based upon e.g., ML, lead to improved forecast accuracy. 
We next discuss some research on cost prediction, on forecasting the spread of infectious 
disease, and on demand forecasting. 
3.1 Forecasting Cost 
Provisioning of service is costly, so cost management is extremely important in service systems, 
where cost of personnel is often a critical factor. The effective provisioning of service also 
requires paying costs in areas most likely to benefit the service. Moreover, investigating the 
trade-off of interventions, as a part of prescriptive analytics, requires an understanding of their 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

respective costs. With these questions in mind, estimating the cost of service may be critical to 
business analytics projects. 
An example of the use of modern tools and data in the context of cost forecasting is in 
(Bertsimas et al. 2008). They used classification trees and clustering algorithms to estimate 
healthcare costs for 200,000 out-of-sample people with medical insurance. They demonstrated 
that past cost helps predict future cost, and that specific medical information is helpful to 
estimate the cost of high-cost patients but is not helpful for other groups. This example nicely 
demonstrates the difference between a predictive model and a comparative one: past costs are 
correlated with the future cost, so they can be used to predict it; but as past costs do not cause 
the future cost, they cannot be directly used to analyze interventions to impact the future cost. 
3.2 Forecasting the Spread of Infectious Diseases 
Forecasting in healthcare includes predictions of the spread of infectious diseases and intensity 
of demand for emergency treatment such as cardiac arrest requiring defibrillators. We note 
that these examples require a spatial demand prediction. Moreover, such predictions are 
essential to support prescriptive analytics; for example, decisions on the location of 
defibrillators require demand forecasting. The outbreak of Covid-19 demonstrates the 
importance of spatial models for forecasting the spread of infectious diseases, for informing 
decision makers on the right social distancing level to recommend in different regions, and for 
designing relevant travel restrictions. 
One of the most common infectious diseases is influenza. The combination of data on 
electronic health records and on past flu activity levels was traditionally used to provide 
temporal and spatial predictions of flu levels. In recent years, people have begun to search for 
medical information on-line. (Yang and Kou et al. 2017) showed that a dynamic multivariate 
regression model that combines these data with Internet (Google) searches for relevant terms 
can improve predictions (at a 5% significance level). It provides an accurate enough forecast, 
i.e., forecast that can be acted upon, for four weeks rather than two weeks ahead of an 
increase in flu activity. Such improved accuracy increases the allowable response time and is 
equivalent to a similar reduction in lead time with major operational consequences. For 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

example, flu shots can be delivered to flu-prone areas, given to populations at risk, and thus 
prevent a pandemic. 
The approach in (Yang and Kou et al. 2017) was extended in (Yang and Santillana et al. 2017b) 
to predict the activity level of dengue fever. The authors aimed at providing a disease 
surveillance system to predict dengue outbreaks and support interventions. They combined 
traditional data with Internet searches and had good accuracy; their approach worked well in 
areas where dengue fever levels were significant. 
3.3 Demand Forecasting 
Forecasting demand for healthcare services, such as arrivals to an ED or for emergency services 
resulting from cardiac arrest, can be improved with an increase in data availability. Moreover, 
the availability of adequate responses, e.g., capacity of ED or location of responders for 
emergency services, can be optimized using data-driven forecasts. In this section, we discuss 
recent analytics work on such forecasting. 
(Chan et. al, 2013) considered the location of defibrillators in Toronto. They showed that the 
while the spatial distribution of cardiac arrest has some correlation with population density, the 
correlation was not perfect. Thus, they recommended considering the location of past cardiac 
arrests when locating defibrillators. In more recent work, (Chan, Demirtas, and Kwon 2016) 
developed optimization models that also considered bystanders could employ defibrillators. 
That is, their forecasts jointly considered demand occurrence and the possible availability of a 
provider (although their model for the latter is not data driven). We note that forecasting both 
demand and servers’ availability has attracted more attention in recent years with the increase 
in the sharing economy and matching; see Hu (2019) and references therein. 
Demand rate for many services, including EDs, has patterns of seasonality, as well as weekly 
and daily fluctuations. Forecasting this nonstationary demand process is important, as it affects 
planning and day to day operation. (Chen et al. 2021) proposed a nonhomogeneous Poisson 
process with a rate that is the sum of several sinusoidal waves. They explained how to estimate 
the number of different waves and their rates and then demonstrated their methodology using 
data for 170,000 arrivals over two years at an ED in an academic hospital in the US. They 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

predicted the arrival rates at the ED for both acute and non acute patients (they ignored 
prediction for emergency patients as these were rare). They also demonstrated how to use 
their method for staffing. 
4. Comparative Analytics 
Comparative analytics often benefits when there are several similar business units, such as 
hospitals. Investigation of implemented interventions in one unit can be improved by an 
understanding of the impact of this intervention in other units. Proper comparative analysis of a 
known intervention supports its extension to other business units. Such a comparison is useful 
to help manage service and wait times. 
In this section, we discuss some research on cost effectiveness of interventions, interventions 
that impact the service discipline and waiting times, problems of resource matching in 
healthcare, focusing on blood transfusion, and the service path and its dependence on 
diagnostics. The work mentioned herein includes examples of both retrospective and 
prospective comparative analytics. 
4.1 Cost Effectiveness 
One of the most important inputs into the effective management of any operation is the cost 
benefit analysis of different interventions. The most common interventions in services are 
related to changes in capacity (e.g., moving shifts, adding capacity, or changing processing 
times) or processes (e.g., scheduling or changing working processes, such as providing 
vaccinations). Evaluating the impact of such interventions is important for both retrospective 
and prospective interventions. We next discuss recent analytics work on the cost effectiveness 
of large scale immunization. 
(Hutton, So, and Brandeau, 2010) performed a cost‐effectiveness analysis of prospectively 
providing free hepatitis B vaccine to children aged 1 to 19 years in China. To overcome the 
absence of counter-factual data, they developed a Markov model for disease progression and 
infections. This model helped to estimate the impact of vaccinations on cost, quality‐adjusted 
life years, and societal perspective. To quantify these measures, they used publicly available 
data published by the Chinese Ministry of Health, in peer‐reviewed Chinese and English 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

publications, and by the GAVI Alliance. Their investigation and sensitivity analysis demonstrated 
that offering free hepatitis B vaccination for 150 million susceptible youth in China would be 
beneficial; it could reduce infections by 8 million and deaths due to hepatitis B by 65,000. 
Brandeau with coauthors in a series of papers (Malloy et al. 2020 a, Claypool et al. 2020) 
presented cost effectiveness analysis using similar principles: developing disease infection 
models, calibrating these using data (often publicly available), and providing detailed sensitivity 
analysis of different interventions. (Malloy et al. 2020 b) discussed the importance of model 
structure in predicting effectiveness of medical interventions. 
4.2 Service Discipline and Wait Times 
Comparative analytics work in the context of improving wait times examines different service 
disciplines and/or routing policies. One of the most useful tools for this is simulation. In this 
section, we discuss recent analytics work on the impact of the service discipline on service 
times and thus on waiting. 
One of the main challenges of analysing the impact of interventions is that counterfactual data 
do not exist. For example, for patients who have had an intervention, there are no data on their 
experience in the absence of this intervention. Therefore, it is hard to establish that the 
intervention caused an observed effect. (Song, Tucker, and Murrell, 2015) investigated the 
impact on length of stay in the ED of operating a pooled versus a dedicated doctors’ queue. 
From their patient level data, they found that operating a dedicated queue reduced the length 
of stay by 17%. This contrasts with queuing theory’s fundamental insight that a pooled queue 
should be better. Their study was retrospective; they could use a difference-in-differences 
approach to support their results because the intervention that changed the queuing system 
was implemented in only one part of the ED. 
(Bayati et al, 2017) considered EDs where high acuity patients received a pre-emptive priority 
over low acuity ones. Their empirical evidence showed low-acuity patients increased the wait 
times of high-acuity patients. This finding was clear in EDs with non pre-emptive priority 
discipline, but it contradicts the theoretical predictions of pre-emptive priority queues, see e.g., 
(Wang, Baron, and Scheller Wolf, 2015). (Bayati et. al 2017) estimated this increase using data 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

from several hospitals and a quasi-randomized experiment, i.e., a prospective study, 
implemented in one hospital. In their experiment they slightly changed the wait time data 
shared with incoming patients. These data changed non acute patients’ decision on whether to 
join the ED or leave it without being seen. This quasi-randomization corrected the existing bias 
in data and supported their findings. They argued low-acuity patients delay high-acuity patients 
due to pre-triage delay and set-ups required between pre-emptions (e.g., changing sheets). 
The impact of delay announcements on hospital wait items was also studied in (Dong, Yom-Tov, 
and Yom-Tov 2019). Their retrospective study used three months of data on wait times posted 
by over 200 EDs in the US and data from a web search for ED delay information. They showed 
that posting wait times balanced the waits among hospitals, and this impact decreased with the 
distance between hospitals. Using difference-in-differences, they compared duration when EDs 
did not report their wait times with duration when wait times were reported. They found the 
balancing of wait times was impacted by information sharing; i.e., wait times were higher when 
no such information was provided. 
Another important decision in EDs that helps control wait times is related to patients’ diversion. 
This problem was investigated by (Xu, and Chan 2016). These authors considered how to use 
arrival forecasts to divert patients from an emergency department. The traditional, static policy 
diverts patients whenever their total number in the ED is above a threshold. They showed that, 
given practical forecasts' accuracy and horizon, a dynamic policy is better than a static one in 
reducing waiting times and patients’ abandonment (leaving without being seen). Their 
diversion decisions combined this threshold with additional diversions of patients that initiated 
long busy periods based on the forecast. The authors motivated this policy by analyzing stylized 
models and then demonstrated its efficacy using a simulation based on data from ED records in 
the SEEStat database (SEE-Center 2009) for 2004. Their retrospective simulation model 
compared the impact of different diversion decisions on waiting time and patients’ 
abandonment. They demonstrated that the use of practical forecasts could improve the 
performance of busy EDs. 
The Erlang R model, where R stands for re-entrant, was introduced and analyzed by (Yom-Tov 
and Mandelbaum 2014). Their motivation for the study of this queueing model stemmed from 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

healthcare applications such as radiology and EDs, where patients often return to the service 
provider after going through some additional tests. They showed that in steady state, the 
Erlang R and Erlang C (i.e., the standard M/M/C queue) models were equivalent (after 
appropriately changing the arrival or service times). Nevertheless, in the presence of time 
dependent arrivals, staffing recommendations based upon the Erlang R model led to 
significantly more stable performances (measured as probability of wait). They retrospectively 
demonstrated these results via the detailed simulation from (Marmor and Sinreich 2005), 
calibrated using empirical data from an ED. They enhanced their results using fluid and diffusion 
models and showed the Erlang R model was also useful in planning for staffing during a 
chemical event mass casualty drill. 
The simulation models that are common in the ORMS community, such as the detailed 
simulation models in (Marmor and Sinreich 2005), are useful in comparative studies. Such 
models allow us to simulate different interventions and estimate their impact on performance 
measures, such as wait times. However, as highlighted in (Carter and Blake 2004) developing 
such simulations is often very hard. Therefore, their usage in practice is not very common. 
These authors highlighted the difficulties of gathering the right data to calibrate the simulation 
(often relevant data, e.g., on resources, are missing), the lack of scalability (a simulation model 
tailored to one hospital is not easily transferable to another one), and the lengthy development 
times (often in the order of months and years). Yet, they argued that once a proper simulation 
model becomes useful, it allows prospective comparative analytics and can thus serve decision 
makers for a relatively long period, including in support of decisions that were not initially 
intended to be addressed by the simulation. 
We note that much of the theoretical development in performing comparative analytics using 
simulation, as well as casual models and AI, is done outside the ORMS community. As an 
example, (Zheng et al. 2018) focused on counterfactual and causal effects in view of different 
patient characteristics. They tested the comparative performance of their estimator with a 
simulation carefully calibrated to create “real” datasets. They extended the analysis of (van der 
Laan and Petersen 2007). This earlier work provided a statically optimal patient-specific 
intervention rule in the presence of missing data. (Zheng et al. 2018) proposed and explained 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

how to implement a targeted maximum likelihood estimator of the impact of intervention on 
specific individuals in support of prescribing tailored medical interventions. Using the concept 
of targeted maximum likelihood estimator in support of comparative and prescriptive analytics 
may benefit ORMS professionals in our business analytics work. 
An additional tool for comparative analytics is learning from best practices and best performers. 
Such learning can be useful for similar business units or employees. (Song et al. 2017) 
retrospectively investigated public versus private relative performance feedback (RPF) at the 
employee level in two EDs. The feedback focused on the length of stay of patients and, in both 
EDs, best practices were shared by management. One ED started to publicly post the RPF on is 
physicians; the other did not. (Song et al. 2017) compared results for both EDs. They found 
improved productivity in both hospitals that could likely be attributed to the RPF process and 
the general feedback provided. Publicly sharing the RPFs further improved productivity and 
reduced variance (i.e., low productivity workers improved more than medium productivity). 
Importantly, these improvements were not at the cost of other performance metrics (such as 
worker attrition). 
We note that the essence of the RPF process is similar to descriptive analytics: mapping 
practices in order to study what practices work well, how to use them where appropriate, and 
how to further improve existing processes in an organization. 
Another common intervention is the use of new technology. In a retrospective analysis, (Lu, Rui, 
and Seidmann, 2017) focused on the impact of introducing new information technology (IT) in 
long-term care facilities (LTF). Much of this technology is focused on reducing the workload in 
tracking and administering medications, i.e., reducing service times. The authors retrospectively 
studied the impact of implementing IT on nurses’ staffing. They developed a stylized model that 
related the level of IT to quality and revenue in the LTF. They tested their model using 
regression models fitted to over 7 years of data on nurse staffing at LTF. They found that after 
employing new IT, staffing dropped in high-quality LTFs but went up in low-quality LTFs. These 
impacts were related to increased quality and changing patient mix and were driven by 
different substitutability and complementarity of IT with labor. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

4.3 Resource Matching 
In several healthcare applications, resource matching can be thought of as double-sided queue. 
Such applications include blood transfusion and organ transplants. They are different from 
standard resource matching, such as the matching of elective surgeries to operating rooms. 
Whereas in the first matching problems, both the supply (donations) and the demand (patients) 
sides have uncontrolled arrivals, in standard problems, one of these sides, typically the supply, 
e.g., operating rooms, is controllable. In what follows, we discuss recent analytics work on 
blood transfusion. We found most analytics models for organ transplant include more 
prescriptive content and thus discuss these in the next section. 
 (Sarhangian et al. 2016 and Sarhangian et al. 2017) analyzed practice and theory for the use of 
red blood cell transfusion. Such transfusions are required for many medical treatments, 
including surgeries. They considered the impact of different ordering and allocation policies on 
the outdate rate, shortage rate, and the age distribution of transfused blood. (Sarhangian et al. 
2016) developed a simulation based on data for over 10,000 transfused units from a Canadian 
hospital. Their initial retrospective analysis characterized the polices used and found that if 
blood were allocated in a first in, first out manner, and an appropriate order-up-to level was 
chosen, the average age of transfused blood could be reduced by 30% without impacting the 
other measures. In a prospective study, (Sarhangian et al. 2016) focused on threshold-based 
allocation policies. They analyzed a stylized queueing theoretical model, derived performance 
measures, and characterized the trade-off between age and availability for such policies. They 
suggested the potential effect of distribution of the age of transfused blood on healthcare 
outcomes can be studied and argued that threshold-based policies are effective when reducing 
the shelf-life significantly impacts availability. 
4.4 Service Path and Diagnostics 
A common concept in healthcare services for chronical diseases is the clinical pathway. While 
there is often a recommended clinical pathway, patients may not always follow it (e.g., treating 
physicians recommend an alternative path, or patients skip some steps). In this context, data 
can help in comparing the clinical results of patients who have followed different pathways. As 
the pathway also depends on diagnostics, the choice of when to use different tests is relevant. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

In the context of EDs, this choice may be related to the relevant congestion in the system. We 
therefore discuss recent analytics work on service path and diagnostics. 
A data-driven robust optimization approach was used to measure the clinical pathway 
concordance for colon cancer patients in (Chan et al. 2019). They used 1 year of patient level 
data on 763 patients’ pathways and survival (over 4 years) to calibrate their model and 5 years 
as test data (with over 4,000 patients). They retrospectively compared survival results for 
patients with different concordance levels and showed that higher concordance levels with the 
recommended pathway were correlated with better survival chances. They considered several 
other methods to measure the concordance level and concluded that their metric performed 
better than the other methods. The study suggests the benefit of the recommended pathway. 
Future interventions could focus on encouraging higher concordance with the recommended 
pathway and on adequate responses for patients whose treatment does not follow this 
pathway. 
The service path often depends on results from diagnostic tests. While business analytics work 
should take the results of these tests as given, there may be a place to use analytics in the 
choice of testing. Focusing on the service path in EDs, (Shi et al 2020) studied the adoption of 
diagnostic tests by jointly considering their medical and operational benefits (measured as 
average length of stay). They demonstrated that some diagnostic tests are effective for a single 
patient from a medical perspective but may add congestion that harms the overall health 
delivery process and thus should not be adopted in practice (by the same token, some tests 
that may be less effective from a medical point of view for a single patient may be effective 
overall, as they reduce congestion). They studied this problem using a Markov decision process 
when considering the routing in the ED. They used data for over 10,000 patient visits; about 
35% of these were suspected to have some level of pulmonary embolism. Diagnosing the 
occurrence of pulmonary embolism requires a CT scan, a congested station in the ED, and such 
a test may be prevented if a D-dime test suggests no pulmonary embolism is present. They 
prospectively compared several different paths in accordance with different levels of usage of 
the D-dime test and demonstrated that with proper routing, the adoption of this test may be 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

beneficial to the patients visiting the ED (e.g., by reducing the wait time for CT for stroke 
patients). 
5. Prescriptive Analytics 
One of the potentially most impactful premises of data availability is the ability to tailor 
services. Tailored offerings could be based on more detailed customer segmentation, 
something that is feasible with big data. In the context of healthcare, finer-grained 
segmentation supports personalized medicine and improved service path. Operations research 
tools could also be used to improve diagnostics and patients’ response, e.g., when the response 
depends on a delay in the diagnostic time. 
We next discuss research on the following: scheduling policies, policies for resource matching 
for organ transplants, preferred service paths for patients, and improvements in the operations 
of diagnostic services. We note, however, that most of this work is traditional ORMS work and 
does not carefully depict the progression from descriptive, to predictive and comparative 
analytics on the way to prescriptive analytics. 
5.1 Scheduling Policies 
 (Jiang, Abouee Mehrizi, and Van Mieghem, 2020) focused on scheduling patients waiting for 
MRI. They considered an MRI scheduling problem for 72 hospitals in Ontario, Canada. They 
used 30 million patient-level records for the period of January 2013 to December 2017. In 
consideration of the inherent uncertainty, and as is common in healthcare, the service level for 
MRI tests was defined as the tail probability of the wait time (e.g., policy makers aim at keeping 
the percentage of patients who wait more than a day at or below 10%). They used ML to 
estimate demand and service, as well as to cluster hospitals within geographic regions while 
considering traveling times. They showed that the impact of (the right) pooling was larger on 
the variance of waits (and thus tail probabilities) than on their mean and could be quite 
significant. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

5.2 Resource Matching 
The process for allocating livers to transplant patients was investigated in (Akan et al 2012). 
They used a fluid model for liver transplant policies while considering different objectives and 
performance measures, including total quality adjusted life years, deaths, and number of 
wasted livers. Using shadow prices, they proposed different polices based on, e.g., an objective 
that was a convex combination of two different measures. They used 14 years of data from the 
united network for organ sharing to validate, cross validate, and then test the efficacy of their 
suggested policies using simulation. They found their recommended policies may be better 
than the one used in practice for measures such as total quality adjusted life years and number 
of wasted livers, but may increase the total number of patient deaths while waiting for 
transplant. 
The process for allocating a kidney to patients was considered by (Ata, Ding, and Zenios 2020). 
They suggested several possible allocation policies based upon a combination of fluid analysis 
and the achievable region approach. They used 5 years of data to estimate kidneys' quality 
scores; for patients, they used data on their initial health score, health decay curve, mortality 
rate for each health level, and quality of life from not matching (they normalized the quality of 
life after each successful matching to 1). They showed that quality of life measures can be 
improved by prioritizing healthier patients for high quality kidneys, while the less healthy 
receive low quality kidneys. 
5.3 Service Path 
Big data availability means prescriptive analytics on service paths can support personalized 
medicine via decision support systems. These systems are based on observed results after 
treatment by experts. There are two important challenges in this context. The first challenge is 
that errors made by experts may become the recommended course of action. The second is 
that following a newly constructed recommendation may result in newly constructed patient 
characteristics that have never been observed before. Then, automated systems that are 
calibrated with observed data can provide no recommendation. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

Treatment for chronic diseases is perhaps the primary example of the importance and 
feasibility of personalized service paths. (Bertsimas et al. 2017) focused on Type 2 diabetes. The 
authors used detailed electronic medical data for over 10,000 patients (each with at least one 
year of data in the system); these data included demographic information and medical and 
treatment histories. For each patient, they used a K nearest (with weighted distance) neighbour 
regression to find a line of therapy (drug regimen) that was likely to be best for her (the Lasso 
and Random forest algorithms did not perform as well). A change in the line of therapy was 
recommended if the predicted benefit of the likely best therapy was significant. In the absence 
of a clinical trial, they used out-of-sample data to evaluate their recommendations. In the 
31.8% of cases where the recommended therapy differed from the observed one, they 
estimated the medical condition by the average observed condition for neighbours who 
received the recommended therapy. The estimated average reduction of the mean post-
treatment glycated hemoglobin based on their recommendation was 0.44%. 
A main limitation of their work was their focus on controlling a unique medical measure 
(glycated hemoglobin); control of several measures would require a significantly larger data set. 
Nevertheless, their approach – performing data-driven patient segmentation—can be used to 
create an effective decision support system for physicians. Moreover, with enough data, novel 
treatment combinations can be extracted (based upon prediction of their efficacy). Such 
extraction would reduce the cost of future clinical trials and the time to market of the 
recommended treatments. 
The quality of the service path is often hard to quantify, and expert opinions or surveys are 
often required to measure it. (Bertsimas, Czerwinski, Kane, 2013) used a combination of expert 
opinion and analytics to measure the quality of service provided. They used data on insurance 
claims for medical services and medications. The expert ranked the quality of care for 100 
patients and a logistic regression model trained with these data was used to identify patients’ 
whose quality of care should be reviewed. The out-of-sample validation of over 30 patients 
suggested the use of the scalable logistic regression model may be helpful in practice. Their 
approach provides a scalable service quality measure based on a small sample from expert 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

opinion; this allows cases that can benefit from an expert review of the service delivery process 
to be flagged. 
Learning from experts can also be applied to radiation therapy for cancer. Experts in this field 
try to balance several objectives, such as delivering a high dose to the tumor but a low dose to 
healthy tissue. As there is no clear way to quantify how to proceed with a specific radiation 
treatment, these treatments are considered knowledge-based, and an expert opinion is 
required. Providing automated recommendations for such treatments is thus very challenging. 
Inverse optimization was used by (Chan et al. 2014) to determine which mathematical 
formulated objectives were best aligned with expert decisions on 12 prostate cancer patients. 
An important contribution of their work was the identification of a relatively small number of 
objectives to consider in the treatment plan. Combining these objectives with patient clustering 
may help create a decision support tool to support treatment planners and oncologists in 
quickly coming up with effective treatment plans. (Boutilier et al. 2016) studied different 
approaches to treatment plans based on prostate cancer patients’ data. Specifically, they 
compared (i) prediction using the best plan from a database with existing clinical plans, (ii) 
principal component analysis and multiple linear regression, and (iii) objective function weights 
using logistic regression or K-nearest neighbors. They investigated the minimum required 
sample size of the training set to achieve errors similar to these from a sample with 200 plans. 
They showed that different methods required different sample sizes. Therefore, for more 
complicated therapies where data are more complex, there may be a trade-off between the 
learning method and the quality of the generated recommendation. 
Another consideration of service path was by (Ding, Gupta and Tang 2020). They considered 
appointment scheduling when some customers require a follow up. They investigated the 
impact of pre-booking appointments to a priority queue for some follow-up appointments. 
They focused on throughput maximization while considering that some appointments were 
unused, due to customers either not showing up or no longer needing them. They also 
considered balking due to long delay. They used over a year of data on about 700,000 
appointments for a network of outpatient clinics in Minnesota where follow-up appointments 
were performed about 20% of the time. They observed that pre-booked, follow-up 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

appointments were booked with the original doctor more often than non-pre-booked ones, and 
the latter were unused more often. They approximated the queuing system by assuming 
follow-up appointments see the time average of the system. They showed that while in the 
absence of balking, there is no benefit in pre-booking follow-ups, there is a unique level of pre-
booking that maximizes the throughput (when follow-up appointments are required less than 
25% of the time). They provided guidelines on how to find the optimal rate of pre-booked 
prioritized appointments. 
5.4 Diagnostics 
Several studies use data to support the careful study and modeling of operations problems in 
services. We focus below on studies related to diagnostics that specify if and when prescribed 
interventions are needed; such questions are relevant in many services. 
(Deo and Milind 2015) considered how to use rapid but costly diagnostic devices for improving 
early infant diagnostics for HIV in Mozambique. They investigated where to locate such devices 
to reduce diagnostic delay. Long delays that are common under the central diagnostic system 
reduce the percentage of caretakers who collect the results of the diagnostic test and thus the 
effectiveness of treatment. An important delay in this setting is the batching delay at the lab. 
The lab only completes diagnostics of full batches of tests, so a test arriving after a batch is 
processed could wait a long time for the collection of another batch before its diagnostics is 
completed. The authors combined a detailed simulation study with an approximated and 
carefully calibrated parents’ behavioral model as a part of the device location optimization 
problem. They showed the optimal usage of such devices can improve the diagnostics process 
much more than other changes to the existing system. The impact of delays and network design 
on this problem was also investigated in (Jonasson, Deo, and Gallien 2017). They developed a 
data-driven simulation that estimated the health benefit of different network designs (lab 
locations, assignments of clinics to labs, and lab capacities) by considering the detailed 
operational procedures. In particular they considered the time to diagnostic (from sample 
collection, transportation, in lab queueing), how the distribution of time to diagnostics impact 
treatment initiation (e.g., the probability of caretakers getting the lab results), and ultimately 
the health outcome (based on the size and age of population treated). In addition, they 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

developed an optimization model to suggest beneficial network configurations. This tractable 
model approximated the impact on the distribution of delays from different designs. They then 
used this simulation model to estimate the results of recommended network designs. They 
established that a resource pooling where a single national lab is beneficial in Mozambique, but 
in countries with longer commute times, designs with more labs may be optimal. 
6. Example: From Descriptive to Prescriptive Analytics with Queue 
Mining 
As seen in the sections above, many analytics projects consider only one analytics phase– 
either, descriptive, predictive, comparative, or prescriptive. While different projects may focus 
on one, most successful projects progress through several of these phases. To demonstrate the 
progression of research on business analytics from descriptive, via predictive and comparative, 
to prescriptive analytics, we now discuss recent advances in queue mining. We believe this 
methodology may be helpful in many service systems, and it also nicely demonstrates some of 
the future directions of research on business analytics in services. 
Many operational and logistics processes can be represented using a control-flow perspective. 
This perspective emphasizes the order of activities, decisions made along the way, and 
concurrent execution blocks. Control flow is typically modelled via dynamic models, such as 
Business Process Modelling and Notation (BPMN) or Petri nets (aka Place/Transition nets). 
Service processes with scarce resources and uncertainty are typically modeled via queueing 
theory. Queueing theory enables resource-centered analysis that is often relevant to the study 
and practice of service processes. We believe a synergy between approaches can be achieved, 
making their joint usage a very appropriate modelling framework for services. In a concise 
fashion, we define: 
• Queue Mining: business analytics for capacitated systems that combines transaction 
level data analysis and queueing theory. 
In the last two decades, the availability of detailed transaction-level data has increased. Process 
mining is a rapidly growing research field that aims at eliciting control-flow models from such 
transactional data (van der Aalst, 2011). On the queueing side, these data have often been used 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

to calibrate theoretical queueing models (analytical, numerical, or simulation based). However, 
the models were first manually constructed and only later annotated with data (e.g., fitting 
arrival processes, estimating durations, and mining service policies). 
A recent development that uses transactional data to automatically extract queueing models is 
queue mining (Senderovich et al. 2014, 2015) and (Senderovich et al. 2016). Queue mining is an 
extension of process mining to consider queueing aspects that are prominent in services. The 
premise of queue mining is the use of data to retrieve the realized service process. 
Retrieving the realized service process based on available records still requires detailed data 
analysis. While much more data are available today in many service systems, they are often 
incomplete, and there is a main differentiation between modern manufacturing and service 
firms. Incomplete and inaccurate data are especially prevalent when data entry is done 
manually or by different organizational units. For example, the details related to the process of 
seeing specialist doctors (e.g., pediatricians, surgeons, etc.) in EDs are often not well 
documented, as these doctors are not a formal part of the ED team. There is a similar concern 
about the processes related to patients arriving by ambulance or to medical tests occurring 
outside the primary medical unit with which the patient is affiliated. As a result, many specific 
time stamps essential to formulate an appropriate queueing model are often missing. 
Missing or incomplete data are common in most business analytics projects. Modern 
approaches allow missing data to be addressed by trying to impute them or by studying their 
impact indirectly. Within queue mining, missing data can be imputed by repairing event logs 
and making educated guesses for missing time stamps. (Rogge-Solti et al. 2013) applied an 
approach for imputing missing data to the ambulatory surgery process in a Dutch hospital. The 
operating theatre staff enters information manually, and there are missing data for almost 43% 
of patients. The authors modeled the service process as a stochastic Petri net and iteratively 
imputed missing data, combining available data with knowledge on the process. To reduce the 
computational complexity, they repaired the structure (e.g., a missing step) based on the 
alignments approach and the time stamps using inference in a Bayesian network. Both repairs 
can be done deterministically or using simulation. They further discussed how to measure the 
quality of the repair. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

An alternative approach for making educated guesses about missing time stamps was 
presented in (Senderovich et al. 2016). They used event data to measure queues to identify 
bottlenecks and process inefficiencies. In many service systems, time stamps for finishing a 
service are more accurate than those entering the queue or the service (start times are often 
missing from data, as providers are only obliged to report ending of activities). Therefore, the 
authors focused on analysing these situations. Their main idea was to cluster customers, using 
K-means clustering, based on the inter-completion times of their services. They assumed the 
“shortest” cluster (with the smallest representative) contained customers who did not wait; 
thus, their time in the system provided an estimate of the service time. Other clusters 
contained customers who observed, say, a low, medium, or long queue, and the queues they 
observed provided estimates to queues observed by customers with similar flow times. The 
authors devised algorithms to impute missing data based on existing data and evaluated them 
based on empirical data from call centers and a hospital where several services could be 
performed in parallel. 
Queue mining supports the formulation of relevant models, helps compare the realized versus 
planned processes, and supports predictions and analysis of performance metrics. A 
comparison of the planned process and reported performance measures allows a detailed 
verification and validation of the resulting process model (Senderovich et al. 2016). With these 
steps, a well-designed queue mining can also build intuition on potential process improvement, 
i.e., support comparative and prescriptive analytics. 
A first step in the direction of using process mining to extract simulation models was made by 
(Rozinat et al. 2008). Their work aimed to support prescriptive analytics for short-term 
interventions. (Mesabbah, Abo-Hamad, and McKeever, 2019) discussed the creation of an auto 
simulation model builder in the context of healthcare. They used ML to predict processing 
times and routing. They assumed data on waiting versus service and resources exist, which is 
often not the case, and thus incorporated specific resources in their simulation model. They did 
not report the use of real hospital data, however. In contrast, (Camargoa, Dumasa, and 
González-Rojasb, 2020) reported such usage with a data set containing event data for both 
customers and medical personnel. They also provided their source code. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

The continuation of queue mining work and transforming it from descriptive to prescriptive 
would require further theoretical support, such as the analysis of appropriate simulation 
models to include practical considerations for the scheduling and control of queues. Such 
considerations are known to improve performance of queueing processes and include priority, 
resource pooling, and scheduling. The latter considerations are especially important in services 
that require visits to several stations. We believe further use of queue mining to automatically 
create simulation models using existing data would facilitate prescriptive analytics in services. 
7. On Operations Research and Management Science in Business 
Analytics 
In the preceding pages, we have presented a framework for business analytics and 
demonstrated its efficacy using recent research on healthcare analytics. We now make several 
observations on the current and potential impact of ORMS professionals on business analytics 
based on our survey of the literature. 
7.1 The Current State of ORMS and Analytics 
On the one hand, there is an increasing amount of work on business analytics in general and on 
healthcare in particular within the ORMS community. Several very interesting data sets have 
been used to demonstrate the potential benefits of analytics in healthcare, e.g., 
http://seeserver.iem.technion.ac.il/see-terminal/. Many papers have used econometric 
tools that were less commonly used by operations researchers in the past, e.g., (Song, 
Tucker, and Murrell, 2015). In parallel, more traditional tools, such as simulation, queueing, and 
optimization techniques, have been used to support service analytics. On the other hand, there 
is relatively little implementation of this healthcare analytics work. Much of the surveyed work 
focuses on descriptive or predictive analytics, with no long-term follow up of comparative 
analytics in support of prescriptive analytics in application. The comparative analytics examples 
suggest that recommending interventions based upon data is challenging, despite their 
increased availability. We need more methods to study the impact of interventions. Even the 
relatively limited work that aims at prescriptive analytics is often published before a long-term 
impact can be adequately measured and reported; the recommendations are not implemented 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

in practice, possibly because the research does not rely on descriptive, predictive, and 
comparative phases. 
We conclude that implementing business analytics in healthcare services is challenging. This 
conclusion is supported by others. For example, Scheinker and Brandeau (2020) shed light on 
the challenges involved in successfully implementing analytics projects in hospitals. Despite 
the expertise of ORMS professionals in prescriptive analytics in challenging settings, there is 
less impact than desired of prescriptive analytics on practice. We see implementation of 
prescriptive analytics projects in general and in healthcare in particular as an exciting and 
challenging opportunity to extend the impact of business analytics. 
7.2 On the Future of ORMS in Business Analytics 
We believe ORMS tools will improve business analytics theory and practice in services such as 
healthcare. The thinking ORMS professionals bring to the business analytics table includes a 
focus on decision making and the use of several methodologies. These methodologies include 
modeling, optimization, stochastic analysis, and—arguably most importantly—the integration 
of a broad set of methodologies, including ones that traditionally belong to other disciplines 
(e.g., computer science, econometrics, and statistics). The inclusion of ORMS promises two 
main benefits. First, the focus of ORMS models on decision making is often very specific, i.e., 
problem driven. Second, the broad training of ORMS professionals allows us to understand 
business processes and relate them to performance measures in view of observed, but often 
incomplete data. Fundamental empirical models and their analysis start with data; we make 
inferences and conclusions based on these data. Such an analysis is not guided by a model of 
the system or by the process that generated the data. In contrast, ORMS also considers a 
model-based approach that is focused on each application. Note that while data often 
represent a single realization, useful models capture domain knowledge that applies to 
different realizations. Thus, without models, the inductive step from descriptive to prescriptive 
analytics requires a blind belief that observations from a specific realization are meaningful to 
other realizations (possibly from dissimilar settings). Adequate models support comparative 
analytics of different realizations by changing input parameters for these models. Such models 
assist in managing and resolving uncertainties. They also give decision makers confidence that 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

they have adequately considered all factors and inherent uncertainties and are thus making 
robust and effective decisions. 
One of the fundamental ORMS approaches, see e.g., (Powell, and Batt 2008), is to formulate a 
problem-specific model, simplify it, and capture the essence of a complicated problem using 
appropriate tools (e.g., mathematical analysis that leads to asymptotic analysis, heuristics, and 
bounds). This approach aims at generating insights that allow to verify and validate results and 
assumptions made in the data analysis and also to support managers in critically thinking about 
the problems they face. 
Several of the significant steps in analytics that supports managers in critically thinking about a 
problem are related to the interpretability of results. Without interpretability, the inductive 
steps—from descriptive to predictive, comparative, and prescriptive analytics —are large and 
harder to take (or to convince others to take). Seeking interpretable and insightful results is 
second nature to ORMS professionals. The focus of ORMS on generating insights and 
interpretability is therefore a requisite aspect of business analytics. Without these insights, 
business managers cannot make responsible decisions. 
Because ML (such as deep learning) models may have low interpretability, their use in business 
analytics may not be advised. With time, people and managers could learn to trust machines 
and computers to support more decisions. For example, the car industry, over the last 80 years, 
has moved from manual gears to automatic gears, to having cruise control as a standard 
feature, to automatic breaking, and is now moving towards autonomous vehicles. Similarly, 
managers have moved from calculating numbers using paper, to slide rules (slipstick), to 
calculators, and to advanced computer software. Nevertheless, managers who make decisions 
on “autopilot” solely “because the algorithm recommended it” are not desirable, bankable 
managers. Therefore, we believe research in the ORMS community that focuses on business 
analytics could improve the interpretability of ML models and facilitate decisions in conjunction 
with their development. While interpretability is also studied by computer scientists, the 
model-based ORMS approach that relates this to specific decisions in application could support 
new frontiers. The genuine interest the ORMS community already has in business analytics may 
motivate us to push the theory of business analytics into the context of “ease of interpretability 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

for the regular, savvy business manager” within ML models. Some preliminary work on 
improved interpretability has been done in (Bertsimas, King, 2017). 
Two ORMS methodologies that would be useful to successful business analytics are 
optimization and stochastic analysis. For example, queue mining takes advantage of advances 
in information technology (process mining), and this has synergy with operations research in 
the study of service analytics where queueing models are appropriate. As another example, 
proper simulation models often require understanding of the stochasticity involved in the 
simulated process. Simply optimizing the performance of a predictive model is often 
inappropriate. Such models focus on finding correlations and may ignore causality and the 
impact of decision making, i.e., of interventions, on data and thus on the generated predictions. 
Moreover, these models are typically not designed to serve as input to optimization as a part of 
prescriptive analytics. The recent work of (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2020) suggests how to 
jointly perform prediction and optimization in an effective fashion. This approach supports the 
use of ML in business analytics. Nevertheless, in many cases, performing comparative analytics 
is essential to support prescriptive analytics. 
Another central paradigm of ORMS is model selection. It would be interesting to find effective 
ways to preform model selection in view of data, possibly by weighing different models. Recent 
advances in such model selection has been achieved outside the ORMS community. For 
example, the super learner approach described in (van der Laan et al. 2007) used cross 
validation to find an optimal weighted combination of several prediction algorithms (based on 
machine learning) to recommend individual treatment rules. With an appropriate definition of 
“optimal”, a similar approach can and should be used for model selection in the ORMS 
community. 
Finally, we believe the view of ORMS professionals supports proper implementation of 
descriptive, predictive, and comparative analytics. This approach would help managers with the 
inductive step required to implement decisions recommended by prescriptive analytics. We, 
therefore, urge our community to perform analytics in all its phases in support of the practice 
of data-driven decision making. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

7.3 Publishing Research on Business Analytics 
While the roots of ORMS research are data driven, publishing data-driven academic work in 
ORMS has been traditionally very tough. There are many objective reasons: lack of high quality 
data, confidentiality of problem-specific data that companies are not willing to share, the 
difficulty of working with public operational data (lack of availability and confidentiality), the 
inability to verify reproducibility of results, and more. Nevertheless, in recent years, with the 
advances in business analytics and the higher awareness of the ORMS community’s 
contributions to this field, more companies are willing to share their data for research. In 
addition, there are several accessible data banks, e.g., https://www.kaggle.com/, and several 
sub communities of ORMS have data-driven research competitions. As a community, we should 
publish more such data sets and work with them. At the same time, journals are providing 
clearer guidelines on publishing research with data; this type of effort supports the progress of 
the ORMS academic community in business analytics and can support managers in critically 
thinking about a problem. 
Some excellent ORMS analytics papers combine mathematical and modeling tools with 
empirical ones (and other excellent papers focus on one of these tools). For example, empirical 
analysis would support and validate assumptions in modeling (e.g., a goodness of fit for a 
Poisson arrival process). This sort of analytics paper would demonstrate the applicability of 
results and support the inductive step from descriptive analytics, i.e., past data and knowledge, 
to prescriptive analytics, i.e., future decisions. Writing such papers suggests the need to 
broaden the training of ORMS in academia and beyond and makes joint authorship more 
attractive. Some ORMS experts possess deep knowledge of econometrics, others know more 
about algorithms, and still others are experts in optimization and so on. We should 
acknowledge that it is impossible for one person to be an expert in everything. 
Having different expertise reflects on the papers we write and the review process. The latter 
becomes harder: how can I review papers that use tools I am not an expert in? With this in 
mind, adding structure to the review process is helpful. It is important for us as a community to 
maintain an open mind to different research approaches. Rather than rejecting papers because 
they depict a different approach than our favorite one (e.g., using a distinctive set of tools), we 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

need to judge papers based upon their contributions. In many cases, papers that follow 
different approaches may improve each other. Thus, rather than discounting or disqualifying 
contributions of a paper because we have a different approach, we should think about 
extending these contributions using our approach. Such a process would be much more 
constructive and generate synergy across approaches. Given the famous (Box 1976) quotation 
“all models are wrong, but some of them are useful,” the judgement on accepting a paper 
should not be that it is “the correct” model, but that it is a useful one. Or as Chris Tang said, in 
personal communication (before reading this paper), “there are no perfect papers.” After all, 
one of the foundations of the ORMS approach is inclusivity of different tools to support 
improved decisions. So, let us remain inclusive in our refereeing efforts as well. 
Acknowledgments 
I thank the editor and the anonymous AE and referees for their comments that helped 
improving the paper. I also thank John Birge, Morris Cohen, Steve Graves, Ming Hu, Dmitry 
Krass, Georgia Perakis, David SImchi-Levi, and Chris Tang for discussions on business analytics 
from an ORMS perspective. Special thanks to Lennart Baardman, Robert Batt, So Yeon Chun, 
Victor Martínez de Albéniz, Arik Senderovich, John Silberholz, and Galit Yom-Tov for comments 
on previous versions and discussions that helped me formulate the framework for business 
analytics, discussed in Section 1. This work was supported by an NSERC grant of the author. 
Reference 
1. Akan M, Alagoz O, Ata B, Erenay FS, Said A. (2012) A broader view of designing the liver 
allocation system. Operations research. Aug;60(4):757-70. 
2. Ata B, Ding Y, Zenios S. (2020) An achievable-region-based approach for kidney 
allocation policy design with endogenous patient choice. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management;23(1), 36-54. 
3. Baron O, Berman O, Krass D, Wang J. (2017) Strategic idling and dynamic scheduling in 
an open-shop service network: case study and analysis. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management; 19(1), 52–71. 10.1287/msom.2016.0591 
4. Baron O, Berman O, Krass D, Wang J. (2014) Using strategic idleness to improve 
customer service experience in service networks. Operations Research; 62(1), January-
February, 123-140. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.2013.1236 
5. Hessam Bavafa, Jónas Oddur Jónasson (2020) Recovering from Critical Incidents: 
Evidence from Paramedic Performance. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

Management. Published online in Articles in Advance 07 Apr 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2019.0863 
6. Bayati, Mohsen and Kwasnick, Sara and Luo, Danqi and Plambeck, Erica L. (2017) Low-
Acuity Patients Delay High-Acuity Patients in an ED (December 31). SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3095039 
7. Bertsimas D, Bjarnadottir M, Kane M, Kryder C, Pandey R, Vempala S, Wang G. (2008) 
Algorithmic Prediction of Health-Care Costs. Operations Research; Vol. 56, No. 6, 1382-
1392. 
8. Bertsimas D, Czerwinski D, Kane M. (2013) Measuring quality in diabetes care: an 
expert-based statistical approach. Springerplus. May 16;2(1):226. doi: 10.1186/2193-
1801-2-226. PMID: 23795340; PMCID: PMC3683141. 
9. Bertsimas D, Kallus N, Weinstein A, Zhuo Y. (2017) Personalized Diabetes Management 
Using Electronic Medical Records. Diabetes Care; 40, 210–217. 
10. Bertsimas D, King A. (2017) Logistic Regression: From Art to Science. Statistical Science; 
Vol. 32, No. 3, 367–384. 
11. Boutilier JJ, Craig T, Sharpe MB, Chan TC. (2016) Sample size requirements for 
knowledge‐based treatment planning. Medical physics. Mar 1;43(3):1212-21. 
12. Box, G. E. P. (1976), Science and statistics, Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 71 (356): 791–799, doi:10.1080/01621459.1976.10480949 
13. Camargo, M., Dumas, M., González-Rojas, O. (2020) Automated discovery of business 
process simulation models from event logs, Decision Support Systems, 134, 113284, ISSN 
0167-9236, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113284. 
14. Carter, M.W. and Blake, J.T. (2004) Using Simulation in an Acute Care Hospital: Easier 
Said Than Done” in: Handbook of OR/MS Applications in Health Care’ Kluwer Academic 
Publishers International Series in Operations Research and Management Science (eds., 
Sainfort, F., Brandeau, M. and Pierskalla W.). 
15. Chan, C. W., V. F. Farias, G. J. Escobar. (2016) The impact of delays on service times in 
the intensive care unit. Management Science. 63(7) 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2016.2441. 
16. Chan T. C.Y., Tim Craig, Taewoo Lee, Michael B. Sharpe (2014) Generalized Inverse 
Multiobjective Optimization with Application to Cancer Therapy. Operations Research; 
62(3):680-695. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2014.1267. 
17. Chan T. C.Y., Demirtas D., Kwon R. H. (2016) Optimizing the Deployment of Public Access 
Defibrillators. Management Science; Pages iv–vii, 3393-3672. 
18. Chan, T. C.Y., Eberg, M., Forster, K., Holloway, C., Ieraci, L., Shalaby, Y., & Yousefi, N. 
(2019) An Inverse Optimization Approach to Measuring Clinical Pathway Concordance. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02636. 
19. Chan, T. C.Y., Nicholas, H., Lagzi, S., Quiroga, B.F., Gonzalo, R. (2021) Negative Spillover 
on Service Level across Priority Classes: Evidence from a Radiology Workflow Platform 
(February 8). Rotman School of Management Working Paper, Forthcoming, Available at 
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3781929 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3781929 
20. Chan T. C.Y., Li H., Lebovic G., Tang S. K., Chan J. Y.T., Cheng H. C.K., Morrison L. J., 
Brooks S. C. (2013) Identifying Locations for Public Access Defibrillators Using 
Mathematical Optimization. Circulation; Vol. 127, No. 17, 1801—1809. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

21. Chen, N., Gurlek, R., Lee, D., and Shen, H., (2021) Can customer arrival rates be 
modelled by sine waves? Improving service operations with queuing data analytics. 
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125120 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125120 
22. Chen W., Linthicum B., Argon N.T, Bohrmann T., Lopiano K., Mehrotra A., Travers D., 
Ziya S. (2020) The effects of ED crowding on triage and hospital admission decisions, 
The American Journal of Emergency Medicine, Volume 38, Issue 4, Pages 774-779, ISSN 
0735-6757, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2019.06.039. 
23. Claypool, A., Brandeau, M. L., Goldhaber-Fiebert, J. D. (2020) Prevention and control of 
Denge and Chikungunya in Columbia: A cost-effectiveness analysis SAGE PUBLICATIONS 
INC.: E85–E87. 
24. Cohen, M. (2018) Big Data and Service Operations, Production and Operations 
Management 27(9):1709-1723. 
25. Deo, S., Jain, A. (2019) Slow first, fast later: Empirical evidence of speed-up in service 
episodes of finite duration. Production and Operations Management; 28 (5), 1061-1081. 
26. Deo, S., Sohoni, M.G. (2015) Optimal decentralization of early infant diagnosis of HIV in 
resource-limited settings. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management; 17 (2), 
191-207. 
27. Diamant, A., Milner, J., Cleghorn, M., Sockalingam, S., Okrainec, A., Jackson, T. D., 
Quereshy, F. (2014) Analysis of Patient Attrition in a Publicly Funded Bariatric Surgery 
Program. Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 219(5), 1047-1055. 
28. Ding, Y., Gupta, D., Tang, X. (2020). Early Reservation for Follow-up Appointments in a 
Slotted-Service Queue. Available at SSRN 3616565. 
29. Ding Y., Park E., Nagarajan M., & Grafstein E. (2019) Patient Prioritization in ED Triage 
Systems: An Empirical Study of Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS), Manufacturing 
and Service Operations Management, 21(4), 723-741. 
30. Dong J, Yom-Tov E., Yom-Tov G.B. (2019) The Impact of Delay Announcements on 
Hospital Network Coordination and Waiting Times. Management Science, 65(5):1969-
1994. 
31. Elmachtoub N. A, Grigas P. (2021) Smart "Predict, then Optimize," Management Science, 
10.1287/mnsc.2020.3922 
32. Hu M. (Ed.) (2019) Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand, Springer, 1-528. 
33. Hutton, D.W., So, S.K. and Brandeau, M.L. (2010), Cost-effectiveness of nationwide hepatitis 
B catch-up vaccination among children and adolescents in China. Hepatology, 51: 405-
414. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.23310 
34. Ibanez, M. R., Clark, J. R., Huckman R.S., and Staats, B. R. (2018) Discretionary Task 
Ordering: Queue Management in Radiological Services, Management Science 64:9, 
4389-4407 
35. Jiang, Y., Abouee Mehrizi, H., & Van Mieghem, J. A. (2020). Geographic Resource Pooling 
to Balance Waiting and Traveling: Data-driven Application to MRI Hospitals in Ontario. 
Available at SSRN. 
36. Jónasson, J. O., Deo, S., Gallien J. (2017) Improving HIV early infant diagnosis supply 
chains in sub-Saharan Africa: Models and Application to Mozambique. Operations 
Research., 65 (6), 1479-1493. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

37. Lu Susan F., Huaxia Rui, Abraham Seidmann (2018) Does Technology Substitute for 
Nurses? Staffing Decisions in Nursing Homes. Management Science 64(4):1842-1859. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2016.2695 
38. Lustig, I., Dietrich B., Johnson C., and Dziekan C. (2010) The analytics journey. Analytics 
Magazine, pp.11–18, November/December. 
39. Malloy, G. S. P., Andrews, J., Brandeau, M. L., Goldhaber-Fiebert, J. D. (2020) Cost-
effectiveness of interventions to prevent plague in Madgascar, Sage Publications Inc; 
E116–E117. 
40. Malloy G. S. P., Goldhaber-Fiebert JD, Enns EA, Brandeau ML. (2021) Predicting the 
Effectiveness of Endemic Infectious Disease Control Interventions: The Impact of Mass 
Action versus Network Model Structure. Med Decis Making. Apr 24:272989X211006025. 
doi: 10.1177/0272989X211006025. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 33899563. 
41. Marmor Y, Sinreich DA (2005) Emergency department operations: The basis for 
developing a simulation tool. IIE Trans. 37(3): 233–245 
42. Mesabbah, M., Abo-Hamad, W. and McKeever S. (2019) A Hybrid Process Mining 
Framework for Automated Simulation Modelling for Healthcare. Winter Simulation 
Conference (WSC), pp. 1094-1102, doi: 10.1109/WSC40007.2019.9004800. 
43. Powell, Stephen G., and Robert J. Batt. (2008) Modeling for Insight: A Master Class for 
Business Analysts. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. 
44. Richardson, D. (1998) No Relationship between ED Activity and Triage Categorization, 
Academic Emergency Medicine 5(2), Wiley, https://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1553-
2712.1998.tb02599.x. 
45. Rogge-Solti A, Mans RS, van der Aalst WMP, Weske M. (2013) Repairing Event Logs 
Using Stochastic Process Models. (Technische Berichte des Hasso-Plattner-Instituts für 
Softwaresystemtechnik an der Universität Potsdam; 78) In: Potsdam:Universität 
Potsdam. 
46. Rose Robert (2016) Defining analytics: a conceptual framework, ORMS-Today; June | 
Volume 43 | Number 3. 
47. Rozinat A., Wynn M.T, van der Aalst WMP, ter Hofstede AHM, Fidge AHM. (2009) 
Workflow simulation for operational decision Support Data & Knowledge 
Engineering, North-Holland, 68(9), 834-850, 9/1. 
48. Sarhangian, V., Abouee-Mehrizi, H., Baron, O., Berman, O., Heddle, N. M. and Barty, 
R. (2016) Reducing the age of transfused red blood cells in hospitals: ordering and 
allocation policies. Vox Sanguinis; 110: 385–392. doi:10.1111/vox.12374. 
49. Sarhangian, V., Abouee Mehrizi, H., Baron, O., Berman, O. (2017) Allocation policies 
in blood transfusion. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 20(2), 
pp347-362 https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0650. 
50. Scheinker, D., Brandeau, M.L., (2020) Implementing Analytics Projects in a Hospital: 
Successes, Failures, and Opportunities. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics 
doi:10.1287/inte.2020.1036. 
51. SEE-Center Technion (2009) Seestat database 
http://seeserver.iem.technion.ac.il/see-terminal/. 
52. Senderovich A, Leemans SJJ, Harel S, Gal A, Mandelbaum A, van der Aalst WMP. 
(2016) Discovering Queues from Event Logs with Varying Levels of Information. In: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903

Reichert M., Reijers H. (eds) Business Process Management Workshops. Lecture 
Notes in Business Information Processing, vol 256. Springer, Cham. 
53. Senderovich A, Weidlich M, Gal A, Mandelbaum A. (2014) Queue Mining – Predicting 
Delays in Service Processes. In: Jarke M. et al. (eds) Advanced Information Systems 
Engineering. CAiSE 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8484. Springer, Cham; 
42-5. 
54. Senderovich A, Weidlich M, Gal A, Mandelbaum A. (2015) Queue mining for delay 
prediction in multi-class service processes. Information Systems 53: 278-295. 
55. Shi, P., Helm, J. E., Sebastian Heese, H., & Mitchell, A. M. (2020) An Operational 
Framework for the Adoption and Integration of New Diagnostic Tests. Production and 
Operations Management, forthcoming. 
56. Simchi-Levi D. (2014) OM Forum—OM Research: From Problem-Driven to Data-Driven 
Research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management; 16 (1), 2-10. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2013.0471. 
57. Song H., Tucker A.L., Murrell K.L. (2015) The Diseconomies of Queue Pooling: An 
Empirical Investigation of ED Length of Stay, Management Science, 61(12), December, 
Pages iv–vi, 2825-3096. 
58. Song, H., Tucker A., Murrell K., Vinson D. (2018) Closing the productivity gap: Improving 
worker productivity through public relative performance feedback and validation of best 
practices. Management Science, 64(6), June, Pages 2473-2972. 
59. van der Aalst W. (2011) Process Mining: Discovery, Conformance and Enhancement of 
Business Processes. Springer. 
60. van der Laan MJ, Petersen ML. (2007) Statistical learning of origin-specific statically 
optimal individualized treatment rules. Int J Biostat;3(1):Article 6. doi: 10.2202/1557-
4679.1040. PMID: 19122792; PMCID: PMC2613337. 
61. van der Laan MJ, Polley EC, Hubbard AE. (2007) Super learner. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol; 
6: Article25. doi: 10.2202/1544-6115.1309. Epub Sep 16. PMID: 17910531. 
62. Wang J., Baron, O., and Scheller Wolf, A., (2015) M/M/c queue with two priority classes. 
Operations Research, 63(3), pp733-749. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.2015.1375. 
63. Xu, K., & Chan, C. W. (2016). Using future information to reduce waiting times in the 
emergency department via diversion. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management, 18(3), 314-331. 
64. Yang S, Kou SC, Lu F, Brownstein JS, Brooke N, Santillana M. (2017) Advances in using 
Internet searches to track dengue. PLOS Computational Biology (Internet); 13 (7), 1-14. 
65. Yang S, Santillana M, Brownstein JS, Gray J, Richardson S, Kou SC. (2017) Using 
electronic health records and Internet search information for accurate influenza 
forecasting. BMC Infectious Diseases (Internet); 17 (1), 332. 
66. Yom-Tov, G. B., & Mandelbaum, A. (2014). Erlang-R: A time-varying queue with 
reentrant customers, in support of healthcare staffing. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management, 16(2), 283-299. 
67. Zheng W, Luo Z, van der Laan MJ. (2018) Marginal Structural Models with 
Counterfactual Effect Modifiers. Int J Biostat. Jun 8;14(1):/j/ijb.2018.14.issue-1/ijb-2018-
0039/ijb-2018-0039.xml. doi: 10.1515/ijb-2018-0039. PMID: 29883322; PMCID: 
PMC6682415. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673903