TITLE: A stochastic programming approach for chemotherapy appointment scheduling
JOURNAL: Naval_Research_Logistics
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.21952
---

A STOCHASTIC PROGRAMMING APPROACH
FOR CHEMOTHERAPY APPOINTMENT SCHEDULING
Nur Banu Demir1, Serhat Gul2, Melih C¸ elik3
1Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
2Department of Industrial Engineering, TED University, Ankara, Turkey
3School of Management, University of Bath, Bath, UK
Correspondence
Serhat Gul, Department of Industrial Engineering
TED University, 06420, C¸ankaya, Ankara, Turkey
E-mail: serhat.gul@tedu.edu.tr
July 2020
arXiv:2001.06806v2 [math.OC] 8 Oct 2020

A Stochastic Programming Approach for Chemotherapy
Appointment Scheduling
October 12, 2020
Abstract
Chemotherapy appointment scheduling is a challenging problem due to the uncertainty in
pre-medication and infusion durations. In this paper, we formulate a two-stage stochastic mixed
integer programming model for the chemotherapy appointment scheduling problem under lim-
ited availability of nurses and infusion chairs. The objective is to minimize the expected weighted
sum of nurse overtime, chair idle time, and patient waiting time. The computational burden
to solve real-life instances of this problem to optimality is signiﬁcantly high, even in the deter-
ministic case. To overcome this burden, we incorporate valid bounds and symmetry breaking
constraints. Progressive hedging algorithm is implemented in order to solve the improved for-
mulation heuristically.
We enhance the algorithm through a penalty update method, cycle
detection and variable ﬁxing mechanisms, and a linear approximation of the objective function.
Using numerical experiments based on real data from a major oncology hospital, we compare
our solution approach with several scheduling heuristics from the relevant literature, generate
managerial insights related to the impact of the number of nurses and chairs on appointment
schedules, and estimate the value of stochastic solution to assess the signiﬁcance of considering
uncertainty.
Keywords: chemotherapy, scheduling, appointment scheduling, stochastic programming, progres-
sive hedging
1

1
Introduction
Recent statistical data on global health shows that cancer is one of the most prevalent causes of
death, second only to heart disease (Ritchie and Roser, 2018). The number of new cancer cases
per year are estimated to increase from 17 million to 23.6 million by 2030 (Cancer Research UK,
2018; National Cancer Institute, 2018). In 2017, estimated expenditures for cancer treatment were
$147.3 billion in the US (National Cancer Institute, 2018). Since many people are aﬀected by this
disease, it is crucial to have planning systems which decrease costs and increase patient satisfaction
at the same time.
Chemotherapy is a frequently used method to cure cancer patients. Chemotherapy treatment is
an exhausting process for patients, since side eﬀects may be observed during or after the treatment.
To reduce the intensity of the side eﬀects, pre-medication drugs are injected to the patients before
initializing the treatment. After the pre-medication process, the patients receive chemotherapy
drugs. These drugs should be given to patients based on predetermined frequency and doses.
Designing patient schedules is vitally important due to the limited capacity of oncology clinics
and time restrictions for the chemotherapy treatment. Oncology clinics should provide schedules
that consider the trade-oﬀbetween provider and patient satisfaction.
In the literature and in
practice, chemotherapy schedules are generally created in two phases: (i) chemotherapy planning,
where patients are assigned to days according to their treatment frequency and (ii) chemotherapy
scheduling, where patients are sequenced and their appointment times are set to create a schedule
for a given day. In this study, we concentrate on constructing daily schedules for chemotherapy
patients.
Nurse overtime, chair idle time and patient waiting time are the three criteria that should be
considered to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of chemotherapy scheduling. Nurse overtime and chair idle
time are undesirable for providers, since they increase operating costs of the clinic. Furthermore,
working for more than the shift length may increase nurse dissatisfaction, and which in turn may
lead to higher nurse turnover rates. Reducing patient waiting time is also important for clinics to
improve patient satisfaction and service level. Since treatment durations are not actually known
in advance of the treatment, rough estimates of these durations are generally used for scheduling.
However, using such simple estimates may result in an undesirable amount of waiting time, idle
time and overtime, particularly when the estimates are not very accurate.
The most complicating factor for chemotherapy patient appointment scheduling is the uncer-
2

tainty in treatment durations. The treatment durations are unknown due to reasons including a
change in the prescription list according to patient’s health status before initiating the treatment,
complications in patients, and early treatment termination due to the patient not tolerating the
treatment (Castaing et al., 2016). If the decision maker plans the daily schedule based on the
longest possible treatment durations, patient waiting time can be reduced. However, this may lead
to excessive nurse overtime and chair idle time. Similarly, schedules based on the shortest possible
treatment durations may result in high waiting times in the clinic. Therefore, the decision maker
should handle the uncertainty in treatment durations wisely to avoid long waiting time, chair idle
time and nurse overtime.
The limited availability of chairs and nurses in the system is another crucial factor in this
problem. A patient should simultaneously seize a nurse and an infusion chair for the treatment.
The pre-medication process involves patients receiving pre-medication drugs, if required in the
prescription. A nurse can conduct at most one pre-medication at a time. During chemotherapy
infusion, the drugs that are used in chemotherapy treatment are injected to patients, in which case
a single nurse proctors multiple patients.
In this paper, we study the problem of sequencing patients and setting appointment times (i.e.,
scheduling appointment start times) for a chemotherapy unit considering the availability of a limited
number of nurses and chairs under pre-medication and infusion duration uncertainties. Decisions
in this problem include (1) sequencing patients of a daily appointment list, (2) setting appointment
times, (3) assignment of patients to nurses, and (4) assignment of patients to chairs. We model the
problem using a two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming (SMIP) formulation. We consider
an objective function that minimizes the total expected penalty of patient waiting time, chair idle
time and nurse overtime across a large set of scenarios sampled through pre-medication and infusion
time distributions. We propose a modiﬁed progressive hedging algorithm (PHA) that utilizes the
problem structure to ﬁnd near-optimal chemotherapy schedules. In particular, we propose a penalty
update method that considers convergence behavior of the primal and dual variables. The method
includes a limit on the penalty parameter, whose value changes according to the iteration number.
We also make use of cycle detection and variable ﬁxing mechanisms, and linearize the objective
function to improve solution times of scenario subproblems. Using instances based on data from a
major oncology hospital, we compare the performance of PHA with heuristics used in the relevant
studies from the appointment scheduling literature. Our experiments provide insight into the issues
related to the following questions:
3

1. What is the value of considering uncertainty in pre-medication and infusion durations when
scheduling chemotherapy appointments?
2. What is the potential beneﬁt of using the PHA over commonly used heuristics from the
relevant appointment scheduling literature?
3. Which PHA routines and parameters must be more carefully designed to enhance the algo-
rithm performance and solution quality?
4. How does the number of nurses and chairs aﬀect optimal schedules in terms of patient waiting
time, chair idle time and nurse overtime?
The organization of the remaining sections is as follows. In the next section, literature review
and the main contributions of the article are presented. In Section 3, the problem description
and model formulation are given. In Section 4, the proposed progressive hedging algorithm and
its implementation details are presented.
Our computational experiments and their results are
demonstrated in detail in Section 5. Finally, concluding remarks and further research directions
are discussed in Section 6.
2
Literature Review
Our literature review mainly focuses on outpatient chemotherapy scheduling problems. The reader
is referred to Lame et al. (2016) for an extensive review on the subject. A detailed review of
outpatient scheduling studies on primary care and specialty care can be found in Gupta and Denton
(2008), Cayirli and Veral (2003), Ahmadi-Javid et al. (2017). However, before we proceed with the
review of chemotherapy scheduling literature, we discuss studies on general outpatient appointment
scheduling.
2.1
General Outpatient Scheduling Problems
Among the studies on outpatient scheduling, the ones that consider (i) patient sequencing (ii)
appointment time decisions, or (iii) patient scheduling in a multiple resource setting are relevant
to our study. As also pointed out in Ahmadi-Javid et al. (2017), most of the articles assume a
predetermined patient sequence due to the complexity of sequencing problem (Kong et al., 2019;
Begen and Queyranne, 2011; Denton and Gupta, 2003). In the context of single-server scheduling,
4

only a few articles consider sequencing and time setting decisions simultaneously (Berg et al., 2014;
Mak et al., 2014; Mancilla and Storer, 2012; Denton et al., 2007). Among these studies, Berg et
al. (2014) , Mancilla and Storer (2012), Denton et al. (2007) formulated stochastic programming
models. Note that the second-stage subproblems in those models are much simpler than those of
the chemotherapy scheduling problem due to the consideration of two types of resources in the
latter.
In the literature of outpatient scheduling, the articles that consider multiple resources in the
model are the most relevant ones to our study (Batun et al., 2011; Perez et al., 2013, Riise et al.,
2016, Alvarez-Oh et al., 2018, Klassen and Yoogalingam, 2019; Leeftink et al., 2019; Hur et al.,
2020). Below, we provide an in-depth comparison between our study and the studies that formulate
two-stage stochastic programming model.
Batun et al.
(2011) considered both surgeons and ORs in their study.
However, the only
assignment decision they made is the assignment of surgeries to ORs in their two-stage SP model.
In other words, they assumed that the surgery list of a surgeon is known. Furthermore, the surgery-
to-OR assignment decision was made at the ﬁrst stage of their SP model. This helped them model
the second-stage problem using only continuous variables. Due to the resulting structure of the
model, they were able to implement the L-shaped algorithm (Van Slyke and Wets, 1969) to solve
their model.
On the other hand, in our model we make assignments to two diﬀerent types of
resources including nurse and chairs. Furthermore, the assignment decisions are made at the second
stage of the SP formulation. These variables make the structure of the second-stage problem of
our model diﬀerent from that of Batun et al. (2011). The types of variables at each stage of an SP
formulation are critical in determining the candidate decomposition algorithms to be implemented.
Due to the binary and continuous variables in the second stage, the L-shaped algorithm is not a
viable solution method for our model. Hence, we implement a progressive hedging algorithm to
obtain solutions.
Perez et al. (2013) considered multiple equipment types and human resources while scheduling
nuclear medicine appointments. They formulated both deterministic and stochastic formulations
for the scheduling problem. They consider uncertainty in future patient arrival requests in their
SP model but ignore any uncertainty in procedure durations. Note that the scheduling decisions in
our SMIP formulation are made under uncertainty in treatment durations. Their SP formulation
was designed to provide an appointment time for only one patient. To schedule multiple patients,
they needed to solve the formulation multiple times within an algorithm. Their objective function
5

includes the waiting time from the arrival time of the appointment request until the planned time
of appointment. However, our model considers the waiting time from the time of patient arrival to
clinic on the day of appointment until the actual treatment start time on the same day. Furthermore,
we consider resource overtime as well. Perez et al. (2013) assigned patients to small time slots
which allowed them to have only binary variables in both stages of the formulation. However,
we do not use time slots in our formulation, and instead model appointment time decisions using
continuous variables, resulting in a formulation with mixed binary and continuous variables in both
stages. Having only binary variables in the ﬁrst-stage problem would allow us to implement an
integer L-shaped algorithm (Laporte and Louveaux, 1993) or an evaluate-and-cut method proposed
by Ahmed (2013) to obtain optimal solutions. However, due to the aforementioned structure of
our model, we implement a modiﬁed PHA. We do not use time slots, since modeling appointments
using time slots would lead to unnecessary idle times.
Alvarez-Oh et al. (2018) studied the allocation of patients to resources in a system with multiple
service steps in the context of primary care clinic. However, they considered only patient-to-nurse
assignments as the physician responsible for a patient is given in the problem. They also assigned
patients to slots to determine appointment times, which allowed them to have only binary variables
in the ﬁrst stage of their SP formulation. Assignment of patients to multiple resources and the way
appointment times are set constitute the main diﬀerences between our study and Alvarez-Oh et al.
(2018).
Hur et al. (2020) scheduled patients of a multidisciplinary outpatient clinic using SP formu-
lation. They assigned patients to multiple providers to be seen during their visit at a back pain
integrated practice unit. However, they assumed that each patient is seen by only one provider
at a time. The appointment times were also set in terms of time blocks, which results in an SP
formulation having only binary variables at the ﬁrst stage. Note that in our case the patients are
assigned to multiple resources simultaneously in the pre-medication step. Continuous appointment
times make our SP model structure diﬀerent from that of Hur et al. (2020) as well.
Leeftink et al. (2019) also considered a multidisciplinary outpatient clinic to schedule appoint-
ments. However, their SP model is quite diﬀerent from ours because they did not make individual
patient assignments to resources. They instead created a blueprint schedule by determining the
number of patients seen by each provider at each time period.
6

2.2
Chemotherapy Scheduling Problems
We do not restrict our review to studies that focus only on the treatment phase of chemotherapy
(i.e. pre-medication and infusion). Some studies also consider the steps that need to be completed
before the treatment starts, namely blood tests, oncologist evaluation, and drug preparation in
the pharmacy. A patient’s blood test result determines whether or not the patient is ready to go
through the treatment. Once the blood test results are received from the laboratory, the treatment
of the patient is either approved or postponed after the oncologist evaluates the results. In case
the treatment is approved, a drug preparation order is provided to the pharmacist. The treatment
can start when the chemotherapy drug is prepared.
Streams of literature most relevant to the work in this paper include the deterministic and
stochastic versions of chemotherapy scheduling problems and their solution approaches, which are
discussed in the remainder of this section.
2.2.1
Deterministic Chemotherapy Scheduling Problems
Turkcan et al. (2012) handled chemotherapy planning and scheduling problems in a hierarchical
manner. In their ﬁrst formulation, the aim is to minimize treatment delays while assigning the
new patients to treatment days. After determining the daily patient lists, the authors focused on
the daily patient scheduling problem by considering resource availabilities and acuity levels of the
patients. Santibanez et al. (2012) suggested that the planner should consider the preferences of
patients, capacity of the pharmacy and laboratory, schedules of the oncologists, and overtime for
nurses while assigning appointment times to patients. To determine the chemotherapy schedules,
a timetable was prepared in Dobish et al. (2003), where it was assumed that laboratory tests and
oncologist evaluation are completed on the previous day of the treatment. Pharmacist availability
was an important concern in the scheduling process. Oncologist evaluation and pharmacy prepa-
ration stages were studied in addition to the treatment stage in the model developed in Sadki et
al. (2011). Nurses were always assumed to be ready for the treatment, so the scarce resources were
the oncologists and chemotherapy chairs.
Heshmat et al. (2018) proposed a two-stage solution approach for the chemotherapy appoint-
ment scheduling problem. In the ﬁrst stage, patients were grouped using clustering algorithms. In
the latter stage, these clusters of patients were assigned to nurses, chairs, and time slots by solving a
mathematical programming model. Huggins et al. (2014) developed a mathematical programming
7

model to maximize chair utilization while considering the workloads of the pharmacists and nurses.
They validated the model solutions with a simulation study. Two heuristics were developed to
assign patients to the infusion chairs by Sevinc at al. (2013). They decomposed the problem into
two phases. They ﬁrst determined the daily patient list for laboratory tests. The patients who
obtain an oncologist approval according to their laboratory test results are then assigned to infusion
chairs in the second phase. The makespan and weighted ﬂow time were minimized in Heseraki et al.
(2018) to schedule appointments of the chemotherapy patients. The authors expressed treatment
durations in terms of time slots by assuming that a nurse can proctor the pre-medication of only
one patient at a given time. Other aspects considered in the study are the patient priorities and
lunch-coﬀee breaks of the nurses.
Liang and Turkcan (2016) discussed two diﬀerent care delivery models for treatment of patients,
namely functional and primary care delivery models. In the functional care delivery model, it is
allowed to assign a diﬀerent nurse to a patient at each treatment visit. On the other hand, a speciﬁc
nurse is responsible for the patient’s treatment in the primary care delivery model. The workload
among nurses tends to show higher variability in the primary care delivery model, compared to
the functional care delivery model. The authors constructed a mathematical programming model
to minimize nurse overtime and total excess workload for the case of primary care delivery model.
The acuity levels of patients are taken into account, and there is an upper bound on the assigned
acuity level for each nurse in a time slot. Skill levels of the nurses are also included in the model.
For the functional care delivery model, they aimed to minimize the total nurse overtime and patient
waiting time within a multi-objective optimization model framework.
Our study diﬀers from the studies summarized in this section since we consider uncertainty in
the pre-medication and infusion durations.
2.2.2
Stochastic Chemotherapy Scheduling Problems
Alvarado and Ntaimo (2018) formulated three diﬀerent mean-risk stochastic integer programming
models for the chemotherapy appointment planning and scheduling problem. Acuity levels, treat-
ment durations, and nurse availability were represented by stochastic parameters in their problem
description. Their model was formulated to provide a solution for a single patient. In other words,
the authors assumed that the appointments of earlier patients were already booked. They made
their planning and scheduling decision for the current patient by considering the remaining time
slots in the future days. The objective was to minimize the deviation from the target treatment
8

start day for the new patient, patient waiting time, and nurse overtime. In our study, we consider
planning the daily schedules of multiple patients without using time slots.
Hahn-Goldberg et al. (2014) considered the uncertainty due to the arrivals of appointment
requests and last minute changes in a schedule. They minimized makespan in the dynamic schedul-
ing problem using an online algorithm. However, they did not consider uncertainty in treatment
durations.
A discrete event simulation model was developed to observe the eﬀect of diﬀerent
operational decisions on the patient waiting time, clinic overtime, and resource utilization in an
outpatient oncology clinic in Liang et al. (2015). The stochastic elements in the simulation model
included unpunctual arrivals of patients and all service durations. However, the uncertainty was
not considered in the mathematical programming model used to create schedules.
Tanaka et al. (2011) assigned patients to the infusion chairs using online bin packing heuris-
tics. It was assumed that each infusion chair has a separate patient list for the treatments. The
uncertainty in drug preparation and nursing durations before the infusion, such as taking vitals
and assessment was taken into account. However, the study assumed deterministic pre-medication
and infusion durations. Mandelbaum et al. (2016) considered uncertain treatment durations and
unpunctual patients. They constructed a data-driven approach for the problem of patient appoint-
ment scheduling, assuming that the infusion chairs are the only servers of the system. Therefore,
the impact of limited nurse availability on a schedule is not considered in this study.
The study most similar to that in this paper was conducted by Castaing et al. (2016), where
the authors constructed a two-stage stochastic integer program to determine patient appointment
times in an outpatient chemotherapy clinic in order to minimize the expected patient waiting time
and total time required for all treatments (i.e., clinic closure time). The authors assumed that an
initial schedule was already created. Their model allowed to make small revisions on the existing
schedule as they assumed the sequence of patients cannot be changed. They set appointment times
for a given sequence of patients and considered multiple chairs, but assumed a single nurse in the
clinic. The binary variables in the second stage made the model diﬃcult to solve. Therefore, a
two-phase heuristic which facilitates setting the values of those variables was implemented to solve
the problem. Our work diﬀers from Castaing et al. (2016) in a number of ways. First, we do not
make the restricting assumption that the patient sequence is ﬁxed. Hence, our model does more
than the reﬁnement of existing schedules; it can be used to create an initial schedule. Moreover,
we consider that there are multiple nurses in the clinic and that a patient can be assigned to any
of the available nurses for treatment. Therefore, our model is applicable to clinics operating based
9

on a functional care delivery model. On the other hand, the model of Castaing et al. (2016) can
be used by clinics functioning according to primary care delivery model. Furthermore, their model
must be solved separately for each nurse, as it considers a single nurse.
3
The Chemotherapy Appointment Scheduling Problem
In this section, we deﬁne the Chemotherapy Appointment Scheduling Problem based on our obser-
vations of the chemotherapy operations at the Hacettepe University Oncology Hospital in Ankara,
Turkey, which is one of the prominent oncology centers in the country.
We also describe the
proposed two-stage stochastic mixed integer programming formulation in detail.
3.1
Chemotherapy Operations in the Hacettepe Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit
The Hacettepe Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit consists of 32 chemotherapy chairs, 28 of which
are used for treatments. The remaining four chairs are reserved for supportive care. The number
of patients receiving treatment varies between 60 and 85 on a given day. On average, 10 nurses,
including a head nurse, provide service to patients each day. During chemotherapy planning (which
is outside the scope of this paper), patients are assigned to each day based on the day of their
previous visit, estimated duration of their treatment, and the expected treatment duration of
patients assigned to each upcoming day. A daily shift starts at 8:00 and ends at 17:00 (unless
overtime is needed), with a lunch break between 12:00-13:00. The daily schedule of patients is
arranged by the head nurse, who assigns appointment times, chairs and nurses to the patients.
Our observations at the chemotherapy unit aimed to capture the operations conducted until
and during the chemotherapy treatment. The blood tests and oncologist evaluations are carried out
on a diﬀerent day before the treatment. The results of these tests are examined by the oncologist
to decide whether the patient has convenient health status to receive a chemotherapy treatment.
When the oncologist approves the treatment protocol, she updates or conﬁrms the dosages of the
drugs. The drugs are then prepared in the pharmacy lab before the patient arrives at the hospital
for her treatment. During each treatment visit, a patient receives two types of medications: (i)
pre-medication drugs, which are injected prior to the chemotherapy infusion to help prevent side
eﬀects; and (ii) chemotherapy infusion drugs, which are used for cancer treatment.
There are certain time slots that the patients are assigned to according to their estimated
treatment duration, which is predicted by the chemotherapy unit according to the types and dosages
10

Figure 1: Patient ﬂow chart for treatment process
of the drugs injected. During a day, the unit makes use of four time slots: 8:00-10:30, 10:30-12:00,
13:00-15:30 and 15:30-17:00. If the estimated treatment duration of a patient is less than the length
of a slot, the patient is given an appointment time so that the expected end of treatment is within the
same slot. Otherwise, the patient can be assigned to more than one slot. If the estimated treatment
duration of a patient is longer than those of other patients, the head nurse prefers to assign this
patient to the beginning of the workday in order to prevent excessive overtime. In the rare case
that the estimated duration of the treatment exceeds 270 minutes, the appointment is generally
split into two sessions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon. Given the uncertainties in
treatment times, the three main objectives in designing the schedule are to ensure that (i) each
patient can actually start their treatment after experiencing minimal or no wait, (ii) all chairs are
highly utilized, and (iii) each nurse spends minimal or no time above regular shift duration.
The treatment of a patient consists of a sequence of events, as illustrated in Figure 1.
A
patient that arrives at the unit is immediately registered and becomes available for treatment at
the appointment time. If a nurse and/or chair is not available at the time, the patient has to wait
for the treatment. A nurse calls the patient when an infusion chair and the nurse both become
available. After the patient is seated in a chemotherapy chair, the nurse measures the fever and
blood pressure, and establishes a vascular access to start the pre-medication process. Aside from
rare cases where the patient may not need pre-medication drugs, the infusion process starts after
the pre-medication process ends. When the infusion process is over, the patient is discharged, and
the nurse calls the next patient to a chair that has become available. In general, each nurse may
be responsible for up to four patients at a given time. The Hacettepe Outpatient Chemotherapy
Unit applies a modiﬁed form of the functional care delivery, where in line with this procedure each
patient can be assigned to diﬀerent nurses in subsequent visits. However, nurse-patient assignments
in the clinic also consider the type of cancer and expected duration of treatment, which may limit
11

the pool of nurses that can be assigned to the patient. The balance of both criteria is aimed to be
satisﬁed to create equity between nurses.
3.2
A Two-Stage Stochastic Mixed-Integer Programming Model for the Chemother-
apy Appointment Scheduling Problem
We formulate a two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programming (SMIP) model for the Chemother-
apy Appointment Scheduling Problem, motivated by the operations at the Hacettepe Outpatient
Chemotherapy Unit. In particular, we study the problem of sequencing patients and setting ap-
pointment times for a chemotherapy unit by considering the availability of nurses and chairs under
uncertainty on the pre-medication and infusion durations. We sequence patients of a daily ap-
pointment list, set appointment times, and assign patients to nurses and chairs in our model. We
consider an objective function that minimizes a weighted combination of patient waiting time, chair
idle time and nurse overtime.
In the remainder of this section, we provide our assumptions and two-stage stochastic program-
ming model and propose a number of valid inequalities and bounds to strengthen the model.
3.2.1
Two-Stage Stochastic Mixed-Integer Programming Formulation
In this section, we discuss our two-stage SMIP model for the chemotherapy appointment scheduling
problem. The following assumptions are made in the model:
• We take the decisions in the chemotherapy planning phase (appointment of patients to days)
as given and focus on the chemotherapy scheduling decisions for each day.
• Among the events shown in Figure 1, we focus on the three main events in between the patient
appointment time and treatment completion time. These events include patient waiting, pre-
medication, and infusion.
• We do not consider time slots (as applied in the Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit) while deter-
mining the patient appointment times. Although the use of slots facilitates the construction
of schedules manually, having to ﬁt the treatment of patients into pre-determined slots may
be too restrictive, as it may lead to long idle times within some slots. To overcome this, our
model schedules patients in any minute within each half-day shift.
12

• Patients can be treated by any available nurse, as is the case for functional care delivery.
Nurses are also assumed to have identical skills.
• A nurse can perform only one patient’s pre-medication process at any time.
• A nurse can proctor the infusion process of multiple patients while conducting the pre-
medication process of a patient.
• Patients become ready exactly on the appointment time for treatment.
• The sequence of patients is not allowed to change after they arrive at the chemotherapy unit.
At the ﬁrst stage of the model, patients are sequenced and their appointment times are set. These
constitute the main decisions in the model.
Then, pre-medication and infusion durations are
realized. At the second stage, patients are assigned to nurses and chairs. The remaining decision
variables at the second stage help determine patient waiting time, chair idle time, discharge time,
and nurse overtime. Overtime is calculated separately for each nurse that works for more than the
planned shift length. Chairs become idle due to two reasons. First, treatment of a patient may
ﬁnish earlier than the appointment time of the subsequent patient. Second, longer than expected
durations of pre-medications may prevent nurses from initiating the treatment of a waiting patient.
Waiting occurs when the treatment starts later than the appointment time of the patient, which
may happen when pre-medications or infusions for the previous patients may last longer than
expected. The unavailability of nurses or chairs may also cause waiting.
We assume a ﬁnite set of scenarios representing uncertainty in pre-medication and infusion
durations. Given these scenarios, we formulate the following two-stage SMIP model for our problem
based on sets, parameters, ﬁrst and second-stage decision variables summarized in Table 1:
min
Q(a,b)
(1)
bij + bji = 1
∀i, j ∈I, j > i (2)
aj ≥ai −M(1 −bij)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i (3)
bij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i (4)
ai : integer
∀i ∈I (5)
where
Q(a,b) = Eξ[Q(a,b, ξ(ω))]
13

Table 1: Notation used throughout the two-stage SMIP model
Index sets
I
Patients
C
Chairs
Ω
Scenarios
N
Nurses
Parameters
sω
i
Pre-medication time of patient i ∈I in scenario ω ∈Ω
tω
i
Infusion time of patient i ∈I in scenario ω ∈Ω
pω
Probability of scenario ω ∈Ω
H
Shift duration of nurses
L
Overtime limit of nurses
λj
Trade-oﬀparameters in the objective function in the interval [0, 1], j ∈{1, 2, 3}
M
A large value
First-stage decision variables
bij
=
(
1,
if patient i ∈I precedes patient j ∈I in the daily appointment list
0,
otherwise
ai
Appointment time of patient i ∈I
Second-stage decision variables
xω
in
=
(
1,
if patient i ∈I is assigned to nurse n ∈N in scenario ω ∈Ω
0,
otherwise
yω
ic
=
(
1,
if patient i ∈I is assigned to chair c ∈C in scenario ω ∈Ω
0,
otherwise
wω
i
Waiting time of patient i ∈I in scenario ω ∈Ω
dω
i
Discharge time of patient i ∈I in scenario ω ∈Ω
Oω
n
Overtime of nurse n ∈N in scenario ω ∈Ω
Iω
c
Idle time of chair c ∈C in scenario ω ∈Ω
T ω
c
Auxiliary variable used to calculate idle time of chair c ∈C in scenario ω ∈Ω
14

is the expected recourse function, and
Q(a,b, ξ(ω)) = min

λ1
X
i∈I
wω
i + λ2
X
n∈N
Oω
n + λ3
X
c∈C
Iω
c

X
n∈N
xω
in = 1
∀i ∈I
(6)
X
c∈C
yω
ic = 1
∀i ∈I
(7)
ai + wω
i + sω
i + tω
i = dω
i
∀i ∈I
(8)
aj + wω
j ≥ai + wω
i + sω
i −M(3 −bij −xω
in −xω
jn)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀n ∈N
(9)
aj + wω
j ≥dw
i −M(3 −bij −yω
ic −yω
jc)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀c ∈C (10)
aj + wω
j ≥ai + wω
i −M(1 −bij)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i (11)
Oω
n ≥dω
i −H −M(1 −xω
in)
∀i ∈I, ∀n ∈N (12)
Oω
n ≤L
∀n ∈N (13)
T ω
c ≥H
∀c ∈C (14)
T ω
c ≥dω
i −M(1 −yω
ic)
∀i ∈I, ∀c ∈C (15)
Iω
c ≥T ω
c −
X
i∈I
(sω
i + tω
i )yω
ic
∀c ∈C (16)
xω
in ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀n ∈N (17)
yω
ic ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀c ∈C (18)
dω
i , wω
i ≥0
∀i ∈I (19)
Oω
n ≥0
∀n ∈N (20)
T ω
c , Iω
c ≥0
∀c ∈C (21)
The objective function in (1) only includes the expected second-stage function, since there is no
contribution from the ﬁrst stage to the objective function. The expected second-stage function aims
to minimize the expected weighted sum of total patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair
idle time. First-stage constraints are given by (2)-(5). Patient precedence relations are determined
using constraints (2). If patient i ∈I is scheduled before the patient j ∈I, the corresponding bij
value should be equal to 1. Constraints (3) establish the relationship between the binary precedence
variables and appointment times, in that if patient i ∈I precedes patient j ∈I in the list, then
the appointment time of patient i ∈I should be no later than that of patient j ∈I.
Binary
15

and integrality restrictions on the ﬁrst-stage variables are represented in constraints (4) and (5),
respectively.
For each scenario representing a set of chemotherapy durations, a subproblem is solved to obtain
second-stage decisions. The constraints for the second-stage scenario subproblems are expressed
by (6)-(21). Constraints (6) and (7) enforce every patient to be assigned to exactly one nurse and
one chair, respectively. Constraints (8) calculate the patient discharge time, which is equal to the
sum of the patient appointment time, waiting time, and durations of pre-medication and infusion.
Constraints (9) ensure that if patient i ∈I and j ∈I are assigned to the same nurse, and patient
i ∈I is scheduled before j ∈I, then the treatment start time of patient j ∈I should start after the
end of pre-medication of patient i ∈I. Similar relation also holds for chair-precedence relationship,
which is demonstrated in constraints (10).
If two patients are assigned to the same chair, the
treatment of the latter may begin only after the discharge time of the former one. By constraints
(11), a patient’s treatment start time should be earlier than those of the patients that are scheduled
later. Overtime of a nurse should be either zero or the diﬀerence between the discharge time of the
last discharged patient assigned to this nurse and the shift length, as determined by constraints
(12). In oncology units, it is desired to have limited overtime to enhance nurses’ working conditions
and preserve equity among nurses. A predetermined bound is included to ensure this in the model,
which also tightens the feasible region of the formulation. The associated constraint is provided in
equation (13). Constraints (14)-(16) are used to calculate idle time of the chairs in the clinic. The
idle time of each chair is calculated considering the shift length and discharge time of the lastly
scheduled patient who is treated in the associated chair. The maximum of the discharge time of the
last patient and shift length is used to measure the idle time of the associated chair. The remaining
constraints are the sign and binary restrictions on the second-stage decision variables.
Given that nurses and chairs are identical, assigning patients to them in the ﬁrst stage may lead
to ineﬃcient schedules. In practice, assignment of each patient to chairs and nurses is generally
made dynamically after arrival, well before the uncertainty on the pre-medication and infusion
durations is fully realized. Although treating these second-stage decisions in our model may seem
in contradiction to practice, we show that once the patient sequencing is ﬁxed in the ﬁrst stage,
these decisions become straightforward. More formally, we use the following proposition, the proof
of which is given in Appendix A.
Proposition 1 Given the sequencing of patients from the ﬁrst stage, assigning arriving patients
to the ﬁrst available chair and nurse produces the optimal schedule for the second stage of the
16

Chemotherapy Appointment Scheduling Problem.
Using this proposition, we are able to consider chair and nurse assignment decisions in the
second stage without violating the dynamic nature of the optimal assignment policy. Note that a
particular assumption, which is also represented by constraints (11), has a critical role in the proof
of the proposition. Constraints (11) enforce that the appointment sequence in the ﬁrst stage is
the same as the treatment sequence in the second stage. This ensures that the optimal policy to
assign patients to chairs and nurses is non-idling. Hence, there is no need to make such assignments
dynamically when patients arrive.
The rule dictated by the above discussed assumption is valid from a practical point of view. As
all patients have the same urgency levels and are assumed to arrive on time, the managers would
not ask an arriving patient to wait and let his/her successor be treated ﬁrst when a nurse and a
chair are available in the unit. This approach would dramatically reduce the satisfaction of the
waiting patient. Therefore, it may be impractical to reshuﬄe patient sequence after the patient
arrivals.
We note here that although it is desired, we do not model a limit on the number of patients to
be observed by a nurse at a given time explicitly. This potential issue is implicitly addressed by
the model with the inclusion of the ﬁrst two components of the objective function, as assigning too
many patients to a single nurse at a given time may excessively increase the patient waiting time
and nurse overtime. Hence, these two objective components would drive the solution to a balanced
assignment of patients to nurses. In case an explicit limit B on the number of patients assigned to
a nurse at a time is desired, the following constraints can be added to the two-stage SMIP model:
uω
ink ≥xω
in + βω
ink + γω
ink −2
∀i ∈I, n ∈N, k ∈K
(22)
Mβω
ink ≥k −ai −wω
i
∀i ∈I, n ∈N, k ∈K
(23)
Mγω
ink ≥ai + wω
i + sω
i + tω
i −k
∀i ∈I, n ∈N, k ∈K
(24)
X
i∈I
uω
ink ≤B
∀n ∈N, k ∈K
(25)
uω
ink, βω
ink, γω
ink ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, n ∈N, k ∈K,
(26)
where K represents the set of discrete time units (e.g., minutes), βω
ink takes a value of 1 if patient
i ∈I has started treatment with nurse n ∈N before k ∈K, γω
ink is 1 if patient i ∈I has not
ﬁnished treatment with the same nurse before k ∈K, uω
ink represents whether patient i ∈I is
17

being treated by nurse n ∈N at time k ∈K, and M is a large number. It should be noted here
that such a modeling approach would require discretization of the time periods (e.g., in minutes),
and would substantially add to the complexity of the model. Furthermore, Proposition 1 should be
modiﬁed to assign arriving patient to the ﬁrst available nurse observing the treatment of less than
B patients.
3.2.2
Improvements in the Formulation
Based on the preliminary runs, it is observed that solving even deterministic instances of the prob-
lem necessitates signiﬁcantly long solution times. Consequently, symmetry-breaking constraints
and valid bounds are added in order to strengthen the formulation and decrease the computational
burden.
The ﬁrst set of constraints relates to breaking symmetry with respect to the overtime of nurses.
Since nurses are assumed to be identical, the schedules of the nurses are interchangeable.
By
convention, we enforce the overtime of nurse with index 1 to be no less than those of the other
nurses. In this way, overtime may be assigned to nurses in non-increasing order of indices. The
mathematical representation of this constraint is given by:
Oω
n ≥Oω
n+1
∀n ≤|N| −1, ∀ω ∈Ω
(27)
Note that balancing nurse workload is not among the main objectives in our model. However, the
upper limit introduced by constraint (13) deﬁnes an acceptable bound and hence prevents excessive
imbalance.
Next, a lower bound on nurse overtime is deﬁned using the structure of the problem. If one
can equally distribute the summation of treatment durations to chairs, the resulting average total
treatment time per chair provides the smallest possible value for the maximum of patient discharge
times. Therefore, the calculated average value is a lower bound for the sum of nurse shift time
and overtime of nurse 1, since the overtime of nurse 1 is at least as high as all others according to
equation (27). The mathematical representation of this constraint is shown given by:
Oω
1 + H ≥
P
i∈I(sω
i + tω
i )
|C|
∀ω ∈Ω
(28)
As proposed in Mancilla and Storer (2012), the appointment and waiting times of the ﬁrst patient
in the schedule can be assigned to zero to reduce the number of decision variables. According to
18

the results of preliminary experiments, adding such time assignments does not have a signiﬁcant
eﬀect to reduce the computation times, and thus these are not included in the formulation.
Equations (27)-(28) are added to the main model and used in the computational experiments.
4
Solution Methodology
SMIP models are in general computationally demanding mainly due to the large amount of vari-
ables and constraints depending on the number of scenarios (Birge, 2011). Decomposition based
solution methods are generally utilized to solve such models in the literature. The well-known stage
decomposition algorithm proposed by Slyke and Wets (1969), L-shaped method, cannot be applied
on stochastic programs in case there are binary variables in the second stage as in our SMIP for-
mulation. To handle those cases, Laporte and Louveaux (1993) extended the method and proposed
the integer L-shaped algorithm, which can be implemented when only binary variables exist in the
ﬁrst stage. Other solution methods aim to overcome the diﬃculty associated with having binary
variables in the second stage through approaches based on value function and set convexiﬁcation
(Sen, 2005; Yuan, 2009). These disjunctive decomposition-based branch-and-cut algorithms are
known to be very eﬀective, but they can also be applied on models with only binary variables in
the ﬁrst stage. On the other hand, in our formulation, the ﬁrst stage includes both binary and
general integer variables.
Scenario decomposition-based approaches are also frequently used to solve SMIP models. The
Progressive Hedging Algorithm (PHA) has been increasingly preferred among them (Gul et al.,
2015; Hvattum et al., 2009; Goncalves et al., 2012). The PHA, proposed by Rockafellar and Wets
(1991), is based on an augmented Lagrangian relaxation technique. The algorithm decomposes the
problem into single-scenario subproblems, and aims to obtain an admissible solution that is feasible
for all scenarios by aggregating the scenario solutions at each iteration. It requires reformulation
of the model to attain a structure appropriate for scenario decomposition. It then relaxes the con-
straints that enforce the ﬁrst-stage decisions to be the same for every scenario in the reformulation
and penalizes the violation of these constraints by introducing a Lagrangian term and quadratic
penalty term in the objective function. The algorithm is shown to converge to the optimal solution
for convex models. Since our model includes general integer and binary decision variables, it is
not convex. Therefore, PHA is used as a heuristic approach for the Chemotherapy Appointment
Scheduling Problem.
Note that there is signiﬁcant evidence in the literature showing that the
19

PHA is an eﬀective heuristic for SMIP models (Crainic et al., 2011; Gul et al., 2015; Watson and
Woodruﬀ, 2011).
In the remainder of this section, general steps of the PHA are given, followed by a literature
review on diﬀerent applications of the PHA. We make use of a number of approaches from the
literature to modify the PHA, which is discussed in the last part of this section.
4.1
The Progressive Hedging Algorithm
We ﬁrst reformulate our SMIP model to facilitate scenario decomposition. In the reformulation
for PHA, which we call as SMIP-R (see Appendix B for the model), non-anticipativity constraints
are explicitly formulated. To formulate these constraints, a copy of a ﬁrst-stage variable must be
created for each scenario. The constraints then enforce the ﬁrst-stage decision variables to be equal
to each other across all scenarios to prevent anticipation of the future. Since the appointment
time values (ai) and the precedence relationship variables (bij) are dependent on each other, there
is no need to include non-anticipativity constraints for the latter. In SMIP-R, non-anticipativity
constraints for the appointment time values are given by:
aω
i = ai
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω,
(29)
where the ai values represent the consensus variable for appointment time of patient i ∈I. Prior
to the PHA implementation, these non-anticipativity constraints are relaxed, and their violation
is penalized using two terms in the objective function. In the ﬁrst term, the amount of violation
for each patient is multiplied by Lagrangian multipliers denoted by µω
i ∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω. The second
term is a quadratic component that takes the squared sum of these violations, and multiplies it by
ρ1
2 , where ρ denotes the penalty parameter. The revised objective function is given by:
λ1
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
pωwω
i + λ2
X
n∈N
X
ω∈Ω
pωOω
n + λ3
X
c∈C
X
ω∈Ω
pωIω
c +
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
µω
i (aω
i −ai)
+ ρ1
2
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
||aω
i −ai||2
(30)
To obtain a separable formulation, variables ai in (30) are replaced by ˆai, a consensus parameter
that is equal to the weighted average of appointment times over all scenarios, where the weights
20

are equal to the probabilities of scenarios.
ˆai =
X
ω∈Ω
pωaω
i
∀i ∈I
(31)
The resulting structure of the objective function and constraint set allow the SMIP-R to be
decomposed into multiple scenario subproblems, which are solved independently at each iteration
of the algorithm.
The general steps of the PHA, shown also in Algorithm 1, are as follows: In step 1, algorithm
parameters are initialized. Penalty parameter of the quadratic term, denoted by ρ, is set as a
positive constant value of ρ0, and the Lagrangian multipliers µω(v)
i
are initialized as 0 in the ﬁrst it-
eration. In step 2, each scenario subproblem is solved. Note that quadratic penalty and Lagrangian
terms are ignored in the ﬁrst iteration of this step. In step 3, the appointment time values obtained
for every patient and scenario are used to calculate the consensus parameters ˆai for every patient.
In step 4, the penalty parameter ρ is updated by multiplying it with a pre-determined positive
constant α. By using the value of the penalty parameter, Lagrangian multipliers are updated con-
sidering the distance between scenario solutions and the consensus parameter value. At the end
of each iteration, the termination criterion is checked. If all ﬁrst-stage solutions are identical, the
algorithm stops. Otherwise, the algorithm returns to step 2 and solves scenario subproblems with
the updated values of the multipliers and consensus parameter.
4.2
Previous Studies on the Progressive Hedging Algorithm
Hvattum et al. (2009), Gul et al. (2015), Gade et al. (2016), Watson et al. (2011), Cheung et al.
(2015), Mulvey and Vladimirou (1991), Goncalves et al. (2012), Atakan et al. (2018), and Hel-
gason et al. (1991) used PHA in application areas such as inventory-routing, surgery scheduling,
unit commitment, hydrothermal systems, and ﬁsheries management. A number of modiﬁcations to
improve convergence behavior and computation times of the PHA were suggested by Watson and
Woodruﬀ(2011), who classiﬁed the changes made in the algorithm in four categories: computing
eﬀective ρ values, accelerating convergence, termination criteria and detecting cyclic behaviour.
Cheung et al.
(2015) solved scenario subproblems approximately in the early iterations of the
PHA, since obtaining exact solutions from the scenario subproblems is not a necessity for the algo-
rithm. PHA was extended with some innovations such as dynamic multiple penalty parameters and
heuristic intermediate solutions in Hvattum et al. (2009), where the penalty parameter is increased
21

when the distance between the scenario solutions and the consensus parameter increases. When
the consensus parameters at consecutive iterations moves farther away from each other, the penalty
parameter is reduced. Mulvey and Vladimirou (1991) also applied a dynamic penalty parameter
update method. The technique can prohibit stalling and ill-conditioning solution structures, which
occurs when the algorithm gets stuck at suboptimal solutions.
Algorithm 1 Progressive Hedging Algorithm
1: Step 1: Initialization:
2: Let v=1
3:
ρ1(v) = ρ10
4:
µω(v)
i
= 0
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
5: Step 2: Solving scenario-subproblems:
6: if v = 1;
7: For each ω ∈Ω; ignore Lagrangian and quadratic penalty terms and solve
8:
scenario subproblems to obtain:
9:
aω
i
(v)
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
10: end if
11: else
12: For each ω ∈Ω; solve scenario subproblems to obtain:
13:
aω
i
(v)
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
14: end else
15: Step 3: Calculate the consensus parameters:
16:
ˆai =
X
ω∈Ω
pωaω(v)
i
∀i ∈I
17: Step 4: Update penalty parameters:
18: if v > 1;
19:
ρ(v+1) = αρ(v)
20: end if
21: Step 5: Update Lagrange Multipliers:
22:
µω
i
(v+1) = µω
i
(v) + ρ(v)(aω
i
(v) −ˆai)
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
23: Step 6: Termination:
24: if all ﬁrst stage solutions are the same, then stop.
25:
aω(v)
i
= ˆai
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
26: end if
27: else
28:
Set v= v+1;
29: end else
30: return to Step 2
4.3
Modiﬁcations on the Progressive Hedging Algorithm
When the PHA is applied to the Chemotherapy Appointment Scheduling Problem, even single-
scenario subproblems require substantial computational times, which deem realistically-sized in-
22

stances of the problem impossible to solve in reasonable time. A number of issues contribute to
this issue. The ﬁrst one is the quadratic term used in the objective function of the subproblems,
whereas the second one is the choice of penalty parameter update method. We investigate other
improvement ideas on the PHA by detecting and favoring solutions found in the majority of the
scenario subproblems, detecting cycles, and varying the optimality gap parameter of CPLEX to
obtain approximate scenario subproblem solutions to decrease solution times. We also propose a
lower bounding scheme for nurse overtime by beneﬁting from the structure of the PHA. In the
following sections, these modiﬁcations on the PHA are presented.
4.3.1
Handling the Quadratic Term in the Objective Function
The scenario subproblems solved at each iteration of the PHA includes a quadratic term in the
objective function, which makes them diﬃcult to solve. This term can be expanded as:
ρ
2
X
i∈I
X
w∈Ω
||aω
i −ˆai||2 = ρ
2
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
(aω
i )2 −ρ
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
(aω
i ˆai) + |Ω|ρ
2
X
i∈I
ˆai2
(32)
Since ˆai is a parameter, the only quadratic part is the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of (32).
Our aim is to use a method to handle this term in a fast manner without sacriﬁcing signiﬁcantly
from the solution quality. For this end, we experiment with three diﬀerent approaches: (1) non-
linear optimization using commercial solvers, (2) second-order cone programming (SOCP), and (3)
linearization of the quadratic term.
For the ﬁrst approach, Nonlinear Optimization package of CPLEX 12.8 is used. The quadratic
term is included in the objective function without making any change in the algorithm. In the second
approach, additional variables are deﬁned to convert the quadratic term into an appropriate format
for second-order cone programming. For the third approach, two alternatives are available in the
PHA literature. The quadratic term is linearized using a piecewise linear function in Watson et al.
(2012). Alternatively, Helseth (2016) dynamically approximated the quadratic term by beneﬁting
from tangent line approximation. In particular, linear cuts that approximate the quadratic term
are added to scenario subproblems to obtain a linear objective function.
Based on our preliminary experiments, we use the third approach, since it outperforms the
other two in terms of the computational times signiﬁcantly, without substantial sacriﬁce in terms
of solution quality. Due to the use of linearized penalty components in the objective function,
we call our algorithm as the linearized progressive hedging algorithm (LPHA). The linearization
23

method that we use, which is based on the approach in Helseth (2016), is explained next.
A general form of Taylor’s approximation, f(m) ≈f(n) + f′(n)(m −n), can be used to derive a
cut that provides a lower bound for the nonlinear term. If the cut is generated at diﬀerent operating
points (n) iteratively, a close approximation of (aω
i )2 is obtained after some iterations.
In our case, at iteration v, the value of (aω
i )2 is approximated based on the operating point
(aω(v−1)
i
) which represents the appointment time set for patient i in scenario ω at the previous
iteration. Note that an alternative operating point would be selected as ˆai calculated in iteration
(v −1). However, we choose the former alternative based on the results of preliminary experiments.
After replacing (aω
i )2 by a new variable gω
i , the proposed linear cuts are then formulated as follows:
(gω
i ) ≥(aω(v−1)
i
)2 + 2(aω(v−1)
i
)(aω
i −aω(v−1)
i
)
(33)
The cuts in (33) are added to scenario subproblems at each iteration until it is noticed that the
value of gω
i does not change from one iteration to another.
4.3.2
Choice of the Penalty Parameter Update Method
In the PHA, the penalty parameter ρ is updated by multiplying it with constant α in every con-
secutive iteration. When the multiplier α is set to 1, the penalty parameter becomes stable in the
algorithm. Previous studies have shown that low values of ρ tend to improve the quality of the so-
lutions at the expense of longer computational times. On the other hand, high values of the penalty
parameter can lead to oscillations in the solutions and the algorithm generally converges faster to
a low-quality solution. Therefore, it is crucial to ﬁnd a balance between solution time and quality
using an appropriate level of the penalty parameter over iterations. Designing a well-performing
penalty update method is challenging due to this trade-oﬀ. Besides, there is no straightforward
way to select the initial value of the penalty parameter; it is mostly dependent on the objective
function coeﬃcients and scales of the decision variable values in the problem.
One way to resolve the trade-oﬀbetween solution quality and computational time is to apply a
dynamic penalty parameter scheme by updating the value of the parameter in subsequent iterations.
In this study, we use a method inspired by the approach discussed in Hvattum and Lokketangen
(2009). In this method, two parameters are made use of by exploiting the relationship between
the primal and dual. The ﬁrst parameter, denoted by ∆p measures the square of the diﬀerence
between consensus parameters for the appointment time of each patient at consecutive iterations.
24

If ∆p is increasing, this means that consensus parameter is changing at a greater rate. This also
implies that the current value of consensus parameter is not promising, and therefore it is risky to
enforce convergence immediately. The second parameter, denoted by ∆d, compares the convergence
behaviour of the ﬁrst-stage variable to the consensus parameter at consecutive iterations. If ∆d is
increasing, this indicates that the ﬁrst-stage variables in diﬀerent scenario subproblems are farther
away from the consensus parameter.
In our implementation of the penalty parameter update method, when ∆d increases in consec-
utive iterations, penalty parameter ρ is multiplied by a constant α that is greater than 1. By this
way, the algorithm is more inclined to converge faster. If the diﬀerence between ∆d in consecutive
iterations is not positive, the behaviour of ∆p is observed. If ∆p is increasing, the penalty parame-
ter is reduced by a factor of 1
α. If both consecutive ∆p and ∆d diﬀerences are negative, the current
penalty parameter is preserved.
Based on preliminary results, we observe that penalty parameter can quickly climb to very large
values as a result of multiplying with α. In terms of convergence, higher penalty parameter values
lead the algorithm to prematurely converge to suboptimal solutions. To avoid this issue, the value
of penalty parameter is bounded above by a pre-determined parameter ρu, so that the algorithm
can converge to a higher quality solution.
It is also observed in our preliminary experiments that keeping the penalty parameter small is
beneﬁcial in terms of solution quality. However, if the predeﬁned bound for the penalty parameter
is kept smaller than needed during the iterations, this may result in excessive computational times.
To avoid this, we preserve a small bound at the earlier iterations to obtain high quality solutions,
and then we increase the limit in the later iterations to achieve fast convergence.
The details
of the penalty update method is provided in Algorithm 2. In the algorithm, ρu
1 and ρu
2 refer to
two diﬀerent penalty parameter limits, where ρu
1 < ρu
2. Furthermore, iterlimit corresponds to the
iteration value at which the upper bound is changed from ρu
1 to ρu
2.
4.3.3
Cycling and Majority Value Detection
Cycles are frequently observed within a typical implementation of the PHA. This behaviour may
prevent convergence. We beneﬁt from the idea of cycling prevention suggested by Watson and
Woodruﬀ(2011) to overcome this. The appointment time values may appear identical over several
consecutive PHA iterations. The direct consequence of this is that the consensus parameter values
remain constant over the iterations. On the other hand, Lagrangian multipliers change in every
25

Algorithm 2 Penalty Update Method with Limit
1: ∆p(v) =
X
i∈P
( ˆai(v) −ˆai(v−1))2
2: ∆d(v) =
X
i∈P
X
ω∈Ω
(aω(v)
i
−ˆai(v))2
3: if
v ≤iterlimit
4:
ρu = ρu
1
5: else
6:
ρu = ρu
2
7: if ∆d(v) −∆d(v−1) > 0
&
ρ(v) < ρu;
8:
ρ(v+1) = αρ(v)
9: elseif ∆d(v) −∆d(v−1) > 0
10:
ρ(v+1) = ρu
11: elseif ∆p(v) −∆p(v−1) > 0
12:
ρ(v+1) = 1
αρ(v)
13: elseif ρ(v) ≤ρu;
14:
ρ(v+1) = ρ(v)
15: else ρ(v+1) = ρu
iteration, since we update their values using Step 5 of Algorithm 1.
While updating the Lagrangian multipliers, the diﬀerences between appointment time values
and consensus parameter are penalized by multiplying it with a penalty parameter. Due to this
reason, Lagrangian multipliers vary over iterations even if the appointment time and consensus
parameter values stay the same. Hence, any cycling behaviour of the algorithm can be detected by
examining the behaviour of the Lagrangian multipliers.
Watson and Woodruﬀ(2011) used a hashing scheme to detect cycles. In our case, we would
like to detect cycles in integer appointment times for each patient. Therefore, we have to check the
behavior of the Lagrangian multipliers associated with each patient. In their approach, Watson
and Woodruﬀ(2011) ﬁrst generated hash weights for each scenario (zω). In our algorithm, hash
weights are the random numbers between 0 and 1. These hash weights are then multiplied with
the Lagrangian multipliers (µω
i ). Hash value for each patient is calculated in every iteration as:
hi =
X
ω∈Ω
zωµω(v)
i
∀i ∈I
(34)
Note that hi = 0 at iteration v = 1, as µω(1)
i
= 0. If zω values are set equal to the probability of
occurrence of each scenario (pω), then hi would be zero for v > 1 due to the reason brieﬂy explained
next. Since µω
i
(v+1) = ρ(v)(aω
i
(v) −P
ω∈Ωpωaω(v)
i
) for all i ∈I, ω ∈Ωat v = 1, P
ω∈Ωpωµω(2)
i
= 0.
26

By induction, it can also be veriﬁed that P
ω∈Ωpωµω(v)
i
= 0 for all v. Therefore, zω is not set as
pω in our experiments.
To detect cycling, we compare values of hi in consecutive iterations. Since the continuous values
of hash weights and Lagrangian multipliers may result in non-integer hash values, we compare the
hash values of patients in consecutive iterations by using a small threshold value. If the diﬀerence
between the hash values are smaller than the threshold value over three consecutive iterations, it
is considered as the indicator of a cycle. The cycle then needs to be broken to maintain algorithm
convergence.
After a cycle is detected, the appointment time for patient i can be ﬁxed to a certain value.
There might be diﬀerent approaches for ﬁxing the appointment time, which include the minimum
and maximum appointment times observed among all scenario subproblem solutions for that patient
in the previous iteration. Based on our preliminary experiments, we ﬁx the appointment time to
the one that is most repeatedly observed among subproblem solutions, which we call the majority
value. We use this approach after the ﬁrst 50 iterations of the PHA, since there is high variation
in the appointment times of a patient across diﬀerent scenarios in the beginning iterations. The
coupled implementation of cycle detection and variable ﬁxing methods ensures the convergence of
the PHA to a local optimum in ﬁnitely many steps.
A common observation in our preliminary experiments is that for many patients, the appoint-
ment times for a majority of the scenarios converge quickly, whereas those of the remaining scenarios
fail to converge for many iterations. To overcome this, we ﬁx the appointment time of a patient
if there is convergence in 80% of the scenarios. Although this may reduce the solution quality, it
signiﬁcantly reduces computational times.
4.3.4
Varying CPLEX optimality gap value in the subproblems
In the earlier iterations of the PHA, computation times to solve the subproblems are longer, since
the algorithm uses lower values of penalty parameter ρ. However, the PHA does not need optimal
solutions of the subproblems for convergence.
We may heuristically solve the subproblems to
decrease solution times. For this purpose, we test the idea proposed by Watson and Woodruﬀ
(2011), where the CPLEX optimality gap value for the subproblems is varied according to the
convergence behaviour.
In particular, it is monotonically decreased by checking the following
27

condition:
gapv+1 = min
(
X
i∈I, ˆai(v)̸=0
X
ω∈Ω
|aω(v)
i
−ˆai(v)|
ˆai(v)
, gapv
)
(35)
The gap value is decreased if the appointment times of the patients move closer to the consensus
parameter. Otherwise, we keep the gap value equal to that of the previous iteration. The initial
gap value is determined according to the results of the preliminary experiments.
Using approximate solutions within the PHA may either improve solution quality by making
greater amount of iterations or reduce it because of the low-quality solutions particularly at the
earlier iterations. The details of this procedure and results are discussed in Section 5.
4.3.5
Lower Bounds on Total Nurse Overtime and Chair Idle Time
In the ﬁrst iteration of the PHA, the scenario subproblems are solved without adding any La-
grangian or quadratic terms. Since the durations are known in each subproblem, waiting times
for all patients would be reduced to zero without causing an increase in the total overtime or idle
time values. In other words, the trade-oﬀbetween waiting time and the sum of other measures
disappears as the non-anticipativity constraint is totally omitted under this setting. Then, nurse
overtime and chair idle time remain as the challenging terms in the subproblem objective function.
Note that these two measures do not conﬂict with each other. Therefore, the resulting sum of
nurse overtime and chair idle time values in a scenario subproblem solution in the ﬁrst iteration
constitutes a lower bound for the associated scenario subproblem in the subsequent iterations.
5
Computational Experiments
In this section, we discuss the computational experiments for the Chemotherapy Appointment
Scheduling Problem. We test the methods using data gathered from the Outpatient Chemotherapy
Unit at Hacettepe Oncology Hospital from November 2017 to March 2018. The data set includes
realized pre-medication and infusion times as well as estimated treatment durations for all patients.
In our experiments, Microsoft Visual C++ 2019 is used for the implementation of the algorithm
using CPLEX 12.9 Concert Technology. The computations are performed with Intel (R) Core (TM)
i7-9750H CPU @2.60 GHz and 16GB RAM. We conduct each experiment on a problem instance
set that consists of 10 instances. We generate those problem instances by sampling pre-medication
28

and infusion durations in our data set.
In Section 5.1, the descriptive statistics on the data set is provided and the problem instance
generation approach is discussed. The method proposed to improve scenario subproblem solution
times is tested in Section 5.2. The performance of the LPHA is assessed in Section 5.3, whereas
sensitivity analysis on model parameters is conducted to generate managerial insights in Section
5.4. Finally, the value of stochastic solution (VSS) is estimated in Section 5.5.
5.1
Data Description and Problem Instance Generation
Our data set consists of the estimated and actual pre-medication and treatment durations of 204
patients we have collected data on over 11 diﬀerent days. The total treatment duration for these
patients ranges between 16 and 240 minutes. In particular, pre-medication duration varies between
0 and 36 minutes with the average of 15.3 minutes. Infusion duration changes between 16 and 217
minutes, and the average is 112.5 minutes. Furthermore, a 95% conﬁdence interval for the means of
pre-medication and infusion durations are [14.61, 16.09] and [104.56, 120.35] minutes, respectively.
We next compare the realized treatment durations with the estimated durations. The data set
indicates that 59% of the patients were allocated less time than needed, whereas the remaining 41%
were allocated more than the necessary amount. Furthermore, the distribution of patient groups
(by estimated duration) varies signiﬁcantly among diﬀerent half-shifts. To avoid sampling bias
due to this reason, we generate representative half-shifts in our instances, rather than replicating
any of the half-shifts. In Figure 2, the comparison of actual and predicted treatment times can
be observed on a scatter plot. In horizontal and vertical axes, the predicted and actual treatment
times are provided, respectively.
The value of mean absolute percent error (MAPE) is 16.9%,
which shows a signiﬁcant variability in observed treatment time values compared to predicted
values. Furthermore, Figure 2 also indicates an underestimation of the actual times of treatment
times shorter than 150 minutes, and overestimation of those longer than three hours. Therefore,
the manager of the chemotherapy clinic should consider a scheduling model where the variability
of treatment times are taken into account.
In the Hacettepe Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit, the schedules are designed for half-day pe-
riods. To mimic the current practice followed in the unit, we also design half-day schedules. We
generate each problem instance by sampling pre-medication and infusion durations from the data
set. As can also be seen in Figure 2, there are 21 discrete groups based on the estimated treatment
duration of the patient. Since each half-shift consists of 7–8 patients and some of the 21 groups have
29

Figure 2: Comparison of actual and predicted treatment times
Table 2: Treatment duration intervals (in minutes) and their frequencies in the data set
Patient
Estimated
Associated
Actual pre-medication
Actual infusion
Class
interval
probability
interval
interval
1
[20, 45]
26.96%
[0, 14]
[16, 44]
2
(45, 100]
7.85%
[6, 35]
[29, 80]
3
(100, 150]
33.33%
[8, 26]
[74, 132]
4
(150, 240]
31.86%
[6, 27]
[125, 217]
very limited number of observations, we cluster these into four larger classes with cut-oﬀs of 45,
100, 150 and 240 minutes of estimated treatment time. For each class, the actual pre-medication
and infusion durations are analyzed. The intervals for the realized pre-medication and infusion
durations for the deﬁned classes as well as the probability of observing the deﬁned classes in the
data set are provided in Table 2.
To generate the treatment duration for a patient, we follow the following procedure: We ﬁrst
draw a random number between 0 and 1 and use the associated probabilities in Table 2 in order to
determine the patient’s class. Next, pre-medication and infusion durations of this patient are deter-
mined by assuming a uniform distribution within the actual pre-medication and infusion intervals
in Table 2 for her class. To justify the use of the uniform distribution for these times, we provide
the chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt test results and plots of ﬁtted vs. actual durations in Appendix C.
We generate a diﬀerent set of durations for this patient in each scenario by taking into account her
class. We then repeat this process for each patient in each instance. In generating these instances,
we also aim to ensure that the total estimated treatment time results in an expected overtime
30

Table 3: Eﬀect of varying initial CPLEX optimality gap value on the objective value run time (in
seconds), and number of iterations of the LPHA
Initial gap = default
Initial Gap = 0.10
Initial Gap = 0.15
Instance
Objective
Time
Iter
Objective
Time
Iter
Objective
Time
Iter
1 8 50
48.28
1491.97
78
48.46
2123.48
129
47.78
2357.88
128
2 8 50
39.72
5444.85
107
46.82
3726.02
111
47.44
7092.87
121
3 8 50
47.99
2467.34
96
60.61
2222.53
121
59.76
3117.67
113
4 8 50
30.40
5137.10
127
34.95
2704.92
109
38.31
2964.76
172
5 8 50
49.52
2037.69
103
54.03
3213.19
127
54.05
3623.33
117
6 8 50
50.39
2266.95
120
49.05
3019.57
121
49.45
2705.13
118
7 8 50
38.97
4881.50
103
45.65
5633.31
123
47.76
6575.99
141
8 8 50
53.21
3140.59
105
53.07
2969.72
126
57.76
3111.89
112
9 8 50
51.96
1449.22
108
57.64
2949.11
123
58.42
3519.49
111
10 8 50
50.09
2262.28
94
48.46
4049.13
123
48.97
3730.82
116
Average
46.05
3057.95
104
49.87
3173.54
121
50.97
3879.98
125
around 60 minutes per nurse, in line with the requirements of the unit. For each instance, we set
the overtime limit L large enough to avoid infeasibility, but also small enough to avoid unfair nurse
schedules. In our experiments, the overtime value for any nurse in any scenario does not exceed 147
minutes. Furthermore, none of our instances results in zero overtime, which is another indication
that our instances are generated in line with the actual assignment of patients to half-shifts.
Our instances are labeled as i j k, where i, j, and k refer to the instance number, number of
patients, and number of scenarios, respectively. Note that we provide the explicit composition of
patient classes considered in each of the 10 instances in Appendix D.
5.2
Tests for varying CPLEX optimality gap value in the subproblems
A technique for solving scenario subproblems approximately based on optimality gap values that
vary over iterations was introduced in Section 4.3.4. The optimality gap values exhibit monotoni-
cally nonincreasing behavior over iterations due to the given rule. We perform experiments to see
the eﬀects of this technique on the computational times and quality of solutions by starting with
two diﬀerent initial optimality gap values of 10% and 15%. The results of the experiments are
presented in Table 3. In these experiments, the number of patients, nurses and chairs are set as 8,
2, and 4, respectively.
The results are compared with the version of the LPHA that uses default CPLEX optimality
gap value while solving subproblems. There is no guarantee that the overall computation times
decrease when the optimality gap is increased, because the algorithm may converge after larger
amount of iterations. Indeed, the one that uses default CPLEX optimality gap value performs the
best in terms of solution quality and run time on average. Due to insuﬃcient basis for the use of
31

rule, we do not vary the optimality gap in our further experiments.
We also test various parameters of the LPHA to determine the best values to use in further
experiments. The details of these experiments are provided Appendix E. Consequently, we set the
step size α as 2, penalty parameter ρ as 0.0001, upper bound ρu
1 for the penalty parameter as 0.1,
and the iteration limit as 100.
5.3
Assessment of the LPHA Performance
In this section, we initially evaluate the performance of the LPHA by conducting comparisons with
optimal solutions. Next, the LPHA solutions are compared with the baseline schedule (i.e., actual
schedule of the particular outpatient chemotherapy unit at Hacettepe Oncology Hospital). Finally,
the LPHA is tested against commonly used scheduling heuristics from the literature.
5.3.1
Comparison with Optimal Solutions
To validate the performance of the LPHA, we ﬁrst compare our solutions to optimal solutions
for instances that can be solved to optimality by CPLEX. Since CPLEX cannot ﬁnd the optimal
solutions in three hours of time limit even for problem instances having 8 patients, 5 scenarios, 2
nurses and 4 chairs, we decrease the number of patients to 7 for these experiments. We use ﬁve
diﬀerent λ values on 10 diﬀerent instances.
On average, CPLEX spends approximately 100 seconds to ﬁnd the optimal solution, whereas
the LPHA spends approximately 40 seconds.
The average optimality gap for the LPHA solu-
tions is 5.64%, which shows that the LPHA ﬁnds high quality solutions within signiﬁcantly lower
computational times than CPLEX.
Using these instances, we are also able to observe the structure of optimal solutions. For this end,
Figure 3 shows the optimal chair and nurse schedules for the ﬁrst two scenarios of the ﬁrst instance
in this set. One common theme in both solutions is the tight scheduling of appointment times
in the beginning of the shift until all chairs are occupied. The remaining patients are scheduled
to arrive in sequence based on the expected departure times of the patients currently receiving
treatment, with some buﬀer time to avoid waiting. Indeed, scenario 1 results in only 2 minutes
of patient waiting (for patient 2), whereas there is no patient waiting in scenario 2. Scenario 1
also results in no overtime, as patients arriving towards the end of the shift need less time for
treatment compared to scenario 2, where 7 minutes of overtime is needed for nurse 2 to complete
the treatment of patient 3.
32

Scenario 1
Chair 1
4
1
Chair 2
5
Chair 3
7
6
Chair 4
2
3
Nurse 1
5
2
3
6
Nurse 2
4
7
1
60
120
180
H = 240
Scenario 2
Chair 1
4
1
Chair 2
5
6
Chair 3
7
Chair 4
2
3
Nurse 1
5
2
6
Nurse 2
4
7
1
3
60
120
180
H = 240
Figure 3: Optimal 4-hour chair and nurse schedules for two scenarios of Instance 1, where each
number corresponds to a patient and the appointment times of patients are a1 = 52, a2 = 16,
a3 = 163, a4 = a5 = 0, a6 = 182, and a7 = 13
33

From Figure 3, we also observe the importance of assigning chairs and nurses to patients upon
arrival, rather than a priori.
For example, ﬁxing the chair assignment of patients 5, 6, and 7
over all possible scenarios would result in either waiting of patients or nurse overtime, unless more
resources are added. These scenarios also reveal the importance of relaxing the slot-based scheduling
structure, since hourly or 2-hourly slots would lead to more patient waiting time and/or more nurse
overtime in both scenarios.
5.3.2
Comparison with the Baseline Schedule
To demonstrate the beneﬁt of using LPHA to create schedules at the Outpatient Chemotherapy
Unit at Hacettepe Oncology Hospital, we compare the LPHA solutions with the baseline schedule.
Since the LPHA solves instances that represent half-day shifts, we generate two schedules using our
algorithm for a representative day in our data set. The resulting morning and afternoon schedules
are compared with the corresponding shifts of the baseline schedule for the same day on Table 3.
Note that we set λ1, λ2, λ3 values as 0.3, 0.3, 0.4, respectively. The number of patients, nurses and
chairs are ﬁxed as 8, 2, and 4 in these experiments, respectively.
While selecting the day for schedule comparison, we consider the percentage of patient classes
observed in our data set, which is given on Table 2. We then identify a day in which the patient
class composition is consistent with those average values. It should be noted here that the ﬁxed-
time slots used by the Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit start at 8:00 and 10:30 for the morning
shift, and 13:00 and 15:30 for the afternoon shift. Since the chair set considered in each instance
consists of four chairs and eight patients are scheduled for the set at each shift, four patients are
asked to arrive at the beginning of each time slot in the baseline schedule. The LPHA schedule
is also generated based on the same patient class composition.
Then, using the same scenario
set for treatment durations, the baseline schedule is compared with the LPHA schedule. To ﬁnd
the performance measures associated with the baseline schedule for each shift, the second-stage
problem of the SMIP is solved.
Table 4 compares the LPHA and baseline schedules with respect to average waiting time,
nurse overtime and chair idle time. All three measures are improved by the LPHA at both shifts.
The use of ﬁxed-length slots at the Outpatient Chemotherapy Unit explains the reason behind
the comprehensive improvement. The scope of improvement is particularly large with respect to
average waiting time. The tendency to underestimate the majority of the appointment durations
in the unit results in excessive wait amounts for patients. Note that the rate of reduction of nurse
34

Table 4: Average patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time of the LPHA and baseline
schedules
Morning Shift
Afternoon Shift
Waiting time
Overtime
Idle time
Waiting time
Overtime
Idle time
LPHA
11.70
2.78
169.98
30.88
11.28
104.14
Baseline
86.66
18.84
185.58
146.94
15.70
110.82
overtime is also notable, particularly for the morning shift.
5.3.3
Comparison with Scheduling Heuristics
To compare the performance of the LPHA with practice in the other outpatient chemotherapy
units, we assess its performance against various combinations of sequencing and appointment time
setting heuristics from the relevant literature. We sequence patients using four diﬀerent sequencing
heuristics: increasing mean of treatment time (SPT), decreasing mean of treatment time (LPT),
increasing variance of treatment time (VAR), and increasing coeﬃcient of variation of treatment
time (CoV). We consider a job hedging heuristic to determine the estimated lengths of patient
appointments.
Before discussing the implementation details of the heuristics, the structure of the model in
terms of ﬁrst and second-stage decisions is investigated. When values for patient precedence bij
and appointment time ai variables become known in the ﬁrst-stage, it is then easy to settle on
the second-stage decisions. In some appointment scheduling studies, such as Mancilla and Storer
(2012), the second-stage subproblems are considered as network ﬂow problems. Having multiple
resources in our case makes the subproblems more challenging. However, the optimal nurse and
chair assignment decisions at this stage can still be made easily using a simple rule that checks
bij values. The rule would favor the patient preceding others in the list while assigning the ﬁrst
available nurse and chair. Next, actual treatment start time for each patient can be determined
accordingly, and their waiting times are revealed according to the discharge time of the previously
scheduled patients. By checking discharge times of the patients treated by a nurse, overtime value
for each nurse can be easily calculated. Since solving the second-stage problem is easy, ﬁnding a
heuristic approach to solve the ﬁrst-stage problem is a more critical issue. After setting the ﬁrst-
stage variable values, we call CPLEX rather then using the simple rule to solve the second-stage
problem, as CPLEX ﬁnds the optimal solution within a very short amount of time.
To create schedules, we ﬁrst choose one of the four sequencing heuristics discussed above. There
are two diﬀerent durations that may aﬀect the sequencing rules, namely average pre-medication
35

and infusion durations. We use average treatment time, which is equal to the summation of those
two values.
After the sequence is ﬁxed, we utilize the job hedging heuristic to set patient appointment times
(Yellig and Mackulak, 1997). We apply the heuristic in accordance with the approach also used in
Gul (2018), Castaing et al. (2016), and Gul et al. (2011). We sort the durations for the relevant
patient class in the data set in non-increasing order, and calculate the kth percentile of the set to
use it for determining the estimated treatment duration of a patient. Since there are two diﬀerent
chemotherapy durations in the problem, the percentile values associated with them are separately
determined, and the summation of those two values is considered while setting patient appointment
times. The steps of the scheduling heuristic that combines job hedging with one of the sequencing
heuristics, namely LPT, is demonstrated in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Job Hedging Heuristics for LPT Rule
1: Calculate the average treatment duration for every patient using avgi =
P
ω∈Ω(sω
i +tω
i )
|Ω|
∀i ∈I.
2: Sort the values of the avgi according to LPT rule, assign index numbers to patients and sequence
the patients according to their index numbers.
3: Assign bij values according to index numbers found at Step 2.
4: Set appointment times according to given percentile level of job hedging heuristic. If the index of
the patient is less than or equal to the both of the numbers of chair and nurse, the appointment
time of the associated patient is assigned as zero. The appointment times of the other patients
are set sequentially according to their index numbers by checking the ﬁrst estimated available
time of nurse and chair simultaneously.
5: Call CPLEX to obtain second-stage decisions and objective function value.
We vary the percentile values between 40% and 65% in increments of 5% for all sequencing
rules and ﬁx the values of λ1, λ2, and λ3 as 0.1, 0.8, and 0.1, respectively. Table 3 compares the
performances of the heuristics with that of the LPHA by illustrating the average gap between the
solutions of the LPHA and each combination of sequencing and job hedging heuristic for a speciﬁc
percentile level.
The results show that the LPHA outperforms all combinations of heuristics signiﬁcantly. On the
average, LPT rule performs better than the other sequencing rules. This result makes sense since
the patients with longer treatment durations are assigned to the earlier hours of the day also at the
outpatient chemotherapy unit in the Hacettepe Oncology Hospital. Note that the LPHA improves
the solutions of even the best-performing and commonly used rule by 37.7%. Furthermore, the
percentiles 45%, 40%, 50%, and 40% used for assigning appointment times are the best in terms of
solution quality on average for sequencing rules SPT, LPT, VAR, and CoV, respectively.
36

Table 5: Average percent gaps of diﬀerent sequencing heuristics from the LPHA solutions under
varying job hedging levels
Job hedging level
SPT gap
LPT gap
VAR gap
CoV gap
40%
80.1
23.5
71.3
57.2
45%
78.5
26.1
71.7
57.6
50%
83.2
32.6
70.5
60.5
55%
79.8
37.8
75.9
63.7
60%
89.7
48.3
80.2
69.5
65%
92.5
57.9
83.6
74.5
Average
84.0
37.7
75.5
63.8
Table 6: Average percent gaps of diﬀerent sequencing heuristics from the LPHA solutions
Sequencing Rule
Average Gap
SPT-opt
78.9
LPT-opt
11.9
VAR-opt
69.9
CoV-opt
46.3
We also compare the LPHA with commonly used sequencing rules without using job hedging.
The sequence of patients is ﬁxed with one of the four aforementioned sequencing rules. Then,
CPLEX is called to determine the appointment times and nurse/chair assignments. We call these
modiﬁed versions of the heuristics as SPT-opt, LPT-opt, VAR-opt, and CoV-opt, respectively.
Although we ﬁx the sequence of the patients, assigning appointment times to the patients still
remains a challenging optimization problem for CPLEX due to the uncertainty of the treatment
durations. Therefore, we put a three-hour time limit on CPLEX and report the best solution for the
given sequence. In Table 6, we compare the results in terms of average gap between the solutions
of the LPHA and each type of sequencing rules.
As shown in Table 6, the LPHA outperforms all heuristics, even when the appointment times
and second-stage decisions are determined by a mathematical model, rather than simple job hedging
rules. LPT-opt, which outperforms all other heuristics, performs 11.9% worse on average than the
LPHA in terms of solution quality.
To further investigate the diﬀerences in the solutions between the LPHA and benchmark heuris-
tics, Table 7 provides the appointment times for the eight patients, expected waiting time, over-
time, chair idle time, and objective value of the instance 1 8 50 under various heuristic approaches.
Comparison of the LPHA appointment times to those under LPT-opt shows that the order of the
patients in both cases is very similar and the diﬀerences between the appointment times are within
37

Table 7: Appointment times (in minutes) for the eight patients, expected waiting time (EWT),
expected nurse overtime (EOT), expected chair idle time (EIT), and objective values under diﬀerent
heuristic approaches for the instance 1 8 50
Patient
LPHA
LPT-opt
LPT+40%
LPT+65%
SPT-opt
SPT+40%
SPT+65%
1
225
222
191
214
0
0
0
2
17
11
14
20
52
34
40
3
180
182
176
195
6
8
11
4
148
148
170
195
8
8
11
5
0
0
0
0
75
66
83
6
0
17
16
22
39
33
40
7
207
205
186
214
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
121
134
147
EWT
51.48
50.44
76.36
53.26
38.76
43.16
18.14
EOT
54.20
57.88
65.38
87.64
96.48
87.90
93.56
EIT
69.66
74.56
74.82
139.90
82.26
78.10
92.00
Objective
55.47
58.80
67.42
89.43
81.29
82.45
85.86
17 minutes. The LPHA sacriﬁces some waiting time to improve the nurse overtime, for which the
objective weight is higher. The diﬀerences in the appointment times become more signiﬁcant as
job hedging heuristics are used and percentile values are increased, which explains the diﬀerence
between the objective values. Under SPT, the order of patients is almost completely reversed from
that under the LPHA. This results in shorter expected patient waiting times, but substantially in-
creases the nurse overtime, leading to the inferiority of the SPT-based heuristics to the LPT-based
counterparts and the LPHA.
Note that the relative performances of sequencing rules shown on Table 6 are consistent with the
results of Table 5. Even though the average gaps improve when CPLEX is used to set appointment
times instead of job hedging heuristics, the ranks of the sequencing rules do not change. Therefore,
the LPT would be preferred by the managers creating schedules without using any sophisticated
tool. However, the most important ﬁnding of this section is that the managers need a sophisticated
approach rather than simple rules to determine patient sequences.
5.4
Sensitivity Analysis on Model Parameters
In this section, we present a sensitivity analysis on the model parameters to generate managerial
insights. The value of λ and number of nurses and chairs are varied for this purpose.
38

Table 8: Average objective values (in minutes) and CPU times (in seconds) of the LPHA for
diﬀerent combinations of the objective weights
Objective
CPU
Waiting
Nurse
Chair
(λ1, λ2, λ3)
value
time
time
overtime
idle time
(1, 10, 10)
46.38
1919.54
142.45
45.23
37.93
(1, 2, 2)
55.73
2075.36
59.27
57.24
52.44
(1, 0.5, 0.5)
46.14
1742.22
20.99
67.03
75.54
(1, 0.1, 0.1)
20.86
1330.06
5.26
78.73
118.95
(1, 0.1, 1)
50.17
2553.53
27.32
78.02
70.24
(1, 0.5, 1)
54.33
2076.88
30.94
71.63
69.05
(1, 2, 1)
53.81
2181.50
47.13
54.74
58.62
(1, 10, 1)
51.66
1924.10
90.05
47.41
55.83
(1, 1, 0.1)
40.83
2184.99
14.87
60.74
101.42
(1, 1, 0.5)
49.29
1751.78
27.15
60.78
70.60
(1, 1, 2)
54.17
1930.14
53.75
60.42
53.61
(1, 1, 10)
49.59
2310.34
111.78
60.02
42.33
5.4.1
Impact of the λ value
The chemotherapy unit manager would typically consider the trade-oﬀbetween patient waiting
time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time while designing schedules. To illustrate the scope of this
trade-oﬀ, we vary the λ values, where (λ1,λ2,λ3) are the objective function coeﬃcients associated
with patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time, respectively. λ values equal to zero
refers to the extreme case where the related objective term is not important performance measure
for the model. We test twelve set of diﬀerent values of λ on an instance set. We ﬁx the number of
patients, nurses, and chairs to 8, 2, and 4, respectively in these experiments.
We set the λ values systematically across experiments. While the weights for any two measures
are kept the same, the weight of the third measure may be (i) one-tenth, (ii) one-half of the others,
or (iii) twice, (iv) ten times as much as the others in an experiment. After ﬁxing the weight of
waiting time as 1, our weight-setting procedure results in the weight combinations shown in the
ﬁrst column of Table 8. Note that we normalized the values of λ in the experiments so that they
could be consistent with the procedure in the other experiments.
Table 8 clearly illustrates the trade-oﬀbetween patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair
idle time with reference to λ values. Average patient waiting time decreases signiﬁcantly when only
the relative value of λ1 is increased. Average nurse overtime and chair idle time values also drop
respectively as each of the λ2 and λ3 values is increased individually while keeping the remaining
two constant. However, the impact of λ2 and λ3 on their respective performance measures is not
39

Table 9: Average objective value and CPU time (in seconds) under varying number of nurses and
chairs
Average Objective Value
Average CPU Time
|C| = 4
|C| = 5
|C| = 6
|C| = 4
|C| = 5
|C| = 6
|N| = 1
85.55
117.37
187.98
3052.16
2062.31
757.06
|N| = 2
54.34
86.70
173.95
1800.54
1469.18
776.65
|N| = 3
Not solved
82.82
172.42
Not solved
810.32
542.43
Table 10: Average waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time (in minutes) under varying
number of nurses and chairs
Waiting Time
Nurse Overtime
Chair Idle Time
|C| = 4
|C| = 5
|C| = 6
|C| = 4
|C| = 5
|C| = 6
|C| = 4
|C| = 5
|C| = 6
|N| = 1
58.20
50.12
25.16
74.16
25.71
10.76
114.61
236.55
443.02
|N| = 2
40.59
14.12
2.83
61.44
8.61
1.92
59.33
199.71
431.30
|N| = 3
Not solved
8.52
0.72
Not solved
6.14
0.67
Not solved
196.06
430.01
as dramatic as the impact of λ1 on average waiting time.
When only the λ1 value increases, both average nurse overtime and chair idle time increase.
To minimize patient waiting time, the model assigns appointment times in wider time intervals,
which leads to increased overtime and idle time values.
This shows that there exists trade-oﬀ
between patient waiting time and the sum of nurse overtime and chair idle time. When only the
λ2 is increased, average waiting time increases, but average idle time decreases. This indicates that
minimizing overtime also helps to minimize chair idle time, meaning that nurse overtime and chair
idle time are not conﬂicting measures. When only the λ3 value is increased, average waiting time
increases, while the average nurse overtime stays about the same. This implies that increasing the
λ3 value alone may not always help improve average nurse overtime. Note that the cases where
the λ values are 0 and 1 are not realistic for the unit manager. The manager may choose a λ value
between those extreme points according to the goals of the units.
5.4.2
Impact of the number of nurses and chairs
The decision maker in the chemotherapy unit would also be interested in investigating the eﬀect
of using diﬀerent numbers of chairs and nurses on the performance measures. For this purpose, we
vary the number of nurses and chairs in our instance sets between 1 and 3, and 4 and 6, respectively.
We ignore the case with 3 nurses and 4 chairs, since the corresponding nurse to chair ratio is not
realistic.
We report the average objective values, run times, and performance measures in the
objective function based on 10 instances in Tables 9 and 10.
40

Table 11: Average objective values for the mean value solution (MV), LPHA solution, and relative
VSS for varying objective weights
(λ1, λ3, λ3)
MV
LPHA
%VSS
(0.3,0.3,0.4)
58.56
54.34
7.7%
(0.2,0.6,0.2)
61.20
54.37
12.9%
(0.8,0.1,0.1)
39.67
25.12
58.8%
(0.1,0.8,0.1)
63.92
50.11
27.6%
(0.1,0.1,0.8)
66.24
50.46
32.7%
As expected, when the number of nurses is increased, the average objective value decreases.
All performance measures in the objective function (patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and
chair idle time) are improved. The increase in the number of nurses provides to have more ﬂexible
schedules without extending clinic closure time. Therefore, both nurse overtime and chair idle time
reduces. On the other hand, increase in the number of chairs results with having higher chair idle
times. Therefore, the objective function value might increase depending on the net change in the
decrease of patient waiting time and nurse overtime and increase in the chair idle time. Another
interesting issue is the change in the computation times. An increase in the number of chairs and
nurses generally makes subproblems easier to solve resulting with a reduction in the solution times.
5.5
Estimating the Value of Stochastic Solution (VSS)
VSS is a cost of excluding uncertainty while giving the ﬁrst-stage decisions. It measures the beneﬁt
of using stochastic programming solution over the mean value solution. We estimate the VSS by
calculating the diﬀerence between the expected objective value associated with the mean value
solution and the LPHA solution. In Table 11, we report the relative VSS, which represents the
percentage change in the objective values for various λ values.
As expected, VSS is always positive in our experimental runs. The LPHA improves the solutions
of the mean value problem by 27.9% on average. Therefore, considering uncertainty in chemother-
apy appointment scheduling problem is valuable to minimize total weighted sum of patient waiting
time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time. Note that the beneﬁt of uncertainty modeling is par-
ticularly signiﬁcant (with VSS% of 58.8%) for the cases where the highest priority is assigned to
patient waiting time.
41

6
Conclusion
Over the recent years, due to the increase in the prevalence of cancer, the demand for chemotherapy
units has been growing, and these units should have eﬃcient planning and scheduling structures.
In this paper, we focused on the Chemotherapy Appointment Scheduling Problem, where patients
are sequenced and assigned appointment times by considering the availability of nurses and infusion
chairs at the same time. The uncertainty in both the pre-medication and infusion durations are
considered in the study. The aim is to design an appointment schedule in order to minimize the
expected weighted sum of patient waiting time, nurse overtime, and chair idle time. A two-stage
stochastic mixed integer programming formulation is used to formulate the problem.
The uncertain durations of chemotherapy are represented with scenarios in the stochastic pro-
gramming formulation. Solving the problem even with a very few scenarios with CPLEX is compu-
tationally challenging. Therefore, a scenario decomposition based algorithm, namely the progressive
hedging algorithm, is implemented to solve the problem. The PHA is enhanced through a number
of modiﬁcations. A penalty parameter update method is proposed, where the parameters are set
dynamically and controlled using changing limits. A cycle detection method is used to guarantee
convergence of the algorithm. A variable ﬁxing procedure is incorporated to reduce overall com-
putation times. Subproblem solution times are improved through symmetry-breaking constraints
and bounds imposed on nurse overtime in the constraint set, and by linearization of the quadratic
term in the objective function. The resulting algorithm after enhancements is called as linearized
PHA (LPHA).
The proposed method is implemented based on real data from the Hacettepe Outpatient
Chemotherapy Unit.
To evaluate the performance of algorithm, the LPHA solutions are com-
pared with the CPLEX solutions and the baseline schedule. Moreover, several scheduling heuristics
are used to validate the performance of the algorithm. The results show that the LPHA outper-
forms commonly used heuristics in all cases. This ﬁnding implies that a sophisticated approach
rather than simple rules is necessary to determine patient sequences in outpatient chemotherapy
units. Furthermore, VSS is estimated to assess the value of considering uncertainty in our problem.
It is found that the LPHA improves the solutions of mean value problem signiﬁcantly. Our solution
approach can be useful for chemotherapy unit managers to evaluate the eﬀects of appointment
schedules on nurse overtime,chair idle time, and patient waiting time. The unit managers can also
observe the eﬀects of changing the level of nurses and chairs in the chemotherapy unit.
42

In a future study, the infusion schedules can be coordinated with lab test and oncologist eval-
uation schedules.
A comprehensive model can be developed to determine treatment days and
appointment times for patients simultaneously. Scenario subproblem solution routine in the LPHA
can be parallelized to reduce computational time and solve larger size problem instances. Making
the assumption of preserving patient arrival sequence throughout the whole chemotherapy unit visit
allowed us to formulate the problem as a two-stage model. A multi-stage stochastic programming
model can be formulated to study a variant of our problem by relaxing this assumption.
References
[1] Amir Ahmadi-Javid, Zahra Jalali, and Kenneth J Klassen. Outpatient appointment systems
in healthcare: A review of optimization studies. European Journal of Operational Research,
258(1):3–34, 2017.
[2] Shabbir Ahmed. A scenario decomposition algorithm for 0–1 stochastic programs. Operations
Research Letters, 41(6):565–569, 2013.
[3] Michelle Alvarado and Lewis Ntaimo. Chemotherapy appointment scheduling under uncer-
tainty using mean-risk stochastic integer programming. Health Care Management Science,
21(1):87–104, 2018.
[4] Hyun-Jung Alvarez-Oh, Hari Balasubramanian, Ekin Koker, and Ana Muriel.
Stochastic
appointment scheduling in a team primary care practice with two ﬂexible nurses and two
dedicated providers. Service Science, 10(3):241–260, 2018.
[5] Semih Atakan and Suvrajeet Sen. A progressive hedging based branch-and-bound algorithm
for mixed-integer stochastic programs. Computational Management Science, pages 1–40, 2018.
[6] Sakine Batun, Brian T. Denton, Todd R. Huschka, and Andrew J. Schaefer. Operating room
pooling and parallel surgery processing under uncertainty. INFORMS Journal on Computing,
23(2):220–237, 2011.
[7] Mehmet Begen and Maurice Queyranne. Appointment scheduling with discrete random dura-
tions. Mathematics of Operations Research, 36(2):240–257, 2011.
43

[8] Bjorn P. Berg, Brian T. Denton, S. Ayca Erdogan, and Thomas Rohleder. Optimal booking
and scheduling in outpatient procedure centers. Computers and Operations Research, 50:24–37,
2014.
[9] John R Birge and Francois Louveaux. Introduction to stochastic programming. Springer Science
& Business Media, 2011.
[10] Cancer Research UK. Worldwide cancer statistics. https://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-
professional/cancer-statistics, 2018.
[11] Jeremy Castaing, Amy Cohn, Brian T Denton, and Alon Weizer. A stochastic programming
approach to reduce patient wait times and overtime in an outpatient infusion center.
IIE
Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engineering, 6(3):111–125, 2016.
[12] Tugba Cayirli and Emre Veral. Outpatient scheduling in health care: a review of literature.
Production and Operations Management, 12(4):519–549, 2003.
[13] Kwok Cheung, Dinakar Gade, C´esar Silva-Monroy, Sarah M Ryan, Jean-Paul Watson, Roger
J-B Wets, and David L Woodruﬀ.
Toward scalable stochastic unit commitment.
Energy
Systems, 6(3):417–438, 2015.
[14] Teodor Gabriel Crainic, Xiaorui Fu, Michel Gendreau, Walter Rei, and Stein W Wallace.
Progressive hedging-based metaheuristics for stochastic network design. Networks, 58(2):114–
124, 2011.
[15] Brian Denton and Diwakar Gupta. A sequential bounding approach for optimal appointment
scheduling. IIE Transactions, 35(11):1003–1016, 2003.
[16] Brian Denton, James Viapiano, and Andrea Vogl. Optimization of surgery sequencing and
scheduling decisions under uncertainty. Health care management science, 10(1):13–24, 2007.
[17] Roxanne Dobish. Next-day chemotherapy scheduling: a multidisciplinary approach to solving
workload issues in a tertiary oncology center. Journal of Oncology Pharmacy Practice, 9(1):37–
42, 2003.
[18] Dinakar Gade, Gabriel Hackebeil, Sarah M Ryan, Jean-Paul Watson, Roger J-B Wets, and
David L Woodruﬀ. Obtaining lower bounds from the progressive hedging algorithm for stochas-
tic mixed-integer programs. Mathematical Programming, 157(1):47–67, 2016.
44

[19] Raphael EC Gon¸calves, Erlon Cristian Finardi, and Edson Luiz da Silva. Applying diﬀerent
decomposition schemes using the progressive hedging algorithm to the operation planning
problem of a hydrothermal system. Electric Power Systems Research, 83(1):19–27, 2012.
[20] Serhat Gul. A stochastic programming approach for appointment scheduling under limited
availability of surgery turnover teams. Service Science, 10(3):277–288, 2018.
[21] Serhat Gul, Brian T Denton, and John W Fowler. A progressive hedging approach for surgery
planning under uncertainty. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 27(4):755–772, 2015.
[22] Serhat Gul, Brian T Denton, John W Fowler, and Todd Huschka. Bi-criteria scheduling of
surgical services for an outpatient procedure center. Production and Operations Management,
20(3):406–417, 2011.
[23] Diwakar Gupta and Brian Denton. Appointment scheduling in health care: Challenges and
opportunities. IIE transactions, 40(9):800–819, 2008.
[24] Shoshana Hahn-Goldberg, J Christopher Beck, Michael W Carter, Maureen Trudeau, Philom-
ena Sousa, and Kathy Beattie. Solving the chemotherapy outpatient scheduling problem with
constraint programming. Journal of Applied Operational Research, 6(3):135–144, 2014.
[25] Thorkell Helgason and Stein W Wallace. Approximate scenario solutions in the progressive
hedging algorithm. Annals of Operations Research, 31(1):425–444, 1991.
[26] Arild Helseth. Stochastic network constrained hydro-thermal scheduling using a linearized
progressive hedging algorithm. Energy Systems, 7(4):585–600, 2016.
[27] Alireza F Hesaraki, Nico P Dellaert, and Ton de Kok. Generating outpatient chemotherapy ap-
pointment templates with balanced ﬂowtime and makespan. European Journal of Operational
Research, 275(1):304–318, 2019.
[28] M Heshmat, K Nakata, and A Eltawil. Solving the patient appointment scheduling problem in
outpatient chemotherapy clinics using clustering and mathematical programming. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 124:347–358, 2018.
[29] Anali Huggins, David Claudio, and Eduardo P´erez. Improving resource utilization in a cancer
clinic: an optimization model. In Proceedings of the 2014 Industrial and Systems Engineering
Research Conference, page 1444, 2014.
45

[30] Youngbum Hur, Jonathan F. Bard, and Douglas J. Morrice. Appointment scheduling at a
multidisciplinary outpatient clinic using stochastic programming. Naval Research Logistics,
2020.
[31] Lars Magnus Hvattum and Arne Løkketangen. Using scenario trees and progressive hedging
for stochastic inventory routing problems. Journal of Heuristics, 15(6):527, 2009.
[32] Kenneth J. Klassen and Reena Yoogalingam. Appointment scheduling in multi-stage outpa-
tient clinics. Health Care Management Science, 22:229–244, 2019.
[33] Qingxia Kong, Shan Li, Nan Liu, Chung-Piaw Teo, and Zhenzhen Yan. Appointment schedul-
ing under time-dependent patient no-show behavior. Management Science, forthcoming, 2019.
[34] G. Lam`e, O. Jouini, and Julie Stal-Le Cardinal. Outpatient chemotherapy planning: A liter-
ature review with insights from a case study. IIE Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engi-
neering, 6(3):127–139, 2016.
[35] Gilbert Laporte and Fran¸cois V Louveaux. The integer l-shaped method for stochastic integer
programs with complete recourse. Operations Research Letters, 13(3):133–142, 1993.
[36] A.G. Leeftink, I.M.H. Vliegen, and E.W. Hans. Stochastic integer programming for multi-
disciplinary outpatient clinic planning. Health Care Management Science, 22:53–67, 2019.
[37] Bohui Liang and Ayten Turkcan. Acuity-based nurse assignment and patient scheduling in
oncology clinics. Health Care Management Science, 19(3):207–226, 2016.
[38] Bohui Liang, Ayten Turkcan, Mehmet Erkan Ceyhan, and Keith Stuart.
Improvement of
chemotherapy patient ﬂow and scheduling in an outpatient oncology clinic.
International
Journal of Production Research, 53(24):7177–7190, 2015.
[39] Ho-Yin Mak, Ying Rong, and Jiawei Zhang. Sequencing appointments for service systems using
inventory approximations. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 16(2):251–262,
2014.
[40] Camilo Mancilla and Robert Storer. A sample average approximation approach to stochastic
appointment sequencing and scheduling. IIE Transactions, 44(8):655–670, 2012.
46

[41] Avishai Mandelbaum, Petar Momcilovic, Nikolaos Trichakis, Sarah Kadish, Ryan Leib, and
Craig A Bunnell.
Data-driven appointment-scheduling under uncertainty: The case of an
infusion unit in a cancer center. Management Science, 66(1):1–28, 2019.
[42] John M Mulvey and Hercules Vladimirou.
Applying the progressive hedging algorithm to
stochastic generalized networks. Annals of Operations Research, 31(1):399–424, 1991.
[43] National
Cancer
Institute.
Cancer
Statistics.
https://www.cancer.gov/about-
cancer/understanding/statistics, 2018. Accessed: November 2018.
[44] Eduardo Perez, Lewis Ntaimo, Cesar O. Malave, Carla Bailey, and Peter McCormack. Stochas-
tic online appointment scheduling of multi-step sequential procedures in nuclear medicine.
Health Care Management Science, 16(4):281–299, 2013.
[45] Atle Riise, Carlo Mannino, and Leonardo Lamorgese. Recursive logic-based benders’ decom-
position for multi-mode outpatient scheduling.
European Journal of Operational Research,
255(3):719–728, 2016.
[46] Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser. Causes of death. https://ourworldindata.org/causes-of-death,
2018. Accessed: November 2018.
[47] R Tyrrell Rockafellar and Roger J-B Wets. Scenarios and policy aggregation in optimization
under uncertainty. Mathematics of Operations Research, 16(1):119–147, 1991.
[48] Abdellah Sadki, Xiaolan Xie, and Franck Chauvin. Appointment scheduling of oncology out-
patients. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering,
pages 513–518. IEEE, 2011.
[49] Pablo Santib´a˜nez, Ruben Aristizabal, Martin L Puterman, Vincent S Chow, Wenhai Huang,
Christian Kollmannsberger, Travis Nordin, Nancy Runzer, and Scott Tyldesley. Operations
research methods improve chemotherapy patient appointment scheduling. The Joint Commis-
sion Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 38(12):541–AP2, 2012.
[50] Suvrajeet Sen and Julia L Higle. The c3 theorem and a d2 algorithm for large scale stochastic
mixed-integer programming: set convexiﬁcation.
Mathematical Programming, 104(1):1–20,
2005.
47

[51] Suleyman Sevinc, Ulus Ali Sanli, and Erdem Goker. Algorithms for scheduling of chemotherapy
plans. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 43(12):2103–2109, 2013.
[52] Takahiro Tanaka. Infusion chair scheduling algorithms based on bin-packing heuristics. State
University of New York at Binghamton, 2011.
[53] Ayten Turkcan, Bo Zeng, and Mark Lawley. Chemotherapy operations planning and schedul-
ing. IIE Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engineering, 2(1):31–49, 2012.
[54] Richard M Van Slyke and Roger Wets. L-shaped linear programs with applications to optimal
control and stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(4):638–663,
1969.
[55] R.M. Van Slyke and Roger Wets.
L-shaped linear programs with applications to optimal
control and stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(4):638–663,
1969.
[56] Jean-Paul Watson and David L Woodruﬀ.
Progressive hedging innovations for a class of
stochastic mixed-integer resource allocation problems. Computational Management Science,
8(4):355–370, 2011.
[57] Jean-Paul Watson, David L Woodruﬀ, and William E Hart.
Pysp: modeling and solving
stochastic programs in python. Mathematical Programming Computation, 4(2):109–149, 2012.
[58] EJ Yellig and GT Mackulak. Robust deterministic scheduling in stochastic environments: The
method of capacity hedge points. International Journal of Production Research, 35(2):369–379,
1997.
[59] Yang Yuan and Suvrajeet Sen. Enhanced cut generation methods for decomposition-based
branch and cut for two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programs. INFORMS Journal on Com-
puting, 21(3):480–487, 2009.
48

Appendix
A
Proof of Proposition 1
Let B = {bij, i, j ∈I} be the appointment precedence set from the ﬁrst stage and let ΦFACN be
the set of patient-chair and patient-nurse assignments (which we will simply call a schedule) based
on the ﬁrst available chair and nurse assignment, given B. Note that due to Constraints (11), if
bij = 1, the appointment time of patient i precedes that of patient j. We will prove the optimality
of ΦFACN by showing that any optimal schedule Φopt can be converted to ΦFACN by a set of moves
that result in no change in the objective function value.
In any step of the conversion from Φopt to ΦFACN, let Φcur be the current schedule and let i ∈I
be the earliest arriving patient in Φcur for whom the chair and/or nurse assignments are diﬀerent
than those in ΦFACN. Let C1 and N1 denote the chair assignments for this patient under Φcur, and
C2 and N2 correspond to their counterparts under ΦFACN. Three cases are possible.
Case 1: C1 ̸= C2, N1 = N2
This situation is illustrated in Figure 4(a). Let k ∈I be the ﬁrst patient assigned to C2 after
the service of i starts on C1 and let j be the last patient assigned to C2 immediately preceding k.
We denote the set of patient assignments before and after patient i on C1 by Subsequence C11 and
C12, respectively. Furthermore, let Subsequence C21 denote the set of assignments before j and
Subsequence C22 those after k on C2. Note that here, patient j must ﬁnish his/her service before
that of i starts on C1, since otherwise C1 would be available for i before C2, a contradiction to
C2 ∈ΦFACN for patient i. Furthermore, due to Constraints (11), ai ≤ak must be preserved.
Next, consider swapping the assignments on C1 for i and Subsequence C12 with those in C2 for
k and Subsequence C22, without changing the service start times and nurse assignments to patients
(see Figure 4(b)). In such a case, total nurse overtime is constant (as nurse schedules remain the
same), total patient waiting time is identical (as service start and end times are unchanged), and
total chair idle time is as before (since the total makespan for C1 and C2 is equal to that under
Φcur and total service time on these chairs is constant). Altogether, these imply that the overall
objective function has stayed the same.
Case 2: C1 = C2, N1 ̸= N2
Since both chairs and nurses are identical among each other, we may use a symmetric approach
to that in Case 1, exchanging the arguments for nurses and chairs. Starting with m as the ﬁrst
49

C1
Subsequence C11
i
Subsequence C12
Subsequence C21
j
C2
k
Subsequence C22
(a)
C1
Subsequence C11
k
Subsequence C22
Subsequence C21
j
C2
i
Subsequence C12
(b)
Figure 4: The patient assignments for chairs C1 and C2 (a) under Φcur and (b) after swapping
under Case 1 (C1 ̸= C2, N1 = N2)
N1
Subsequence N11
i
Subsequence N12
Subsequence N21
N2
l
m
Subsequence N22
(a)
N1
Subsequence N11
m
Subsequence N22
Subsequence N21
N2
l
i
Subsequence N12
(b)
Figure 5: The patient assignments for nurses N1 and N2 (a) under Φcur and (b) after change under
Case 2 (C1 = C2, N1 ̸= N2)
patient assigned to nurse N2 after the service of i starts on N1 (see Figure 5(a)), we perform a
similar swap that results in a new set of assignments (see Figure 5(b)) with the chair assignments
unchanged, where each patient starts his/her service at the same time as in Φcur. This implies that
the all three are still the same and objective function is identical to that under Φcur.
Case 3: C1 ̸= C2, N1 ̸= N2
In this case, we perform a sequence of the Case 1 and Case 2 moves. By similar arguments,
patient i and the following subsequence assigned to C1 can be swapped with patient k and the
following subsequence assigned to C2, followed by swapping patient i and the following subsequence
assigned to N1 with patient m and the following subsequence assigned to N2.
By the above
arguments, these two swaps are feasible and do not change the objective function value.
50

The conversion from Φopt to ΦFACN proceeds as follows: In each iteration, one checks the earliest
arriving patient whose nurse and/or chair assignment is diﬀerent from those in ΦFACN. Depending
on whether (i) chair, (ii) nurse, or (iii) both assignments are diﬀerent, one applies the move in Case
1, 2, or 3, respectively, moving on to the next arriving patient. Since there are at most as many
iterations as there are patients, the conversion can be made in no more than |I| steps.
□
B
SMIP-R
Revised Decision Variables:
bω
ij =





1,
if patient i ∈I precedes patient j ∈I in daily appointment list in scenario ω ∈Ω
0,
otherwise
aω
i : appointment time of patient i ∈I in scenario ω ∈Ω
min

λ1
X
i∈I
X
ω∈Ω
pωwω
i + λ2
X
n∈N
X
ω∈Ω
pωOω
n + λ3
X
c∈C
X
ω∈Ω
pωIω
c

(36)
X
n∈N
xω
in = 1
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(37)
X
c∈C
yω
ic = 1
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(38)
bω
ij + bω
ji = 1
∀i, j ∈I, j > i, ∀ω ∈Ω
(39)
aω
i + wω
i + sω
i + tω
i = dω
i
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(40)
aω
j + wω
j ≥aω
i + wω
i + sω
i −M(3 −bij −xω
in −xω
jn)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀n ∈N, ∀ω ∈Ω
(41)
aj + wω
j ≥dw
i −M(3 −bij −yω
ic −yω
jc)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(42)
aj + wω
j ≥ai + wω
i −M(1 −bij)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀ω ∈Ω
(43)
aω
j ≥aω
i −M(1 −bω
ij)
∀i, j ∈I, j ̸= i, ∀ω ∈Ω
(44)
Oω
n ≥dω
i −H −M(1 −xω
in)
∀i ∈I, ∀n ∈N, ∀ω ∈Ω
(45)
Oω
n ≤L
∀n ∈N, ∀ω ∈Ω
(46)
T ω
c ≥H
∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(47)
T ω
c ≥dω
i −M(1 −yω
ic)
∀i ∈I, ∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(48)
Iω
c ≥T ω
c −
X
i∈I
(sω
i + tω
i )yω
ic
∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(49)
aω
i = ai
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(50)
aω
i : integer
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(51)
bω
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(52)
xω
in ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀n ∈N, ∀ω ∈Ω
(53)
51

yω
ic ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I, ∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(54)
dω
i , wω
i ≥0
∀i ∈I, ∀ω ∈Ω
(55)
Oω
n ≥0
∀n ∈N, ∀ω ∈Ω
(56)
T ω
c , Iω
c ≥0
∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω
(57)
C
Test Results and Distribution Plots of Actual and Fitted Data
for Instance Generation
In this section, we share the chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt test results and comparisons of ﬁtted vs.
empirical distributions of pre-medication and infusion times for the four patient classes in Table 2.
We ﬁrst provide the goodness-of-ﬁt results for the chi-square tests to justify the adherence
of each pre-medication and infusion time distribution for each patient class to the given discrete
uniform distribution in in Table 2.
For this purpose, we divide each time range into smaller
categories, ensuring that the expected number of observations in each category based on the given
ﬁtted distribution is at least 5. Using a conﬁdence level of 95%, we test the null hypothesis that
the measurements from our observation follows a discrete uniform distribution.
Figures 6 through 13 present the chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results, in each of which the p-value
is large enough so that the null hypotheses cannot be rejected, implying that the observed times
ﬁt the proposed discrete uniform distributions.
To provide further justiﬁcation for ﬁtting a discrete uniform distribution for the pre-medication
and infusion times for each patient class, we provide plots of ﬁtted and actual values in Figures 14
through 21. As can be observed from these ﬁgures, the ﬁtted values do not diverge signiﬁcantly
from the actual times in any case, which further allows us to use these distributions to generate
the pre-medication and infusion times.
52

Figure 6: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of pre-medication times of
patient class 1 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 0 and 14
Figure 7: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of infusion times of patient class
1 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 16 and 49
Figure 8: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of pre-medication times of
patient class 2 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 6 and 35
53

Figure 9: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of infusion times of patient class
2 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 29 and 80
Figure 10: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of pre-medication times of
patient class 3 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 8 and 26
Figure 11: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of infusion times of patient
class 3 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 74 and 132
54

Figure 12: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of pre-medication times of
patient class 4 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 6 and 27
Figure 13: Chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt results for the observed values of infusion times of patient
class 4 to a discrete uniform distribution with parameters 125 and 217
55

Figure 14: Fitted vs. actual pre-medication times of patient class 1
Figure 15: Fitted vs. actual infusion times of patient class 1
56

Figure 16: Fitted vs. actual pre-medication times of patient class 2
Figure 17: Fitted vs. actual infusion times of patient class 2
57

Figure 18: Fitted vs. actual pre-medication times of patient class 3
Figure 19: Fitted vs. actual infusion times of patient class 3
58

Figure 20: Fitted vs. actual pre-medication times of patient class 4
Figure 21: Fitted vs. actual infusion times of patient class 4
59

D
Patient Composition Details
Table 12 shows the percentage of each class of patients in the 10 instances used within the experi-
ments.
Table 12: Percentage of patients in each class in each instance
Instance
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
1 8 50
25.0
12.5
12.5
50.0
2 8 50
12.5
37.5
0.0
50.0
3 8 50
12.5
25.0
12.5
50.0
4 8 50
25.0
12.5
25.0
37.5
5 8 50
12.5
25.0
12.5
50.0
6 8 50
12.5
12.5
37.5
37.5
7 8 50
12.5
25.0
25.0
37.5
8 8 50
12.5
12.5
37.5
37.5
9 8 50
12.5
25.0
12.5
50.0
10 8 50
25.0
12.5
12.5
50.0
E
Sensitivity analysis on the LPHA parameters
In this part, we conduct experiments to evaluate the sensitivity of the LPHA to the algorithm
parameters. As there are many parameters associated with the LPHA, we perform preliminary ex-
periments to ﬁx some of these before elaborating on others. As a result, initial values of Lagrangian
multipliers (µω(v)
i
) are ﬁxed to zero, since there is no signiﬁcant eﬀect of changing this parameter.
We also ﬁx the number of patients, nurses, and chairs as 8, 2, and 5, respectively.
The eﬀects of diﬀerent values set for α, ρ, ρu
1, and iterlimit are tested based on a one-way
sensitivity analysis approach.
First, we investigate the eﬀect of α on the performance of the
algorithm.
E.1
Eﬀect of α on the performance of the LPHA
The parameter α is the step size that determines the rate of change in the penalty parameter ρ.
The parameter ρ may be updated by a factor of α, 1, or 1
α according to the changes in the ∆p and
∆d, deﬁned in Section 4. When α takes higher values, this means the penalty parameter varies
signiﬁcantly during the consecutive iterations.
On the other hand, small values of α smoothly
change the value of penalty parameter. When the deviation in the penalty parameter is smaller,
we expect convergence in longer computational times to a higher quality solution.
60

Table 13: Eﬀect of α on the objective value (Obj), run time (in seconds), and number of iterations
(Iter) of the LPHA
α = 2
α = 4
α = 6
Instance
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
1 8 50
86.41
894.67
131
86.03
1025.06
155
86.27
1423.75
129
2 8 50
97.01
1213.24
115
97.88
661.33
115
98.62
1025.54
116
3 8 50
82.99
1978.06
142
83.31
1171.81
135
84.79
1662.01
118
4 8 50
101.35
961.67
98
101.41
5070.40
122
102.98
1527.77
197
5 8 50
83.25
1366.29
114
82.90
1748.01
199
81.14
1895.23
181
6 8 50
86.49
2457.74
236
81.49
1004.17
120
82.32
1713.64
159
7 8 50
93.39
1363.62
114
93.20
733.42
113
93.17
1416.79
117
8 8 50
79.90
1786.17
166
80.40
803.35
118
84.85
1702.69
121
9 8 50
79.23
1836.90
131
80.39
1144.87
127
79.56
2076.86
123
10 8 50
80.78
1851.17
147
80.01
1329.35
164
80.99
1732.41
118
Average
87.08
1570.95
139.40
86.70
1469.18
136.80
87.47
1617.67
137.90
We set three diﬀerent values of α (2, 4, and 6) and report their impact into computational times
and solution quality in Table 13. In doing so, the aim is to ﬁx α at a reasonable value where there
is a balance between solution time and quality. Based on the results in Table 13, we observe that
α = 4 results in shorter computational times than the other two cases (with CPU time savings
of 6.9% and 10.1% over than of α = 2 and α = 6, respectively). Hence, for the remainder of the
experiments, we ﬁx α at this value.
E.2
Eﬀect of initial value of ρ on the performance of the LPHA
There are various factors that aﬀect the behaviour of the penalty parameter value ρ. The ﬁrst one
is its initial value. According to the literature, the lower values of ρ yield better quality solutions
in longer computational times. To test the eﬀect of the initial value of ρ, three diﬀerent values are
used (0.0001, 0.005, and 0.1). The experimental results are provided in Table 14.
The computational times decrease signiﬁcantly in the cases where ρ is equal to 0.005 and 0.1
compared to ρ = 0.0001 case. Since the increase in the initial value of ρ may create an undesirable
increase in the objective values for some instances, we use an initial ρ value of 0.0001 in the
subsequent experiments.
E.3
Eﬀect of ρu
1 on the performance of the LPHA
As stated in Section 4, the value of the penalty parameter ρ is limited using an upper bound
ρu
1. This prevents faster convergence of the algorithm to premature solutions due to high penalty
61

Table 14: Eﬀect of the initial value of penalty parameter (ρ) on the objective value (Obj), run time
(in seconds), and number of iterations (Iter) of the LPHA
ρ = 0.0001
ρ = 0.0050
ρ = 0.1000
Instance
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
1 8 50
86.03
1025.06
155
86.99
1372.51
120
86.48
1081.56
151
2 8 50
97.88
661.33
115
98.09
1018.9
114
98.89
771.58
116
3 8 50
83.31
1171.81
135
88.77
1042.49
125
82.93
1436.79
159
4 8 50
101.41
5070.40
122
105.30
711.86
108
102.45
823.04
120
5 8 50
82.90
1748.01
199
81.76
1313.61
125
82.83
1588.85
193
6 8 50
81.49
1004.17
120
81.13
1334.77
123
81.33
1001.15
154
7 8 50
93.20
733.42
113
96.54
1057.86
126
93.42
897.90
121
8 8 50
80.40
803.35
118
81.97
960.78
127
86.95
1131.55
143
9 8 50
80.39
1144.87
127
81.62
1187.91
113
85.98
1319.30
106
10 8 50
80.01
1329.35
164
82.77
1376.28
152
81.54
1304.55
154
Average
86.70
1469.18
136.80
88.50
1137.70
123.30
88.28
1135.63
141.70
parameter values. There is a trade-oﬀbetween solution quality and computational times to be
considered while selecting the value of ρu
1. For this purpose, we used three diﬀerent values as 0.1,
0.5, and 0.7 to test the performance of the algorithm. The experimental results are provided in
Table 15.
According to the results provided in Table 15, the best solutions with respect to the solution
quality are obtained with the smallest tested value of ρu
1. The average number of iterations needed
for convergence does not change signiﬁcantly by varying the values of ρu
1. Since larger penalty
parameter values make scenario subproblems easier to solve, the time spent for completing an
iteration is expected to decrease. This explains the inverse relation between the value of ρu
1 and run
time in the table. When ρu
1 is raised to 0.5 and 0.7, the objective value deteriorates by 2.4% and
3.7% with respect to the case where ρu
1 = 0.1, respectively. Since the use of ρu
1 = 0.1 only needs,
on average, less than ten extra minutes to improve objective value, we set 0.1 for ρu
1 for further
experiments.
E.4
Eﬀect of iterlimit on the performance of the LPHA
In the LPHA, we use ρu
1 as an upper bound for the value of the penalty parameter up to a
predetermined iteration iterlimit in Algorithm 1. After iterlimit many iterations, the upper bound
on penalty limit is increased to ρu
2. We set reasonable values for iterlimit, because very large
values of iterlimit may lead to limited values of ρ even when the iteration number reaches a
considerable amount. This in turn may result in excessive computation times until convergence.
62

Table 15: Eﬀect of the ﬁrst upper limit of penalty parameter (ρu
1) on the objective value (Obj),
run time (in seconds), and number of iterations (Iter) of the LPHA
ρu
1 = 0.1
ρu
1 = 0.5
ρu
1 = 0.7
Instance
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
1 8 50
86.03
1025.06
155
99.81
955.68
147
102.39
694.85
109
2 8 50
97.88
661.33
115
98.61
925.16
169
99.62
682.63
131
3 8 50
83.31
1171.81
135
81.11
964.57
131
81.58
943.45
147
4 8 50
101.41
5070.40
122
104.66
1009.34
160
103.34
881.37
186
5 8 50
82.90
1748.01
199
83.61
999.16
132
84.22
837.48
138
6 8 50
81.49
1004.17
120
83.14
953.42
137
85.00
779.78
136
7 8 50
93.20
733.42
113
93.09
1073.81
144
95.27
1388.00
150
8 8 50
80.40
803.35
118
81.68
1070.32
126
84.52
1313.22
156
9 8 50
80.39
1144.87
127
81.14
1028.52
125
81.59
752.32
115
10 8 50
80.01
1329.35
164
80.62
1133.97
120
81.51
1001.34
122
Average
86.70
1469.18
136.80
88.75
1011.40
139.10
89.90
927.44
139.00
On the other hand, having a limited value of ρ over a large amount of iterations would improve
solution quality. We try three diﬀerent alternatives for determining the value of iterlimit as 50,
70 and 100, because the computation times increase signiﬁcantly once the iterlimit exceeds 100,
according to our preliminary experiments.
Table 16: Eﬀect of iteration limit (iterlimit) on the objective value (Obj), run time (in seconds),
and number of iterations (Iter) of the LPHA
iterlimit = 50
iterlimit = 70
iterlimit = 100
Instance
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
Obj
Time
Iter
1 8 50
87.06
604.769
100
86.84
733.507
117
86.03
1025.06
155
2 8 50
97.95
401.448
79
98.12
445.828
82
97.88
661.33
115
3 8 50
81.56
610.327
80
81.80
1144.32
152
83.31
1171.81
135
4 8 50
102.25
559.198
129
101.79
598.106
95
101.41
5070.40
122
5 8 50
82.71
601.796
85
83.22
703.881
107
82.90
1748.01
199
6 8 50
81.55
703.951
126
81.66
789.632
116
81.49
1004.17
120
7 8 50
93.24
555.179
90
93.29
666.236
80
93.20
733.42
113
8 8 50
83.49
802.583
117
81.43
820.124
133
80.40
803.35
118
9 8 50
82.81
884.723
134
80.26
1040.52
142
80.39
1144.87
127
10 8 50
80.94
830.715
130
80.27
990.318
138
80.01
1329.35
164
Average Values
87.36
655.47
107.00
86.87
793.25
116.20
86.70
1469.18
136.80
The values of the objective function and computation times are given in Table 16, where we
observe that the average number of iterations before convergence increases with the higher values
of iterlimit, resulting with higher average run times. When iterlimit is set to lower values, the
algorithm starts to use higher values of ρ in earlier iterations and the quality of the solutions worsen.
63

Since we would not like to sacriﬁce solution quality and computational times are acceptable at this
level of the parameter, we ﬁx iterlimit at 100 in our experiments.
64