TITLE: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2023.0427
---

Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Meng Qi
SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850,
mq56@cornell.edu
Paul Grigas
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720,
pgrigas@berkeley.edu
Max Shen
Faculty of Engineering & Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong, China,
maxshen@hku.hk
Many real-world optimization problems involve uncertain parameters with probability distributions that can
be estimated using contextual feature information. In contrast to the standard approach of first estimating
the distribution of uncertain parameters and then optimizing the objective based on the estimation, we
propose an integrated conditional estimation-optimization (ICEO) framework that estimates the underly-
ing conditional distribution of the random parameter while considering the structure of the optimization
problem. We directly model the relationship between the conditional distribution of the random parame-
ter and the contextual features, and then estimate the probabilistic model with an objective that aligns
with the downstream optimization problem. We show that our ICEO approach is asymptotically consis-
tent under moderate regularity conditions and further provide finite performance guarantees in the form of
generalization bounds. Computationally, performing estimation with the ICEO approach is a non-convex
and often non-differentiable optimization problem. We propose a general methodology for approximating
the potentially non-differentiable mapping from estimated conditional distribution to optimal decision by
a differentiable function, which greatly improves the performance of gradient-based algorithms applied to
the non-convex problem. We also provide a polynomial optimization solution approach in the semi-algebraic
case. Numerical experiments are also conducted to show the empirical success of our approach in different
situations including with limited data samples and model mismatches.
Key words : contextual stochastic optimization; prescriptive analytics; statistical learning theory
1.
Introduction
Two fundamental aspects of decision-making under uncertainty are estimation and optimization.
Classically these two aspects are treated separately, with statistical and/or machine learning
methodologies used to estimate the distributions of uncertain parameters based on data, resulting
in a stochastic optimization problem to be solved for making a decision. In recent years, researchers
and practitioners have increasingly recognized the significance of considering estimation and opti-
mization in tandem (Bertsimas and Kallus 2020, Kao et al. 2009, Donti et al. 2017, Elmachtoub
and Grigas 2022). Another salient feature of modern decision-making under uncertainty is the pres-
1
arXiv:2110.12351v4 [stat.ML] 2 Aug 2023

2
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
ence of contextual information, usually in the form of features/covariates, that can be leveraged
to improve the estimation of the uncertain parameters. For example, contextual information such
as temporal information, the presence of promotions, and economic indicators can be leveraged to
refine the estimation of uncertain demand for products. The refined demand distribution estimates
would then be used for making inventory and supply chain decisions through optimization models.
Contextual stochastic optimization (CSO) has recently emerged as a general paradigm describ-
ing this situation, with applications in supply chain management, finance, transportation, energy
systems, and many other areas.
In this work, we consider the CSO problem in a data-driven setting where one has available
historical data consisting of realizations of the uncertain parameters paired with contextual feature
information. As mentioned, the classical method of solving CSO given data is a two-step procedure,
where in the first step either a point prediction of the parameter or an estimation of its distribution
is built based on data. (Although the phrases “prediction” and “estimation” are often synonymous
or not clearly distinguished in the literature, herein we specifically let “prediction” denote point pre-
dictions of the random parameter and let “estimation” refer to any methodology, either parametric
or non-parametric, for estimating the conditional distribution of the random parameter given the
context.) Modern machine learning techniques are often utilized in the first step to provide more
granular results, and these models are usually fit based on statistical objectives such as measures
of prediction error or likelihood. Then in the second step, given the prediction or estimation, an
optimization problem is solved. A major drawback of these standard predict-then-optimize (PTO)
and estimate-then-optimize (ETO) approaches is that they do not consider the decision error – the
cost with respect to the downstream optimization problem due to an imperfect prediction – when
fitting a statistical model.
We propose an integrated conditional estimation-optimization (ICEO) approach that estimates
the underlying conditional distribution of the random parameter based on minimizing the ultimate
decision error. We propose a highly flexible framework that models the conditional distribution
using a hypothesis class and applies ideas from statistical learning to do estimation. As compared
to existing approaches, our approach uses a generic learning framework based on specifying a
hypothesis class and applies to a broad class of convex contextual stochastic optimization problems
with uncertainty in the objective. We study the statistical and computational properties of our
approach. In particular, we prove asymptotic consistency in terms of risks, decisions and hypothe-
ses. Asymptotic consistency is highly desired for data-driven methods because it guarantees that,
as the amount of data increases, our solutions and estimated models converge to their optimums
given full information of the true distribution of contextual features and uncertain parameters.
We prove asymptotic consistency in terms of the ICEO risk, induced decisions, and the learned

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
3
hypothesis. We also provide generalization bounds to quantify the out-of-sample performance when
data is limited to a finite sample.
In general, there are fundamental differences between the cases of linear and nonlinear objective
functions in CSO problems and the two problem classes require completely different solution meth-
ods. As pointed out in the prior literature (for example, Bertsimas and Kallus (2020), Elmachtoub
and Grigas (2022), Sadana et al. (2023) and Qi and Shen (2022)), the linear objective assumption
implies that point predictions are sufficient to address the CSO problem. However, in the general
nonlinear case, one needs to utilize a distributional estimation of the conditional distribution. As
such, ICEO seeks a distributional estimation that directly models the relationship between the
conditional distribution of the random parameter and the contextual features and then estimates
the probabilistic model with a training objective that aligns with the downstream optimization
problem. Our methodological and corresponding theoretical contributions are entirely novel and
significant.
It is worthwhile to point out that, in the ICEO method, we adopt a strongly convex decision
regularization function inside the optimization oracle in order to stabilize the decision and induce
uniqueness. Due to the interplay between the downstream optimization oracle, decision regulariza-
tion, and the model, the overall training objective is more complicated than typical prediction error
losses and as such standard uniform convergence and consistency do not directly apply even with
i.i.d. samples. Instead, such results can only be obtained after establishing the convergence and
Lipschitzness of the regularized oracle. Similarly, finite sample bounds for ICEO are generalization
bounds based on multi-variate Rademacher complexity. However, as ICEO adopts a more compli-
cated training objective that incorporates the regularized oracle to take the downstream problem
into account, ICEO deviates from standard learning procedures that use simple loss functions.
Tackling this difficulty also relies on establishing a Lipschitz property of the regularized oracle,
which further translates to the training objective.
In terms of computation, the core training problem of the ICEO framework is non-convex and
even non-differentiable in many cases. In fact, due to the presence of constraints in the downstream
problem, it is often the case that the optimal decision oracle has a piece-wise constant shape, which
leads to poor local minima that are very hard to escape when applying gradient-based methods.
For these reasons, we propose two computational approaches: (i) a highly practical approach that
involves approximating the regularized optimal solution oracle with a smooth function and then
applying gradient algorithms, and (ii) a polynomial optimization approach when the downstream
problem has a semi-algebraic objective and we approximate the optimal solution oracle with a
polynomial function.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:

4
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
1. We propose the ICEO framework, wherein we directly estimate the underlying conditional
distribution of uncertain parameters given contextual information using a hypothesis class.
In contrast to two-step ETO methods, we learn the conditional distribution in a way that
integrates with the downstream optimization goal. ICEO offers more flexibility compared
to most existing related approaches. To the best of our knowledge, among all integrated
approaches for general classes of nonlinear CSO problems with convex objective functions,
ICEO is the first that provides both asymptotic and finite sample performance guarantees.
2. We prove the asymptotic consistency of the ICEO method when the model is specified cor-
rectly (Theorem 1). More specifically, we show the consistency of ICEO risk, ICEO decisions,
and ICEO hypothesis when the hypothesis class contains the correct conditional distribution
function. To show asymptotic consistency, standard statistical learning approaches do not
apply because of the presence of the regularized oracle. Tackling these difficulties requires
establishing certain properties of the regularized oracle such as uniform convergence and uni-
form Lipschitzness.
3. To quantify the out-of-sample performance with finite samples, we provide generalization
bounds for the ICEO method based on the multi-variate Rademacher complexity of the
hypothesis class used to learn the conditional distribution (Theorem 3). Again, standard sta-
tistical learning results do not directly apply since taking the downstream optimization into
account leads to a more complicated loss function than the typical (e.g., MSE) losses. In partic-
ular, our generalization bound requires first establishing the Lipschitz property of the regular-
ized optimal decision oracle (Proposition 2).Furthermore, our generalization bound intuitively
indicates that ICEO can be more flexible/expressive than policy optimization methods while
still achieving a comparable sample (Rademacher) complexity.
4. The ICEO training problem is non-convex and non-differentiable. Non-differentiability poses
a serious concern when applying gradient-based algorithms, like (stochastic) gradient descent,
to solve the ICEO training problem as the presence of constraints can lead to local minima
that are hard to escape (visually illustrated in Figure 1). To address this issue, we approximate
the oracle using differentiable function classes with a guaranteed approximation error (Propo-
sition 3, Proposition 4). We then provide corresponding generalization bounds when training
ICEO method using the approximated oracle (Theorem 4). In addition, for the case where
the nominal optimization problem is semi-algebraic, we propose an exact solution algorithm
(Proposition 5).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 1.1, we review related methods in
literature. The details of our proposed ICEO framework are introduced in Section 2. In Section 3,
we provide performance guarantees in terms of asymptotic consistency and generalization bounds.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
5
In Section 4, we discuss the main difficulties in solving the ICEO formulation and provide solution
methods. Empirical performances of the ICEO method is demonstrated in Section 5. Moreover,
Appendix A provides supplementary materials to support the asymptotic consistency result in
Section 3.1. B presents supplementary lemmas and proofs for Sections 3.2 and 4. Appendix A.1.1
presents conditions that ensure an “automatic crossover” behavior of the regularized oracle, which
further supports the assumptions made in Section 3.1. Appendix C provides two detailed exam-
ples of using polynomial functions to approximate the optimal solution mapping. When both the
oracle approximation and objective functions are polynomial functions, the ICEO problem can be
reformulated as a semi-algebraic problem thus can be solved efficiently. Appendix D demonstrates
supplementary materials for Section 5. In Appendix E, we provide more intuition of the advantages
of ICEO by comparing it to policy optimization approaches.
1.1.
Relevant Literature
The fusion of prediction models based on data and the optimization problems has become more
and more widespread in recent years. In the remainder of this section, we will discuss existing
works related to this topic and contrast them with our proposed ICEO approach.
The first stream of research focuses on providing a prescriptive solution by approximating the
conditional distribution of the random parameter given a feature vector with the help of various
machine learning tools. In one of the first works along these lines, Hannah et al. (2010) use non-
parametric methods to estimate the density function conditioned on state variables to solve convex
stochastic optimization problems. They consider weights on the empirical distribution based on
kernels and the Dirichlet process. Bertsimas and Kallus (2020) also proposed prescriptive models
that approximate the conditional distribution with a weighted empirical distribution of the uncer-
tainty. The weights can be achieved based on multiple machine learning models, including k-nearest
neighbors (KNN), kernel methods, tree-based methods, etc. Kallus and Mao (2020) consider using
a (non-parametric) random forests estimator of the conditional distribution in a way that is trained
with respect to the cost of the downstream optimization task, akin to the ICEO approach. A later
work Bertsimas and McCord (2019) investigates these prescriptive methods in the multi-period
problem setting. Bertsimas et al. (2019) follows the same idea and propose a tree-based algorithm
that balances the optimality of the prescription and accuracy of the prediction. Kallus and Mao
(2020) consider a random forest model for the prescriptive solution. In contrast to the standard
way of splitting the feature space, the authors consider the down stream optimization quality while
constructing the partitions. Different from Kallus and Mao (2020) the ICEO approach directly
models the underlying conditional distribution using a hypothesis class H. Thus, while Kallus and
Mao (2020) only provide asymptotic consistency results, we are able to prove both asymptotic
consistency and generalization bounds for a wide variety of hypothesis classes.

6
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Ho and Hanasusanto (2019) considers the regularized Nadaraya-Watson approach and establishes
performance guarantees using moderate deviations theory. We refer to Qi and Shen (2022) for a
tutorial on these methods.
Another stream of related work investigates adjusting the loss function to meet the ultimate
optimization goal while training the machine learning models to predict the random parameters.
Ban and Rudin (2019) investigates the Newsvendor problem, which is inherently equivalent to
a quantile prediction problem. The authors learn the feature-to-decision mapping from data by
adopting a loss function that characterizes the newsvendor inventory cost and is equivalent to
the quantile loss function. Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022) consider the case when the downstream
optimization problem has a linear objective. The authors propose a “smart predict-then-optimize”
(SPO) framework with a tractable convex surrogate loss function (SPO+) to integrate the ultimate
optimization problem structure. They prove Fisher consistency of SPO+ and demonstrate its strong
numerical performance on different problem classes. Balghiti et al. (2019) later provides a finite-
sample performance guarantee of the SPO loss in the form of generalization bounds. Recently, Liu
and Grigas (2021) have strengthened the consistency of SPO+ by providing risk guarantees and a
calibration analysis in the polyhedral and strongly convex cases. Elmachtoub et al. (2020) propose
a method to train decision trees using the SPO loss and demonstrate strong numerical performance
and improved model complexity over standard decision tree methods (e.g., CART) that minimize
prediction error.
Other existing studies aim to learn the task-based end-to-end learning models with differentiable
optimization layers. Donti et al. (2017) consider a general setting where the optimization stage
involves a convex optimization problem and adopt the objective in the optimization stage as the loss
function to achieve an end-to-end training for the machine learning models. The main issue in such
end-to-end learning models is to address the non-differentiability of the optimal solution mapping
(the mapping from a contextual feature vector to the optimal decision). Amos and Kolter (2017)
introduce the differentiable optimization layers for the end-to-end training approaches and propose
a method of approximating the gradient of the optimal solution mapping by the solution of a group
of equations representing the KKT conditions. Agrawal et al. (2019) further provide a method to
convert convex programs to the canonical forms that can be implemented at the optimization layer
and implemented their grammar in CVXPY for ease of use. Wilder et al. (2019a) and Wilder et al.
(2019b) further consider more difficult combinatorial problems. They propose end-to-end models
that map from the graph structure to a feasible solution and train them with the quality of the
solution. Wilder et al. (2019a) consider continuous relaxations of the discrete problem to propa-
gate gradients through the optimization procedure. Mandi and Guns (2020) consider mixed integer
linear programs and consider a homogeneous self-dual formulation of the LP and show that the

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
7
gradients are related to an interior point step. Berthet et al. (2020) instead consider stochastically
perturbed optimizers to evaluate the gradients required for back-propagation. Mandi et al. (2020),
Ferber et al. (2020), Poganˇci´c et al. (2019) also discuss how to approximate the gradients when
training end-to-end models for combinatorial problems. As our work focuses on convex optimiza-
tion problems, we skip the details and refer to Kotary et al. (2021) for a detailed survey. Although
demonstrated to be competitive in numerical experiments, these end-to-end learning models based
on optimization layers and their extensions to combinatorial cases lack strong performance guar-
antees in theory. Moreover, learning feature-to-decision mapping lacks flexibility in the way that
it handles constraints. Indeed, constraints restrict the hypothesis class that can be used to learn
the data-to-decision mapping. In contrast, our ICEO framework learns the conditional distribution
and uses the optimal solution mapping to obtain the decision, which is more flexible in handling
constraints.
Other related works include Kao et al. (2009) which investigates the case of model mis-
specification when features are not perfect. This work proposes a method of directed regression
which combines the merits of regression and empirical optimization. Later Kao and Van Roy (2012)
extended this setting to a directed time series regression. Ho-Nguyen and Kılın¸c-Karzan (2020),
which investigates the relationship between the prediction part to the performance of the optimiza-
tion part, mainly in the case of the least squares loss function. A recent work Poursoltani et al.
(2023) investigates the coefficient of prescriptiveness which can be used to quantify the performance
of different CSO approaches and how to directly optimize it. Bennouna and Van Parys (2021)
took a different perspective on data-driven solutions and investigated the optimal formulation that
guarantees a certain level of out-of-sample performance.
There are also a number of decision-focused learning contributions that address practically
impactful applications. Chung et al. (2022) investigate the problem of allocating limited supply in
health supply chains and proposed a decision-aware learning method that uses the decision cost
to inform training. Qi et al. (2020) focus on a multi-period inventory management problem with
random demand and lead times, and provide a practical end-to-end learning framework empowered
by deep learning models. The authors demonstrate the empirical success of this approach in prac-
tice by conducting a field experiment in industry. Cristian et al. (2022) proposes a neural network
architecture that approximately solves linear programs in an end-to-end way. The authors also ana-
lyze applications of the proposed approach to a multi-warehouse inventory management problem
with cross-fulfillment. Chehrazi and Weber (2010) consider the problem of optimal debt settlement
and consider an approach that combines estimating the objective function and the optimization
problem.

8
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Another stream of work investigates the performance of the classic separated two-step PTO
and ETO approach. Hu et al. (2022) demonstrate that, when the optimization problem has a
linear objective and linear constraints, the two-step predict-then-optimize approach leads to faster
convergence in terms of expected risk compared to the integrated policy optimization approach.
Elmachtoub et al. (2023) take a stochastic dominance perspective and demonstrate that when
the model class is well-specified, the predict-then-optimize approach outperforms the integrated
approach in a strong sense. More broadly, there is a rapidly growing literature regarding data-driven
methods for CSO problems. We have mainly included a discussion of work closely related to our
paper and refer readers to Sadana et al. (2023) for a comprehensive survey of various approaches
to address CSO as well the connection among previously stated streams of literature.
There are also other studies that explore seemingly similar but different problem settings as
CSO and ICEO. For example, the joint estimation-optimization (JEO) model (Jiang and Shanbhag
(2013), Ahmadi and Shanbhag (2014), Jiang and Shanbhag (2016), Ho-Nguyen and Kılın¸c-Karzan
(2019)) The major difference between CSO and JEO is that, in the JEO model, there is no contex-
tual information considered predictors of uncertainty. Besides, several JEO models focus on solving
an online convex optimization problem in the optimization stage, while we consider a stochastic
optimization problem. We would also like to point out the differences between CSO and the oper-
ational statistics method, in which the downstream optimization goal is considered in finding the
optimal operational statistic (Liyanage and Shanthikumar (2005), Chu et al. (2008), Ramamurthy
et al. (2012)). We include contextual information in our problem setting which is not considered in
the classic operational statistics literature. Moreover, we aim to learn the underlying conditional
distribution rather than finding the best statistic. We also consider constraints in the downstream
optimization problem.
Lastly, there are other works that explore data-driven solutions for stochastic optimization. For
example, data-driven methods for robust optimization (Bertsimas et al. (2018a), Wang et al. (2023),
Bertsimas et al. (2018b), Hong et al. (2021)) and distributionally robust optimization (DRO)
(Delage and Ye (2010), Blanchet et al. (2019), Gao and Kleywegt (2023), Wiesemann et al. (2014),
Van Parys et al. (2021)). These lines of research emphasize the robustness of data-driven solutions.
Among the data-driven DRO literature, the stream of residual-based DRO is most relevant to
our work (Kannan et al. (2020), Qi et al. (2022)). Residual-based DRO considers the conditional
distribution based on residuals. A similar approach involving residual-SAA has been studied by
Deng and Sen (2022), Liu et al. (2022), Kannan et al. (2022). Besides methodologies that solves
the standard CSO, there are other works considering other settings different from the classical
CSO problem, for example, the small-data large-scale regime Gupta and Rusmevichientong (2021),
Gupta et al. (2022).

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
9
2.
Contextual Stochastic Optimization and the ICEO Approach
In this section, we review the basic ingredients of contextual stochastic optimization problems,
which is a fundamental model for applying machine learning in many operational contexts, and
we formally describe our ICEO approach. We consider a convex CSO, which models a downstream
decision-making task. The feasible region for the decision variable w ∈Rd, denoted by S ⊂Rd, is
assumed to be known with certainty. We additionally assume that S is a convex and compact set.
Although the feasible region of our optimization task is known with certainty, the objective function
c(·,ξ) : S →R is stochastic and depends on a random parameter ξ. We assume that for all values
of ξ, c(·,ξ) is a convex function of w. While the precise value of ξ is not known at the time when
a decision must be made, we assume that the decision-maker observes an associated contextual
feature vector x ∈X ⊆Rp (sometimes the components of x are referred to as covariates) that can
be used to learn information about the objective function. Let D denote the joint distribution
of x and ξ. Then, given an observed x ∈Rp, the decision maker’s goal is to solve the contextual
stochastic optimization problem:
min
w∈S Eξ[c(w,ξ)|x],
(1)
where the expectation above is with respect to the conditional distribution of ξ given x.
It is important to emphasize that the distribution D, and hence the conditional distribution of
ξ given any x, is typically unavailable in practice. Instead, a data-driven approach to solving (1)
is much more viable. Indeed, one often has a training dataset {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 consisting of historically
observed pairs of feature vectors xi ∈X and associated parameter values ξi.
In this work, in order to directly model the conditional distribution, we consider the case where
the random parameter ξ has finite discrete support, i.e., ξ ∈Ξ := {˜z1, ˜z2,..., ˜zK}. Then, for any
x ∈X, the conditional distribution of ξ given x is characterized by a probability vector p∗(x) ∈∆K,
where ∆K := {p ∈RK : PK
k=1 pk = 1,p ≥0} denotes the (K −1)-dimensional unit simplex. That is,
p∗
k(x), the k-th component of p∗(x), is defined by p∗
k(x) = Pξ(ξ = ˜zk|x), for all k = 1,...,K. Using
this notation as well as the shorthand notation ck(·) := c(·, ˜zk) for all k = 1,...,K, problem (1) can
be equivalently written as
min
w∈S Eξ[c(w,ξ)|x] = min
w∈S
K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w).
(2)
Note that there might be multiple optimal solutions and we use the notation W(p) to refer to the
set of such optimal solutions, i.e., W(p) := arg minw∈S
PK
k=1 pkck(w).
2.1.
ICEO Approach
Let us now describe the major ingredients of our ICEO approach, as well as the formulation of our
ICEO training problem.

10
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Hypothesis Class of Conditional Probability Estimators It is evident from the right side of (2)
that learning the conditional distribution p∗(x) is the most critical part of our contextual stochastic
optimization setting. We adopt standard ideas from learning theory to learn p∗(x), whereby we
employ a compact hypothesis class H of conditional probability estimators. That is, H is a compact
set (e.g., with respect to the uniform norm) of functions f : X →∆K. The hypothesis class H is
the first major ingredient of our ICEO approach. Note that the constraint on the output of f ∈H,
namely f(x) ∈∆K for all x ∈X, is not standard in most learning problems but is necessitated by our
setting. Fortunately, this constraint can be accommodated in a number of ways. A straightforward
approach is to consider the softmax operator soft : RK →RK defined by softk(v) =
exp(vk)
PK
j=1 exp(vj)
for v ∈RK. Then, given any hypothesis class ˜H of unconstrained functions ˜f : X →RK, we can
define H as the composition class soft ◦˜H. Note that, due to the differentiability properties of the
softmax operator, soft◦˜H naturally inherits differentiability properties from ˜H, which can be very
useful from a computational perspective. For another example, consider H defined by a decision
tree partitioning algorithm. Then, for any given x, f(x) can be constructed from the empirical
distribution of ξ restricted to the subset of the partition of the training data for which x lies in.
Finally, a third approach, which we expand upon in Section C.3, is to let H be a constrained linear
hypothesis class whereby H = {f : f(x) = Bx ∈∆K for all x ∈X}. Depending on the structure of
X, it may be possible to efficiently model the constraint Bx ∈∆K for all x ∈X, and we discuss
specific examples in Section C.3. We would like to emphasize two points about our approach for
estimating the conditional distribution using a hypothesis class H. First, by directly estimating
the conditional probability our proposed method has more flexibility in handling constraints as
compared to methods that learn a mapping π directly from features x to decisions w. In particular,
compared to the policy learning approaches which learn a mapping from features to decisions
requires that the output of the mapping π be feasible in the region S, which may severely constrain
the feasible set of π. More detailed intuitions can be found in Appendix E. On the other hand, our
approach of composing a user-specified hypothesis class H with the regularized optimal solution
mapping wρ(·) allows for a very general selection of H.
Regularized Optimization Oracle. As mentioned previously, we assume that the functions ck(·) =
c(·, ˜zk), for all k = 1,...,K, are all convex functions of w on the convex and compact feasible region
S. Furthermore, we presume that we can additionally work with a decision regularization function
ϕ(·) : S →R, which is non-negative and strongly convex with respect to some norm ∥· ∥on Rd.
Given any p ∈∆K and ρ > 0, define the regularized optimal solution mapping:
wρ(p) :=arg min
w∈S
K
X
k=1
pkck(w) + ρϕ(w).
(3)

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
11
Note that, due to the strong convexity of ϕ(·), wρ(p) is uniquely defined. Furthermore, we can
show that wρ(·) is a continuous mapping as demonstrated in Lemma 1. These regularity properties
are induced by the use of the regularization term ϕ(·), which is crucial for developing our ICEO
methodology and for providing associated theoretical guarantees. We further assume that wρ(p)
can be efficiently computed in practice for any p ∈∆K and ρ > 0. Possible examples include using
a commercial solver or utilizing a specialized algorithm that depends on the structure of the ck(·)
and ϕ(·) functions. Ideally, the function ϕ(·) should be chosen so that the complexity of computing
wρ(p) is not greatly increased as compared to when ρ = 0. Note that our performance guarantees
developed in Section 3 hold for any choice of ϕ(·) that is 1-strongly convex.
ICEO Methodology. We are now ready to describe our ICEO methodology and corresponding
training problem, whereby we consider an integrated approach that estimates a hypothesis f ∈H in
consideration of the downstream optimization goal. We presume that we have collected a training
dataset {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 consisting of historically observed pairs of feature vectors xi ∈X and associated
parameter values ξi. We also presume that the decision maker uses the regularized optimal solution
oracle wρ(·) defined in (3). We adopt the empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle with respect
to the in-sample cost induced by the regularized oracle:
min
f∈H,w1,...,wn∈S
1
n
n
X
i=1
c(wi,ξi)
(ICEO-ρ)
s.t.
wi = wρ(f(xi)),
where ρ > 0 is a given value of the decision regularization parameter, which can be chosen with
cross-validation for example. Let ˆf ∈H denote a computed optimal solution of (ICEO-ρ). Then, for
any newly observed feature vector x ∈X, the decision maker implements the decision wρ( ˆf(x)) ∈S
formed by composing wρ(·) with ˆf(·). We remark that one may consider a variant of ICEO-ρ that, in
the objective function, additionally includes decision regularization terms ρϕ(wi) for each sample.
Although these decision regularization terms appear more aligned with (3), and were included in
an earlier version of this paper, they are in fact a purely optional component of our model and we
choose to not include them here for simplicity. Indeed, our entire analysis also will carry through
with or without the additional decision regularization terms. The only difference is that the rate
of convergence in the finite-sample bound is slightly faster when these terms are excluded.
Let us contrast the ICEO approach with the PTO and ETO approaches. In the PTO approach,
a machine learning model ˆgPTO : X →Ξ is built, using the training data, to predict the parameter
ξ based on the feature vector x. Then, given any new x ∈X, the decision maker implements
a decision from the optimal solution set arg minw∈S c(w, ˆgPTO(x)). Note that, as pointed out in
Section 1, because of the nonlinearity of the objective function, a point estimate for a prediction

12
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
of ξ given x does not provide enough information about the conditional distribution to produce a
reasonable solution of (1). Different from PTO, the ETO approach learns a model ˆfETO : X →∆K
for estimating the conditional distribution of ξ given x. Then, given any new x ∈X, the decision
maker implements a decision from the optimal solution set W( ˆfETO(x)). Thus, the ETO approach is
more aligned with the ICEO approach. The main distinction is that the traditional ETO approach
learns the model ˆfETO in a way that is completely oblivious to the downstream optimization
task. For instance, given a hypothesis class H, the ETO approach might select the hypothesis by
minimizing the empirical cross-entropy loss, defined for any f ∈H and any observed (x,ξ = ˜zk) by
ℓce(f(x),ξ = ˜zk) := −log(fk(x)).
Additional Notation. Due to the compactness of S, the cost function c(·,·) is bounded and we
define ¯c := supw∈S,ξ∈Ξ |c(w,ξ)|. Because of the compactness of S, we can define diameters of S. We
let diamj(S) := supu,v∈S |uj −vj| to denote the coordinate-wise diameter of the feasible region S.
We further let diam(S) := Pd
j=1 diamj(S) denote the summation of the coordinate-wise diameter
of all coordinates. Given a norm ∥· ∥defined on Rd, the distance from a point w ∈Rd to a set
W ⊆Rd is denoted by dist(w,W) := infu∈W ∥w −u∥. For a convex function h(·) : S →R, we let
∂h(w) denote the set of subgradients of h(·) at w. Let ◦denote the composition of functions.
For example, with f : X →∆K and w : ∆K →S, then w ◦f is the function from X to S with
(w ◦f)(x) := w(f(x)) for all x ∈X. This function composition notation also extends naturally to
function classes. For example, for a class H of functions f : X →∆K, we let w ◦H denote the
class of functions {w ◦f : f ∈H}. For f,g ∈H, recall the sup-norm is defined as as ∥f −g∥∞:=
supx∈X |f(x)−g(x)|. We denote the set of non-negative integers a N0 and let Nk
0 denote the set of all
k-dimensional vectors with each component is a non-negative integer. 1 denotes the K-dimensional
vector with all coordinates taking the value of one. We let TV(P,Q) denote the total variation
between two probability measures P and Q supported on the K −1-dimensional simplex ∆K.
TV(P,Q) := P
A∈B |P(A)−Q(A)| where B denote the class of Borel sets in ∆K. In Section 4.1, we
will use an equivalent expression of TV(P,Q) = 1
2 supf:∆→[−1,1](
R
∆K f(p)dP(p) −
R
∆K f(p)dQ(p)).
2.2.
Motivating Examples
In this section, we present a few motivating examples for the ICEO framework, some of which will
be revisited in our numerical experiments in Section 5.
Example 1 (Multi-item Newsvendor). The multi-item Newsvendor problem aims to find
the optimal replenishment quantities for d different products. We let ξ := (ξ1,...,ξd) denote the
random demand of d products and let w ∈Rd denote the associated order quantities. The demand
values ξ might be related to contextual information such as promotions, holiday seasons, brand
information, etc. The objective of this problem is the total inventory cost including the holding

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
13
costs hl and stockout costs bl, which characterize the over-stock and under-stock, respectively. The
objective cost can be formulated as
c(w,ξ) :=
d
X
l=1
hl(wl −ξl)+ + bl(ξl −wl)+,
(4)
where the function (·)+ is defined as max{·,0}. Moreover, we consider a budget capacity constraint
C > 0 on the total order quantities and formulate the feasible set as
S := {w :
d
X
l=1
wl ≤C,w ≥0}.
Example 2 (Risk-Averse Portfolio Optimization). We consider the problem of finding
an optimal risk-averse portfolio of d assets. We denote the random vector of asset returns by
ξ ∈Rd, which may be associated with contextual information such as economic indicators, news
headlines, etc. The decision maker aims to find the best allocation of assets w ∈Rd that optimizes
a weighted combination of the expected return and variance of the portfolio. By introducing an
auxiliary variable w0 ∈R, we formulate the objective as
c(w,w0,ξ) := α
 
d
X
l=1
wlξl −w0
!2
−
d
X
l=1
wlξl,
(5)
where α > 0 is a trade-off parameter. Note that the expectation of the first term in (5) is
αEξ
h
(Pd
l=1 wlξl −w0)2i
, which represents the variance of the investment return Var(Pd
l=1 wlξl)
when w0 is optimally selected as w0 = Eξ
hPd
l=1 wlξl
i
, while the second term is the return of the
portfolio. Therefore, Eξ[c(w,w0,ξ)] trades off between minimizing the variance and maximizing the
expected return of the portfolio. As is standard in the classical portfolio optimization problems,
we constrain the portfolio decision in the simplex ∆d = {w ∈Rd : Pd
l=1 wl = 1,w ≥0} and we have
S := {(w,w0) : w ∈∆d,w0 ≥0,0 ≤w0 ≤¯Ξ},
where ¯Ξ ≥0 is a known upper bound the maximum of the returns ∥ξ∥∞.
Example 3 (Minimum Convex Cost Flow Problem). Many applications such as urban
traffic systems and area transfers in communication networks can be formulated as a minimum
convex cost flow problem (we refer to Chapter 14 of Ahuja et al. (1988) for more details). In the
minimum convex cost flow problem, the decision-maker aims to find the flow that minimizes the
associated cost on the edges. The cost is a convex function of flow and depends on a random
parameter. Suppose we consider a directed graph with d edges and the random parameter ξ ∈Rd.
In this problem, we consider the objective function
c(w,ξ) =
d
X
l=1
gl(wl,ξl)

14
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
where gl is a convex function of wl and gl can be different for different coordinates. Similar to the
standard network flow problem, we let the matrix A denote the node-arc incidence matrix of the
graph and restrict the flow on each edge in the region [l,u]. Therefore, we have the feasible region
S = {w ∈Rd : Aw = 0,w ∈[l,u]d}.
3.
Performance Guarantees
In this section, we demonstrate asymptotic consistency and finite-sample performance guarantees
of the ICEO approach. Let us first introduce some additional notation. We state our results in
terms of arbitrary policy mappings π : X →S, which represent any mapping from the feature space
X to the set of feasible decisions S. Our main interest herein is the class of policies that combine
the optimal solution mapping and hypothesis f, i.e., Π = wρ ◦H. This class of policies could include
both hypotheses learned by the ICEO approach as well as by ETO approaches. In the remaining
part of this work, we let f ∗: X →∆K denote the function that maps from x to the true conditional
distribution p∗(x). We refer to f ∗as the true hypothesis. To quantify our performance guarantees,
we define the following risk functions for any policy π:
1. ˆRn(π): The empirical risk with respect to a given sample {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1, i.e.,
ˆRn(π) := 1
n
n
X
i=1
c(π(xi),ξi).
2. R(π): The expected risk with respect to the underlying joint distribution D of x and ξ, i.e.,
R(π) := Ex,ξ [c(π(x),ξ)] = Ex
" K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(π(x))
#
,
where p∗
k(x) = Pξ(ξ = ˜zk|x) for all k = 1,...,K.
Note that ˆRn(·) is the objective function of (ICEO-ρ). We use the notation Dx to refer to the
marginal distribution of the features x. We further define the optimal risk values for the class of
policies wρ ◦H and w ◦H that we consider herein. Recall that, for all k, ck(·) is convex but in
general not strongly convex. Therefore, there may exist multiple optimal solutions, as denoted by
W(p)arg minw∈S
PK
k=1 pkck(w), for any input probability vector p ∈∆K. In this case, we assume
that the oracle w(·) : ∆K →S as a function that arbitrarily outputs a value from the optimal
solution set W(·), i.e., w(p) ∈W(p) for all p ∈∆K.
1. J ∗: the optimal expected unregularized risk, i.e.,
J ∗:= min
f∈H Ex
" K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w(f(x)))
#
= min
f∈H R(w ◦f).
In Lemma 2 in the Appendix, we demonstrate that the value of the unregularized optimal
risk J ∗does not depend on the particular choice of w(·) and that f ∗is always the minimizer
that achieves J ∗.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
15
2. J ∗
ρ: the optimal expected regularized risk for any given regularization parameter ρ > 0, i.e.,
J ∗
ρ := min
f∈H Ex
" K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(wρ(f(x)))
#
= min
f∈H R(wρ ◦f).
and we let f ∗
ρ denote an optimal hypothesis.
3. ˆJ n
ρ : the optimal empirical risk with any given sample Sn and a given regularization parameter
ρ > 0, i.e.,
ˆJ n
ρ := min
f∈H
1
n
n
X
i=1
c(wρ(f(xi)),ξi)) = min
f∈H
ˆRn(wρ ◦f),
and we let ˆf n
ρ denote an optimal hypothesis.
3.1.
Asymptotic Consistency
We first demonstrate the asymptotic consistency of the ICEO approach. The consistency of ICEO
is three-fold: the consistency of the ICEO risk, the consistency of the ICEO decisions, and the
consistency of the ICEO hypothesis. The asymptotic consistency results build upon the convergence
of the regularized oracle to the original optimization oracle, as stated in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1 (Convergence of Regularized Oracle). Suppose wρ(·) is the regularized
optimal solution mapping for any ρ > 0, as defined in (3). For any positive sequence {ρn} that
satisfies limn→∞ρn = 0, and for any p ∈∆K, we have dist(wρn(p),W(p)) →0 as n →∞.
To establish asymptotic consistency, we require the following assumptions concerning the hypoth-
esis class H and the regularized oracle wρ(·). A standard sufficient (but not necessary) condition to
ensure uniform convergence and thus asymptotic consistency in learning theory is for the hypothe-
sis class to have a finite bracketing number (we refer to Vaart and Wellner (2023) for more details).
We build upon this natural sufficient condition by introducing the multivariate bracketing number
of the hypothesis class H. In other words, we present a modest extension of the standard definition
of the bracketing number for real-valued functions to the multivariate case. Herein, we first define
a multivariate bracket of H relative to any norm ∥· ∥on H.
Definition 1 (Multivariate ϵ-bracket). Given two functions l : X →RK and u : X →RK,
the bracket [l,u] is the set of all functions f ∈H with lk(x) ≤fk(x) ≤uk(x) for each coordinate
k = 1,...,K and for all x ∈X. An ϵ-bracket is a bracket [l,u] with ∥l −u∥< ϵ.
Then the multivariate bracketing number can be defined as follows.
Definition 2 (Multivariate bracketing number). The multivariate bracketing number
N[](ϵ,H,∥· ∥) is the minimum number N of ϵ-brackets [l1,u1],...,[lN,uN] that cover H, i.e., with
the property that for all f ∈H there exists i ∈{1,...,N} such that f ∈[li,ui].

16
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Establishing the asymptotic consistency of our proposed ICEO method requires that H be com-
pact and that its multivariate bracketing number is finite. Note that the metric defined on f is the
sup-norm, ∥f −g∥∞:= supx∈X |f(x) −g(x)|.
Assumption 1. For the compact hypothesis class H, we assume the following properties:
A. (Model specification.) The hypothesis class H includes the true hypothesis f ∗i.e., f ∗∈H.
B. (Finite bracketing number of H.) The multivariate bracketing number, N[](ϵ,H,∥· ∥∞), as
defined in Definition 2, is finite for any ϵ ∈(0,1).
C. (Unique optimal hypotheses.) There does not exists a hypothesis f ̸= f ∗in H such that
W(f(x)) ∩W(f ∗(x)) ̸= ∅, Dx-almost surely for all x ∈X. For ρ > 0 and for all f ′ ̸= f ∗
ρ in H,
there exists ϵ > 0 with Px(∥wρ(f ′(x)) −wρ(f ∗
ρ(x))∥≥ϵ) > 0.
Regularity conditions of the oracle are also needed to establish the asymptotic consistency of the
ICEO method. To be more specific, we assume that the regularized oracle is uniformly Lipschitz,
as presented in Assumptions 2.A-2.B. The third assumption 2.C is only needed for the consistency
of decisions and hypotheses.
Assumption 2 (Uniform Properties of the Regularized Oracle). For
the
regularized
oracle, wρ(·) with ρ ∈(0,ρ0] for some ρ0 > 0, we assume the following properties:
A. (Lipschitz in ρ.) For all p ∈∆K, ∥wρ1(p) −wρ2(p)∥≤Lρ|ρ1 −ρ2| for all ρ1,ρ2 ∈(0,ρ0].
B. (Lipschitz in p.) For all ρ ∈(0,ρ0], ∥wρ(p) −wρ(p)∥≤Lw∥p1 −p2∥.
C. (Unique optimal decisions.) For any ϵ > 0, there exists δ > 0, so that for all ρ ∈(0,ρ0] and
f ∈H it holds that
Px(∥wρ(f(x)) −wρ(f ∗
ρ(x))∥≥ϵ) > 0 ⇒R(wρ ◦f) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ) ≥δ.
To further justify these assumptions, in Appendix A, we study a reasonable sufficient condition
to guarantee these assumptions of uniform Lipschitzness. Namely, we demonstrate that when the
underlying contextual stochastic optimization problem (2) satisfies a linear growth condition away
from the optimal solution set, then the regularized oracle satisfies an “automatic crossover” prop-
erty. The automatic crossover property says that the regularized oracle automatically outputs a
point from the unregularized optimal solution set W(p), whenever ρ is smaller than a certain
“phase-transition” threshold. Whenever the automatic crossover property holds, the uniform Lip-
schitz assumptions hold and thus imply uniform equicontinuity of the regularized oracle, which
allows us to generalize the pointwise convergence of the oracle (Proposition 1) to uniform conver-
gence.
To guarantee the consistency of the ICEO method, we consider a sequence of regularization
parameters ρn, depending on the sample size n, such that ρn converges to zero as n grows to
infinity. Theorem 1 below demonstrates the three levels of consistency.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
17
Theorem 1 (Asymptotic Consistency of ICEO). Suppose that the training data (xi,ξi) is
an i.i.d. sequence from the distribution D and that the sequence of regularization parameters ρn ∈
(0,ρ0] satisfies limn→∞ρn = 0. Then, under Assumptions 1.A - 1.B and Assumptions 2.A - 2.B,
we have the following:
(i) The optimal empirical regularized risk converges to the optimal expected risk, i.e., ˆJ n
ρn →J ∗
with probability 1.
(ii) Additionally, with Assumptions 1.C and 2.C, Dx-almost surely for all x ∈X, the sequence
of ICEO decisions wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) converges to the true set of optimal decisions W(f ∗(x)), i.e.,
dist(wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x))) →0 with probability 1.
(iii) Additionally, with Assumptions 1.C and 2.C, the sequence of ICEO hypotheses converges to
the true hypothesis, i.e, ˆf n
ρn →f ∗with probability 1.
The proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Appendix A. The idea of the proof, particularly for part
(i), is to separately establish the convergence of J ∗
ρ to J ∗and the uniform convergence over ρ of
ˆJ n
ρ to J ∗
ρ. The first technical challenge involved is demonstrating the convergence properties of the
regularized optimal solution oracle wρ(·) to the optimal solution set W(·), even beyond the pointwise
convergence provided in Proposition 1. These properties are needed for showing the convergence
of both J ∗
ρ to J ∗and ˆJ n
ρ to J ∗
ρ. Secondly, to establish the convergence of ˆJ n
ρ to J ∗
ρ uniformly over
ρ as we collect more data, the convergence of the oracle is not enough. Indeed, we demonstrate
finiteness of the bracketing number of the composition class F := {g : g = c ◦wρ ◦f for some ρ ∈
(0,ρ0] and f ∈H} (Lemma 3).
We would like to clarify the relationship between the asymptotic consistency stated in Theorem
1 and the asymptotic optimality defined in Bertsimas and Kallus (2020). In Bertsimas and Kallus
(2020), the authors define asymptotic optimality in terms of the decisions reaching the best objec-
tive function performance possible. Because of the continuity of the cost function c, the convergence
of ICEO decisions, as stated in (ii) of Theorem 1, implies the asymptotic optimality property of
Bertsimas and Kallus (2020).
3.2.
Finite Sample Performance Guarantees
We now provide finite sample performance guarantees of the ICEO solution ˆf n
ρn in the form of
generalization bounds based on Rademacher complexities. In particular, our overall strategy is as
follows: (i) we demonstrate that, due to the presence of the strongly convex decision regularization
function ϕ(·), the optimal solution mapping wρ(·) is Lipschitz, (ii) we use the result of Maurer (2016)
to bound the Rademacher complexity with respect to the cost function of the ICEO framework
by the multivariate Rademacher complexity of the underlying hypothesis class H. In addition,
we slightly abuse the notation and let c(·) : S →RK denote a vector-valued mapping, where each

18
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
component ck(w) denotes the cost c(w,ξ = ˜zk) for all scenarios k = 1,...,K, as defined earlier in
Section 2.
Before we investigate the Rademacher complexities, we first demonstrate the Lipschitz property
of the regularized optimal solution mapping wρ(·) for any positive parameter ρ, based on the
following assumption regarding the Lipschitz property of the cost function c(w) and the strong
convexity constant of the decision regularization function ϕ(·).
Assumption 3. The cost function c(·) and the decision regularization function ϕ(·) satisfy the
following conditions:
A. c(·) is Lc-Lipschitz with respect to the decision w ∈S, i.e., it holds that ∥c(w1) −c(w2)∥2 ≤
Lc∥w1 −w2∥for all w1,w2 ∈S.
B. The decision regularization function ϕ(·) is a 1-strongly convex function on the compact set
S.
Note that we use the ℓ2 norm as the norm on the space of outputs of the cost functions c(·), while
the norm on the space of decisions w remains the generic norm ∥· ∥. The reason for focusing on
the ℓ2 norm is that we can apply the elegant vector contraction inequality of Maurer (2016) when
analyzing the Rademacher complexity. It is also worth mentioning that the Lipschitz condition
in Assumption 3.A implies that the cost functions ck(·) are uniformly Lc-Lipschitz, i.e., ∥c(w1) −
c(w2)∥∞≤Lc∥w1 −w2∥.
Proposition 2 (Lipschitz Properties of wρ(·) and c(·)). Suppose Assumption 3 holds and
note that RK
+ := {p ∈RK : pk ≥0,∀k = 1,...,K}. Then, for any ρ > 0, the optimal solution mapping
wρ(·) is ( Lc
ρ )-Lipschitz:
∥wρ(p) −wρ(p′)∥≤Lc
ρ ∥p −p′∥2,
∀p,p′ ∈RK
+
(6)
Furthermore, c(wρ(·)) is ( L2
c
ρ )-Lipschitz:
∥c(wρ(p)) −c(wρ(p′))∥∞≤∥c(wρ(p)) −c(wρ(p′))∥2 ≤L2
c
ρ ∥p −p′∥2,
∀p,p′ ∈RK
+
(7)
The proof of this Proposition follows standard arguments of Nesterov’s smoothing technique (Nes-
terov (2003)), and a related result with a similar proof style appears in Gupta and Kallus (2021).
Detailed proof can be found in Appendix B.1.
To establish the generalization bound for the ICEO risk, we rely on both regular single-variate
and multi-variate Rademacher complexity. In the ICEO setting, given a class of policies Π, where
π : X →S for all π ∈Π, we can apply generalization bounds that directly use the Rademacher

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
19
complexity of the function class c ◦Π. Given a sample {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 the empirical Rademacher
complexity ˆRn(c ◦Π) of the function class c ◦Π is defined by
ˆRn(c ◦Π) := Eσ
"
2
n sup
g∈c◦Π
n
X
i=1
σig(xi,ξi)
#
= Eσ
"
2
n sup
π∈Π
n
X
i=1
σic(π(xi),ξi)
#
,
where σi are independent random variables drawn from the Rademacher distribution, i.e. Pr(σi =
+1) = Pr(σi = −1) = 1
2 for all i = 1,2,...,n. The expected Rademacher complexity Rn(c◦Π) is then
defined as the expectation of ˆRn(c ◦Π) with respect to the i.i.d. sample {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from
the distribution D:
Rn(c ◦Π) = E(xi,ξi)∼D[ ˆRn(c ◦Π)].
Next, we introduce the multivariate Rademacher complexity as a generalization of the regular
Rademacher complexity to a class of vector-valued functions. In the ICEO context, we focus on
the hypothesis class H which takes values in ∆K. Following Bertsimas and Kallus (2020), Maurer
(2016) and Balghiti et al. (2019), the empirical multivariate Rademacher complexity ˆRn(H) is
defined in our context as
ˆRn(H) = Eσ
"
2
n sup
f∈H
n
X
i=1
K
X
k=1
σikfk(xi)
#
,
where σik are also independent random variables drawn from the Rademacher distribution for all
i = 1,2,...,n and k = 1,...,K. Correspondingly, the expected multivariate Rademacher complexity
Rn(H) is then defined as
Rn(H) = Exi∼Dx[ ˆRn(H)],
In the remainder of this section, we provide generalization bounds with respect to the expected
single-variate and multi-variate Rademacher complexities. We note that similar results can be
achieved with respect to the empirical versions of the Rademacher complexities. Our focus on the
expected versions is justified since, for many hypothesis classes H, we can bound Rn(H) by a term
that converges to 0 as the sample size n grows. For example, Balghiti et al. (2019) establish upper
bounds of Rn(H) for regularized linear hypothesis classes with the rate of O( 1
√n), where the O(·)
notation hides dimension dependent constants that depend on the type of regularization used.
Given a sample {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1, we aim to provide a high-probability bound on the out-of-sample
risk R(wρn ◦f), given the in-sample risks ˆRn(wρn ◦f) and ˆRn(wρn ◦f;ρn), that holds uniformly
for any hypothesis f ∈H. As such, our generalization bound is constructed based on the classic
generalization bound with Rademacher complexity due to Bartlett and Mendelson (2002), which
we restate below as specialized to the ICEO setting. Recall that ¯c := supw∈S,ξ∈Ξ c(w,ξ).

20
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Theorem 2 (Bartlett and Mendelson (2002)). Let Π be a family of functions mapping
from X to S with bounded Rademacher complexity Rn(c◦Π). Then, for any δ ∈(0,1], with probabil-
ity at least 1−δ over i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from the distribution D, the following inequality
holds for all π ∈Π:
R(π) ≤ˆRn(π) + Rn(c ◦Π) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ)
2n
.
The next step of our analysis is to apply the vector contraction inequality of Maurer (2016) to
derive a generalization bound that depends directly on the multi-variate Rademacher complexity
of the hypothesis class H.
Theorem 3 (Generalization of ICEO). Suppose Assumption 3 holds and that the hypothesis
class H has bounded multi-variate Rademacher complexity Rn(H). Then, for any δ ∈(0,1] and
ρn > 0, with probability at least 1 −δ over i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from the distribution D,
the following inequalities hold for all f ∈H:
R(wρn ◦f) ≤ˆRn(wρn ◦f) +
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ)
2n
.
(8)
Note that the right-hand side of the inequality in Theorem 3 involves the non-regularized empirical
risk, which may be evaluated for any f ∈H. This is also the objective function of (ICEO-ρ).
As mentioned previously, one can often establish upper bounds on Rn(H) that converge to zero,
for example at the rate O( 1
√n). Therefore, Theorem 3 suggests that we should set the sequence
of regularization parameters ρn so that Rn(H)/ρn converges to zero as well, in which case the
remainder terms on the right-hand side of (8) converge to zero. We now state the proof of Theorem
3. Proof of of Theorem 3 utilizes Proposition 2 and can be found in Appendix B.1
Leveraging Theorem 3, we obtain the following corollary that provides an upper bound for the
suboptimality gap, in terms of out-of-sample risk evaluation, for the ICEO minimizer ˆf n
ρn relative
to the out-of-sample risk of the optimal in-class hypothesis and the true hypothesis.
Corollary 1. Suppose Assumption 3 holds and that the hypothesis class H has bounded multi-
variate Rademacher complexity Rn(H). Let f ∗
H ∈arg minf∈H R(w ◦f) denote an optimal in-class
hypothesis. Then, for any δ ∈(0,1] and ρn > 0, with probability at least 1 −δ over i.i.d. data
{(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from the distribution D, the following inequality holds:
R(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) −R(wρn ◦f ∗
H) ≤
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + 3¯c
2
s
2log( 2
δ)
n
.
If, in addition, we have f ∗∈H, then we have
R(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) −R(wρn ◦f ∗) ≤
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + 3¯c
2
s
2log( 2
δ)
n
.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
21
Remark 1. The generalization bound provided in Theorem 3 involves the Rademacher com-
plexity Rn(H) of the hypothesis class H, which returns outputs in ∆K. It is noteworthy that, if H
involves a softmax operator, i.e., H = soft ◦˜H for some hypothesis class ˜H outputting in RK, then
it is possible to obtain an identical generalization bound involving the Rademacher complexity
Rn( ˜H) of the hypothesis class ˜H. Indeed, since the softmax function soft is Lipschitz (Gao and
Pavel (2017)) with constant 1, the Lipschitz bound (7) can be extended to a bound involving the
outputs of ˜H with the same (L2
c/ρ) constant. Alternatively and equivalently, the vector contraction
inequality of Maurer (2016) can be extended to a Lipschitz mapping (such as the softmax func-
tion) that has both multivariate input and output. This extended vector contraction inequality can
be obtained by a straightforward extension of Lemma 7 and Theorem 3 of Maurer (2016) to the
multivariate case.
4.
Computational Methods
In this section, we discuss the computational difficulties of solving the ICEO formulation (ICEO-ρ)
and present multiple approaches to address them.
Non-convexity. First, we point out that the ICEO formulation, (ICEO-ρ), is not a convex
optimization problem even in a very simple case where both the objective and constraints of the
nominal optimization problem are linear and the decision regularization is quadratic, as stated in
Example 4 in Appendix B.2. This example shows that, even in this simplest case, (ICEO-ρ-LP) is
not a convex optimization problem. Besides non-convexity, a more serious issue from a practical
standpoint is the potential of non-differentiability of optimal solution mapping.
Non-differentiability.
To solve the non-convex ICEO problem (ICEO-ρ), a default approach
in machine learning is to use a gradient-based algorithm such as the basic stochastic gradient
descent method. Indeed, in practice, gradient-based algorithms are often able to deliver high-quality
solutions for machine learning problems, especially in high dimensions. Unfortunately, applying
these basic gradient-based methods to solve the ICEO formulation poses an additional major dif-
ficulty due to the non-differentiability of the optimal solution mapping wρ(·). Although wρ(·) is a
continuous function, as guaranteed for example by Proposition 2, it is generally not differentiable.
The non-differentiability leads to major difficulties in applying gradient-based methods while solv-
ing ICEO-ρ. As reviewed in Section 1.1, existing studies that focused on directly learning the
optimal solution mapping w(f ∗(x)) also encounter the same issue of non-differentiability. Wilder
et al. (2019b) does not discuss much about this. Donti et al. (2017) use the output of an auto-
matic gradient function calculated by back-propagation of a neural network. Agrawal et al. (2019)
approximate the gradient by solving a group of linear equations based on KKT conditions. How-
ever, all existing methods fail to demonstrate theoretical reliability or performance guarantees in
approximating the gradient.

22
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
The non-differentiability of the optimal solution mapping mainly arises from the constraints
and the points of discontinuity occur where there is a “jump” in the optimal solution, e.g., in the
polyhedral case as in Example 4. Therefore, a non-differentiable optimal solution map may also have
regions where it is constant (or close to constant), resulting in the gradient of the ICEO objective
being equal to zero. We demonstrate this poor behavior in Figure 1a, where we plot the second
coordinate of the optimal solution mapping wρ(·) with respect to the first two coordinates of the
input probability vector, for the multi-product newsvendor problem in Example 1, demonstrating
the piece-wise constant shape. Such piece-wise constant shapes will greatly impede the performance
of gradient-based methods, even if the gradient is easily calculated. This is because the gradient
of the optimal solution mapping is zero in flat regions creating poor local minima that are very
difficult to escape.
(a) 3-D plot of the optimal oracle. It is clear that
the landscape of the optimal solution mapping has
cliffs and platforms.
(b) 3-D plot of the approximated oracle constructed
using polynomial functions. The piece-wise con-
stant shape is smoothed out.
Figure 1
The landscape of the optimal and the approximated oracle.
To address the issue of non-differentiability and its consequences leading to poor local optima
and slow convergence, we develop a framework for approximating the mapping wρ(·) with a differ-
entiable function ˜wρ(·), which allows us to smooth out the optimal solution mapping and enhance
convergence to a good local optimum. Figure 1b is an example of smoothing out the piece-wise
constant shape by constructing an approximate oracle using polynomial kernel regression. As noted
before, gradient-based methods are often highly effective at delivering high quality solutions to non-
convex machine learning problems in practice. Thus, in a practical sense, the non-differentiability of
the optimal solution mapping is a much more serious concern than the non-convexity. Our general
strategy of approximating the optimal solution mapping with a differentiable function, for which
we expand upon and give examples in Section 4.1, greatly increases the practical viability of the
ICEO approach.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
23
4.1.
Approximating Optimal Solution Mappings
In this section, we propose a general methodology for approximating the potentially non-
differentiable optimal solution mapping. In Appendix C, In we provide two examples of using
polynomial functions to approximate the optimal solution mapping.
As stated in the previous section, the major computational difficulty in solving the ICEO training
problem (ICEO-ρ) in practice is the non-differentiability of the mapping wρ(·). To overcome this
difficulty, for any given ρ, we approximate the function wρ(·) with a differentiable function ˜wρ(·) :
∆K →S. Then instead of (ICEO-ρ), we solve the following problem:
min
f∈H
1
n
n
X
i=1
c(wi,ξi)
(Approx-ICEO-ρ)
s.t.
wi = ˜wρ(f(xi))
To construct such an approximation ˜wρ(·), we rely on the ability to evaluate the optimal solution
mapping wρ(p) for any given p ∈∆K, as stated in Section 2. We can then generate a sequence
of samples (pi,wρ(pi)) and build an approximation function ˜wρ(·) using any class of continuous
functions with enough representation power, such as polynomial functions or neural networks.
We consider two generic types of approximation schemes for building the mapping ˜wρ(·): (i)
uniform approximations, and (ii) high-probability approximations. Uniform approximation schemes
satisfy a uniform error bound, as formalized below in Assumption 4, and can be achieved by an
interpolation method such as the Bernstein polynomial method as described in Section C.1. Note
that, for each j = 1,...,K and p ∈∆K, we use the notation wρ,j(p) and ˜wρ,j(p) to refer to the jth
coordinates of wρ(p) and ˜wρ(p), respectively.
Assumption 4 (Uniform Error Bound). For each j = 1,...,K, there exists a constant
Eunif
j
≥0 such that the approximate optimal solution mapping ˜wρ(·) : ∆K →S satisfies:
|wρ,j(p) −˜wρ,j(p)| ≤Eunif
j
,
∀p ∈∆K.
The uniform error bound in Assumption 4 provides guarantees for the approximation error over all
probability vectors from the simplex ∆K. There are two main drawbacks that apply to all known
approaches for achieving a uniform error bound. First, achieving a tight uniform error bound
requires exact or near-exact computations of the optimal solution mapping wρ(p) for all p ∈∆K. In
practice, we may only have an approximate optimal solution mapping available. Second, the sample
size required by a method that achieves Assumption 4, for example, an interpolations scheme,
may be prohibitively large. For these reasons we are motivated to consider a high-probability error
bound, which would hold for the more realistic approach of using a regression method, possibly
with noise in the output of wρ(·), to fit the approximate optimal solution mapping. We consider

24
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
a generic approach that uses a hypothesis class G for the approximate optimal solution mappings.
Assumption 5 below formalizes our high-probability error bound, which holds for a wide range of
regression methods including, for example, the polynomial kernel regression method considered in
Section C.2. In Assumption 5, we work with a reference distribution Dp on ∆K that we use to
generate samples {pi}m
i=1 to feed into a regression method. In addition, for any f ∈H, we later use
the notation Df(x) to refer to the distribution on ∆K induced by the marginal distribution Dx of
x ∈X.
Assumption 5 (High-probability Error Bound). Let G be a family of candidate approxi-
mate optimal solution mappings whereby ˜wρ(·) : ∆K →S for all ˜wρ(·) ∈G. For each j = 1,...,K,
there exists a function Eprob
j
(·,·;G) : N × [0,1) →[0,∞) such that, for any distribution Dp on ∆K
and for any δ ∈(0,1], with probability at least 1 −δ over m independent samples drawn from Dp
with empirical distribution ˆDm
p , it holds for all ˜wρ(·) ∈G that:
EDp[|wρ,j(p) −˜wρ,j(p)|] −E ˆ
Dm
p [|wρ,j(p) −˜wρ,j(p)|]
 ≤Eprob
j
(m,δ;G).
When using an approximate optimal solution mapping with either a uniform or a high-probability
error bound guarantee, a natural question is: do the performance guarantees of the ICEO approach
developed in Section 3 extend to problem (Approx-ICEO-ρ)? We now answer this question affir-
matively by extending the generalization bounds of Theorem 3 to situations with approximate
mappings satisfying either Assumption 4 or Assumption 5. We make an implicit assumption that,
after solving problem (Approx-ICEO-ρ), the decision-maker uses the correct optimal solution map-
ping wρ(·) to make decisions. Therefore, the left hand side of our bounds involve the true risk
R(wρ ◦f) with the correct mapping while the right hand sides involve the empirical risk ˆRn( ˜wρ ◦f)
with the approximation (and the reguarlized version thereof).
Theorem 4. Suppose Assumption 3 holds and that the hypothesis class H has bounded multi-
variate Rademacher complexity Rn(H). Then, for any δ ∈(0,1] and ρn > 0, we have the following:
(i) If the approximate optimal solution mapping ˜wρ(·) satisfies the uniform error bound as stated
in Assumption 4, then with probability at least 1 −δ over i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from
the distribution D, the following inequalities hold for all f ∈H:
R(wρn ◦f) ≤ˆRn( ˜wρn ◦f) +
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ)
2n
+ Lc
d
X
j=1
Eunif
j
(9)
(ii) If the approximate optimal solution mapping ˜wρ(·) comes from a family G satisfying the high
probability error bound as stated in Assumption 5, then with probability at least 1 −δ over

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
25
i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from the distribution D and over m independent samples {pi}m
i=1
drawn from a reference distribution Dp on ∆K, the following inequalities hold for all f ∈H:
R(wρn ◦f) ≤ˆRn( ˜wρn ◦f) + Lc
d
X
j=1
"
1
m
m
X
i=1
|wρn,j(pi) −˜wρn,j(pi)| + Eprob
j
(n,δ/2d;G) + Eprob
j
(m,δ/2d;G)
#
+
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + diam(S)LcTV(Df(x),Dp) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ )
2n
(10)
5.
Numerical Experiments
In this section, we demonstrate the numerical performance of our proposed ICEO framework using
synthetic data. We first summarize the benchmark methods that we adopted for comparison:
1. Sample average approximation (SAA). In this benchmark, the decision-maker simply ignores
the contextual features and minimizes the average of cost functions using the empirical dis-
tribution of the observations of the random parameter.
2. The two-step estimate-then-optimize (ETO) method is based on cross-entropy loss (ETO-
Entropy). In this benchmark, we estimate the hypothesis f ∈H using the cross-entropy loss
function (a standard loss function for multi-class classification) instead of the downstream
optimization goal.
3. The prescriptive method (PRES) proposed by Bertsimas and Kallus (2020). We consider the
KNN-based (PRES-KNN) and kernel-based (PRES-Kernel) variants.
Moreover, we consider two different types of ICEO methods.
1. Vanilla ICEO (ICEO). ICEO method that solves (ICEO-ρ).
2. The ICEO method regularized by cross-entropy loss (ICEO-Entropy). This is the ICEO
method incorporating an additional cross-entropy loss term as a regularization component in
conjunction with the objective function described in (ICEO-ρ). Adding the cross-entropy term
as a regularization component aligns with practical intuition provided by existing literature
(Kao and Van Roy 2012, Elmachtoub and Grigas 2022).
Data Generation Process. The synthetic data is generated in the following manner. The fea-
tures xi ∈Rp are generated independently following the multi-variate Gaussian distribution xi ∼
N(0,MIp) for some constant M > 0 and where Ip is an identity matrix. Then, given K scenar-
ios Ξ = {˜z1,..., ˜zK}, the corresponding conditional probability vector is generated according to a
randomly initialized neural network, denoted as f ∗
NN, composed with the softmax function. The
softmax function is implemented by adding a softmax layer as the output layer. Subsequently, ξi
takes on the value of ˜zk with a probability of p∗
k(x) = soft ◦f ∗
NN for all k = 1,...,K.

26
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Optimal Solution Mapping Approximation. The optimal oracle is approximated using neural
networks in the experiment. We first generate a data set {(pi,wi)}m
i=1 by uniformly sampling pi
from the simplex ∆K and then generating wi := wρ(pi). Then we train a neural network with one
hidden layer to approximate the oracle. The neural network is trained with respect to the mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) loss.
ICEO Hypothesis Learning. In this experiment, we consider the hypothesis class H := soft ◦˜H
where ˜H represents a neural network. If ˜H contains the true hypothesis f ∗
NN, then H is well-specified.
However, if ˜H only includes neural networks with fewer layers or hidden nodes, it indicates the
case of model misspecification. For both cases of well-specification and misspecification, we employ
the Adam optimization algorithm (Kingma and Ba (2014)) to solve (Approx-ICEO-ρ) and learn
the hypothesis.
5.1.
Multi-item Newsvendor Problem
We consider the multi-item newsvendor problem, as in Example 1, with synthetic data. We consider
d = 2, which is the case where the newsvendor jointly decides the order quantities of two products
with an overall budget of 50. The decision variable w ∈R2 and random demand ξ ∈R2 are both two-
dimensional, corresponding to the order quantity and demand of the two products. The newsvendor
aims to minimize the total inventory cost as formulated in (4), with unit overstock costs h1 and h2
set to 1 and 1.3 and unit stockout cost b1 and b2 set to 9 and 8 for the two products, respectively.
Results and Comparisons with Benchmarks. In this experiment, we vary the number of scenarios
K ∈5,10,15. The realizations for each scenario, ˜z1,..., ˜zK, are generated randomly. Further details
on the scenario generation process can be found in Appendix D. We set the regularization coefficient
ρ = 0.01 and consider multiple training set sizes n ∈{100,300,500,700}. For every value of n,
we run 25 simulations. We use a validation set to tune the hyper-parameters for PRES-KNN,
PRES-Kernel, ETO-Entropy and the ICEO method. To evaluate out-of-sample performances of
all these methods, we generate a test set including 1000 samples in each simulation. We evaluate
performance using the newsvendor cost (4).
Figure 2 illustrates the performance of the ICEO methods and the non-parametric benchmarks
across different numbers of scenarios. Each sub-figure demonstrates that the ICEO-Entropy method
consistently outperforms all benchmarks, regardless of the training set sizes and numbers of scenar-
ios. Although the vanilla ICEO method sometimes falls short of the benchmarks except for SAA,
incorporating the cross-entropy loss in ICEO leads to the superior performance of ICEO-Entropy,
which outperforms all benchmarks, even the ETO entropy, in every scenario. A comparison between
vanilla ICEO and ICEO-Entropy reveals that ICEO-Entropy outperforms the former. The possi-
ble reason might be that incorporating the oracle in the ICEO objective induces a higher level of

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
27
non-convexity and increases the likelihood of converging to a poor local minimum since the ICEO
objective is non-convex in the predicted distribution. By adding a small component of cross-entropy
loss, the gradient-based method suffers less from non-convexity while still being influenced by the
ICEO objective. Despite this computational issue, the ICEO objective demonstrates the advan-
tages of considering the ultimate optimization goal, as evident when comparing ICEO-Entropy with
ETO-Entropy. Moreover, when compared with non-parametric prescriptive methods, the superior
performances of the two ICEO methods and the ETO-Entropy method highlight the benefit of
modeling the underlying conditional distribution.
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
200
220
240
260
280
Newsvendor cost
(a) K = 5
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
100
125
150
175
200
Newsvendor cost
(b) K = 10
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
250
300
350
400
Newsvendor cost
(c) K = 15
Figure 2
Comparison of ICEO with benchmark methods for multi-item newsvendor problem.
Results on Model Misspecification We then examine the performance of ICEO and benchmark
methods in the case of model misspecification. When the model is properly specified, the data
generation neural network f ∗
NN consists of two hidden layers, whereas the hypothesis class H
consists of linear models. Since the ICEO methods and ETO-Entropy are the only approaches
that utilize this hypothesis class to model the underlying conditional distribution, we compare
the performance of these three methods to study the effect of model misspecification. To evaluate
their effectiveness, we utilize the newsvendor cost on a test set comprising 1000 samples in each
simulation. Figure 3 illustrates the performance of vanilla ICEO and ICEO-Entropy in comparison
to the two-step ETO-Entropy method. As we can see, under model misspecification, both ICEO
methods consistently outperform the two-step ETO-Entropy approach. This finding demonstrates
the advantage of considering the ultimate optimization goal under model misspecification while
estimating the conditional distribution.

28
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
Newsvendor cost
ICEO
ICEO-Entropy
ETO-Entropy
Figure 3
Comparison between ICEO and ETO-Entropy under model misspecification on the multi-item
newsvendor problem.
5.2.
Quadratic Cost Network Flow Problem
In this part, we consider the minimum cost network flow problem. The problem formulation is as
stated in Example 3, where gd(wd,ξd) = cd(wd −ξd)2. We consider a simple network demonstrated
in Figure 4, where there are two source nodes 1 and 2, and two sink nodes, 3 and 4. The amount
of flow that sources out of each of the source nodes 1 and 2 must be no less than a threshold equal
to 10. Similarly, the amount of flow that goes into each of the sink nodes 3 and 4 must be at least
10. We let w1,w2,w3,w4 denote the amount of flow on arcs (1,3),(1,4),(2,3),(2,4), respectively.
Figure 4
Network graph
Results and Comparisons with Benchmarks. In this experiment, we consider K ∈{5,10,15}. The
realizations of each scenario, ˜z1,..., ˜zK, are generated randomly. Again, more details regarding the
scenario generation process can be found in Appendix D. Furthermore, the weights of each arc
c1,c2,c3,c4 take the values of 1,3,2,2 respectively. The regularization coefficient ρ = 0.01. As in
Section 5.1, we consider multiple training set sizes n ∈{100,300,500,700}, we run 25 simulations
for each sample size, and the test set includes 1000 samples in each simulation. To tune the
hyper-parameters for ICEO, ETO-Entropy, and the two prescriptive methods, PRES-KNN and
PRES-Kernel, we use a validation set including 1000 samples.
Figure 5 compare the test-set performance of the ICEO method and benchmarks across different
numbers of scenarios and sample sizes. Each sub-figure demonstrates that either the vanilla ICEO
method or the ICEO-Entropy method outperforms all benchmarks in this experiment. Compared
to the best benchmark (PRES-KNN), there is a vague trend that the advantage of ICEO methods
is more significant when the sample size is limited.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
29
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
20
25
30
Network cost
(a) K = 5
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
20
25
30
Network cost
(b) K= 10
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
20
30
40
Network cost
(c) K = 15
Figure 5
Comparison of ICEO with benchmark methods on the minimum cost network flow problem.
Results on Model Misspecification. As in Section 5.1, we investigate the case of model misspec-
ification. The model misspecification is again introduced by having the data generation neural
network f ∗
NN consist of two hidden layers, whereas the hypothesis class H consists of linear models.
We only compare the two ICEO methods and ETO-Entropy because these are the only approaches
that utilize this hypothesis class to model the underlying conditional distribution. Figure 3 illus-
trates the performance of vanilla ICEO, ICEO-Entropy, and ETO-Entropy methods. It is shown
that again, both vanilla ICEO and ICEO-Entropy consistently outperform ETO-Entropy. More-
over, one may observe a possible trend that this advantage of ICEO methods is stronger when there
are fewer training samples. This finding again verifies the advantage of considering the ultimate
optimization goal while estimating the conditional distribution.
100
300
500
700
Training sample size
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
Network cost
ICEO
ICEO-Entropy
SAA
ETO-Entropy
Figure 6
Comparison between ICEO and ETO-Entropy under model misspecification on the minimum cost
network flow problem.
6.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a new framework for estimating the underlying conditional distribution
in contextual stochastic optimization. The proposed ICEO framework uses a flexible hypothesis

30
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
class to learn by incorporating the downstream optimization goal and applies readily to the case
where the random parameter is a discrete random variable and the nominal optimization problem is
convex. We then prove that the ICEO method is asymptotically consistent and provide finite-sample
analysis in the form of generalization bounds. Moreover, we investigate the non-differentiability of
the regularized optimal solution oracle which often leads to computational difficulties in calculating
the gradients and poor local minima that are hard to escape. We address this issue by approximating
the regularized oracle using differentiable functions. We then provide approximation error bounds
and the corresponding generalization bounds when using the approximated oracle. Among others,
a natural direction for future research is to move further beyond the assumption of finite suport
for the random parameter by considering modeling extensions and/or theory.
Acknowledgments
PG acknowledges the support of NSF AI Institute for Advances in Optimization Award 211253.
References
Agrawal A, Amos B, Barratt S, Boyd S, Diamond S, Kolter JZ (2019) Differentiable convex optimization
layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 9558–9570.
Ahmadi H, Shanbhag UV (2014) Data-driven first-order methods for misspecified convex optimization prob-
lems: Global convergence and rate estimates. 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 4228–
4233 (IEEE).
Ahuja RK, Magnanti TL, Orlin JB (1988) Network flows (Cambridge, Mass.: Alfred P. Sloan School of
Management, Massachusetts).
Amos B, Kolter JZ (2017) Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. International
Conference on Machine Learning, 136–145 (PMLR).
Balghiti OE, Elmachtoub AN, Grigas P, Tewari A (2019) Generalization bounds in the predict-then-optimize
framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11488 .
Ban GY, Rudin C (2019) The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning. Operations
Research 67(1):90–108.
Bartlett PL, Mendelson S (2002) Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 3(Nov):463–482.
Bennouna M, Van Parys BP (2021) Learning and decision-making with data: Optimal formulations and
phase transitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06911 .
Berge C (1877) Topological spaces: Including a treatment of multi-valued functions, vector spaces and con-
vexity (Oliver & Boyd).
Berthet Q, Blondel M, Teboul O, Cuturi M, Vert JP, Bach F (2020) Learning with differentiable perturbed
optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08676 .

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
31
Bertsimas D, Dunn J, Mundru N (2019) Optimal prescriptive trees. INFORMS Journal on Optimization
1(2):164–183.
Bertsimas D, Gupta V, Kallus N (2018a) Data-driven robust optimization. Mathematical Programming
167:235–292.
Bertsimas D, Gupta V, Kallus N (2018b) Robust sample average approximation. Mathematical Programming
171:217–282.
Bertsimas D, Kallus N (2020) From predictive to prescriptive analytics. Management Science 66(3):1025–
1044.
Bertsimas D, McCord C (2019) From predictions to prescriptions in multistage optimization problems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.11637 .
Blanchet J, Kang Y, Murthy K (2019) Robust wasserstein profile inference and applications to machine
learning. Journal of Applied Probability 56(3):830–857.
Chehrazi N, Weber TA (2010) Monotone approximation of decision problems. Operations Research 58(4-
part-2):1158–1177.
Chu LY, Shanthikumar JG, Shen ZJM (2008) Solving operational statistics via a bayesian analysis. Opera-
tions Research Letters 36(1):110–116.
Chung TH, Rostami V, Bastani H, Bastani O (2022) Decision-aware learning for optimizing health supply
chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.08507 .
Cristian R, Harsha P, Perakis G, Quanz BL, Spantidakis I (2022) End-to-end learning via constraint-enforcing
approximators for linear programs with applications to supply chains.
De Klerk E, Den Hertog D, Elabwabi G (2008) On the complexity of optimization over the standard simplex.
European journal of operational research 191(3):773–785.
Delage E, Ye Y (2010) Distributionally robust optimization under moment uncertainty with application to
data-driven problems. Operations research 58(3):595–612.
Deng Y, Sen S (2022) Predictive stochastic programming. Computational Management Science 1–34.
Donti P, Amos B, Kolter JZ (2017) Task-based end-to-end model learning in stochastic optimization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 5484–5494.
Elmachtoub A, Liang JCN, McNellis R (2020) Decision trees for decision-making under the predict-then-
optimize framework. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2858–2867 (PMLR).
Elmachtoub AN, Grigas P (2022) Smart “predict, then optimize”. Management Science 68(1):9–26.
Elmachtoub AN, Lam H, Zhang H, Zhao Y (2023) Estimate-then-optimize versus integrated-estimation-
optimization: A stochastic dominance perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06833 .
Ferber A, Wilder B, Dilkina B, Tambe M (2020) Mipaal: Mixed integer program as a layer. Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, 1504–1511.

32
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Gao B, Pavel L (2017) On the properties of the softmax function with application in game theory and
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00805 .
Gao R, Kleywegt A (2023) Distributionally robust stochastic optimization with wasserstein distance. Math-
ematics of Operations Research 48(2):603–655.
Gupta V, Huang M, Rusmevichientong P (2022) Debiasing in-sample policy performance for small-data,
large-scale optimization. Operations Research .
Gupta V, Kallus N (2021) Data pooling in stochastic optimization. Management Science .
Gupta V, Rusmevichientong P (2021) Small-data, large-scale linear optimization with uncertain objectives.
Management Science 67(1):220–241.
Hannah L, Powell W, Blei D (2010) Nonparametric density estimation for stochastic optimization with an
observable state variable. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23.
Ho CP, Hanasusanto GA (2019) On data-driven prescriptive analytics with side information: A regularized
nadaraya-watson approach. Technical report, Technical report, March.
Ho-Nguyen N, Kılın¸c-Karzan F (2019) Exploiting problem structure in optimization under uncertainty via
online convex optimization. Mathematical Programming 177(1):113–147.
Ho-Nguyen N, Kılın¸c-Karzan F (2020) Risk guarantees for end-to-end prediction and optimization processes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15046 .
Hong LJ, Huang Z, Lam H (2021) Learning-based robust optimization: Procedures and statistical guarantees.
Management Science 67(6):3447–3467.
Hu Y, Kallus N, Mao X (2022) Fast rates for contextual linear optimization. Management Science 68(6):4236–
4245.
Jiang H, Shanbhag UV (2013) On the solution of stochastic optimization problems in imperfect information
regimes. 2013 Winter Simulations Conference (WSC), 821–832 (IEEE).
Jiang H, Shanbhag UV (2016) On the solution of stochastic optimization and variational problems in imper-
fect information regimes. SIAM Journal on Optimization 26(4):2394–2429.
Kallus N, Mao X (2020) Stochastic optimization forests. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07473 .
Kannan R, Bayraksan G, Luedtke JR (2020) Residuals-based distributionally robust optimization with
covariate information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01088 .
Kannan R, Bayraksan G, Luedtke JR (2022) Data-driven sample average approximation with covariate
information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13554 .
Kao Yh, Roy B, Yan X (2009) Directed regression. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
22:889–897.
Kao YH, Van Roy B (2012) Directed time series regression for control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6141 .

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
33
Kingma DP, Ba J (2014) Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 .
Kotary J, Fioretto F, Van Hentenryck P, Wilder B (2021) End-to-end constrained optimization learning: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16378 .
Lasserre JB (2015) An introduction to polynomial and semi-algebraic optimization, volume 52 (Cambridge
University Press).
Liu H, Grigas P (2021) Risk bounds and calibration for a smart predict-then-optimize method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.08887 .
Liu J, Li G, Sen S (2022) Coupled learning enabled stochastic programming with endogenous uncertainty.
Mathematics of Operations Research 47(2):1681–1705.
Liyanage LH, Shanthikumar JG (2005) A practical inventory control policy using operational statistics.
Operations Research Letters 33(4):341–348.
Mandi J, Guns T (2020) Interior point solving for lp-based prediction+ optimisation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.13943 .
Mandi J, Stuckey PJ, Guns T, et al. (2020) Smart predict-and-optimize for hard combinatorial optimization
problems. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, 1603–1610.
Maurer A (2016) A vector-contraction inequality for rademacher complexities. International Conference on
Algorithmic Learning Theory, 3–17 (Springer).
Nesterov Y (2003) Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87 (Springer Science
& Business Media).
Poganˇci´c MV, Paulus A, Musil V, Martius G, Rolinek M (2019) Differentiation of blackbox combinatorial
solvers. International Conference on Learning Representations.
Poursoltani M, Delage E, Georghiou A (2023) Robust data-driven prescriptiveness optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.05937 .
Qi M, Cao Y, Shen ZJ (2022) Distributionally robust conditional quantile prediction with fixed design.
Management Science 68(3):1639–1658.
Qi M, Shen ZJ (2022) Integrating prediction/estimation and optimization with applications in operations
management. Tutorials in Operations Research: Emerging and Impactful Topics in Operations, 36–58
(INFORMS).
Qi M, Shi Y, Qi Y, Ma C, Yuan R, Wu D, Shen ZJM (2020) A practical end-to-end inventory management
model with deep learning. Available at SSRN 3737780 .
Ramamurthy V, George Shanthikumar J, Shen ZJM (2012) Inventory policy with parametric demand: Oper-
ational statistics, linear correction, and regression. Production and Operations Management 21(2):291–
308.

34
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Sadana U, Chenreddy A, Delage E, Forel A, Frejinger E, Vidal T (2023) A survey of contextual optimization
methods for decision making under uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.10374 .
Sen B (2018) A gentle introduction to empirical process theory and applications. Lecture Notes, Columbia
University 11:28–29.
Sundaram RK, et al. (1996) A first course in optimization theory (Cambridge university press).
Vaart Avd, Wellner JA (2023) Empirical processes. Weak Convergence and Empirical Processes: With Appli-
cations to Statistics, 127–384 (Springer).
Van der Vaart AW (2000) Asymptotic statistics, volume 3 (Cambridge university press).
Van Parys BP, Esfahani PM, Kuhn D (2021) From data to decisions: Distributionally robust optimization
is optimal. Management Science 67(6):3387–3402.
Wainwright MJ (2019) High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48 (Cambridge
University Press).
Wang I, Becker C, Van Parys B, Stellato B (2023) Learning for robust optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.19225 .
Wiesemann W, Kuhn D, Sim M (2014) Distributionally robust convex optimization. Operations research
62(6):1358–1376.
Wilder B, Dilkina B, Tambe M (2019a) Melding the data-decisions pipeline: Decision-focused learning for
combinatorial optimization. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33,
1658–1665.
Wilder B, Ewing E, Dilkina B, Tambe M (2019b) End to end learning and optimization on graphs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.13732 .

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
35
Appendix A:
Lemmas and Proofs for Section 3.1
Lemma 1. For any ρ > 0, wρ(·) is a single-valued continuous function of p ∈∆K.
Proof of Lemma 1
From part 2 in Theorem 9.17 of Sundaram et al. (1996), the mapping wρ(p) : ∆k →S
is a continuous function of p.
□
Lemma 2. Suppose that Assumptions 1.A and 1.C hold, and let w(·) : ∆K →S be an optimal solution
mapping such that w(p) ∈W(p) for all p ∈∆K. Then, we have that: (i) f ∗is the unique minimizer of
minf∈H R(w ◦f;0); (ii) the optimal expected unregularized risk is J ∗:= minf∈H R(w ◦f;0) = R(w ◦f ∗,0),
and the value of J ∗is the same for all valid optimal solution mappings w(·).
Proof of Lemma 2
We first prove part (i). Suppose that there exists ¯f ̸= f ∗in H such that
Ex
" K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w( ¯f(x)))
#
≤Ex
" K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x)))
#
.
Since w(f ∗(x)) ∈W(f ∗(x)) and f ∗(x) is the true hypothesis, i.e., f ∗
k(x) = p∗
k(x), we have
K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w( ¯f(x))) ≥
K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x)))
for all x ∈X. Combining the above two inequalities yields
K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w( ¯f(x))) =
K
X
k=1
p∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x))),
almost surely for all x ∈X. Hence, w( ¯f(x)) ∈W(f ∗(x)) almost surely, which contradicts Assumption 1.C.
Therefore, under Assumptions 1.A and 1.C, f ∗is the unique minimizer of minf∈H R(w ◦f;0).
We now show (ii). Let w(·),u(·) : ∆K →S be two valid optimal solution mappings such that w(p) ∈W(p)
and u(p) ∈W(p) for all p ∈∆K. Thus, w(f ∗(x)) ∈W(f ∗(x)) and u(f ∗(x)) ∈W(f ∗(x)) for all x, which yields
PK
k=1 p∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x))) = PK
k=1 p∗
k(x)ck(u(f ∗(x))) by the definition of W(·). Therefore, taking expectation
with respect to x yields J ∗= R(w ◦f ∗,0) = R(u ◦f ∗,0).
□
Proof of Proposition 1
Let p ∈∆K be given. We define the correspondence gp(ρ) by gp(ρ) := wρ(p) for
ρ > 0 and gp(0) := W(p). Here, gp(·) is a function that maps a value of ρ ∈[0,∞) to a subset of S (which is just
a single point wρ(p) when ρ > 0). Given the sequence {ρn > 0} that converges to zero, define a corresponding
sequence wn where wn = wρ(p) ∈gp(ρn). If dist(wρn(p),W(p)) ̸→0 as n →∞, then there exists a constant
ϵ > 0, such that for some subsequence wn(m) we have dist(wn(m),W(p)) > ϵ for all m. By the Weierstrass
Theorem and the compactness of S, assume without loss of generality that wn(m) →¯w ∈S as m →∞. Due
to the continuity of the objective function in (3) with respect to ρ, we apply the maximum theorem (Berge
(1877)), which guarantees that gp(ρ) is upper hemicontinuous in ρ. Thus, since ρn(m) →0 as m →∞, we
have that ¯w ∈gp(0) = W(p) according to the definition of upper hemicontinuity. This directly contradicts
the claim that dist(wn(m),W(p)) > ϵ for all m.
□
Lemma 3. Consider the class of functions g : X × Ξ →R defined by F := {g : g = c ◦wρ ◦f for some ρ ∈
(0,ρ0] and f ∈H}. If Assumptions 1.B and 2.A-2.B hold, then for any δ ∈(0,1), the 3δ-bracketing number
N(3δ;F,∥· ∥∞), with respect to the sup-norm ∥· ∥∞, is finite.

36
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Proof for Lemma 3
Assumption 1.B guarantees that, for any δ ∈(0,1), we can find a
δ
2LcLw -bracket of H.
That said, for each f ∈H, there exist an i ∈{1,...,N1} such that li
k(x) ≤f i
k(x) ≤ui
k(x) for all k = 1,...,K
and x ∈X and with ∥li −ui∥∞≤
δ
2LcLw .
By the uniform Lipschitzness of wρ in ρ (Assumption 2.A), we have that for any ρ1, ρ2 and p, ∥wρ1(p) −
wρ2(p)∥≤Lρ|ρ1 −ρ2|. Therefore, |c(wρ1(p),ξ)−c(wρ2(p),ξ)| ≤LcLρ|ρ1 −ρ2|. Then we consider T = ⌊ρ0LcLw
2δ
⌋
and have a collection of points {ρ0,...,ρT+1}, where ρi :=
δ
LcLρ i, for i = 0,...,T, and ρT+1 := ρ0.
Now we show that {[c◦wρi ◦lj −δ,
c◦wρi ◦uj +δ]
:
∀i = 0,...,T +1,∀j = 1,...,N1} forms a 3δ-cover
of F. We first show that for any ρ ∈(0,ρ0] and f ∈H, there exists i and j such that
|c(wρ(f(x)),ξ) −c(wρi(uj(x)),ξ)|
≤|c(wρ(f(x)),ξ) −c(wρi(f(x)),ξ)| + |c(wρi(f(x)),ξ) −c(wρi(uj(x)),ξ)|
≤LcLρ|ρ −ρi| + Lc∥wρi(uj(x)) −wρi(f(x))∥
≤δ
2 + LcLw∥uj(x) −f(x)∥
≤δ
2 + δ
2 = δ.
The second inequality holds by the Lipschitz Assumptions 2.A and the the fact that the objective func-
tion c(·,ξ) is Lc-Lipschitz for any ξ. Then the third inequality follows from Assumption 2.B. There-
fore, c(wρ(f(x)),ξ) ≤c(wρi(uj(x)),ξ) + δ. The same reasoning leads to the fact that c(wρ(f(x)),ξ) ≥
c(wρi(lj(x)),ξ) −δ.
Note that for any x and ξ
|(c(wρi(uj(x)),ξ) + δ) −(c(wρi(lj(x)),ξ) −δ)|
≤2δ + |c(wρi(uj(x)) −c(wρi(lj(x)),ξ))|
≤2δ + LcLw∥uj(x) −lj(x)∥.
Therefore, ∥(c ◦wρi ◦uj + δ) −(c ◦wρi ◦lj)∥≤2δ + 0.5δ ≤3δ and we have fund a 3δ-bracket with a size of
N1 × T + 1 < ∞.
□
A.1.
Justifying Assumptions for Theorem 1
In this subsection, we justify the validity of the uniform Lipschitzness of the regularized oracle (Assumptions
2.A-2.B). To achieve that, we start by showing that the desired property can be guaranteed by a common
“automatic crossover” phenomenon of regularized oracle wρ(·).
Assumption 6 (Automatic Crossover of the Regularized Oracle). There exists a positive number
ρc,ϕ, so that for all ρ ≤ρc,ϕ and all p ∈∆K, wρ(p) ∈W ∗(p). The universal constant ρc,ϕ only depends on the
property of the objective function c(·,·) and the regularization ϕ(·).
This assumption indicates that, if ρ is smaller than a threshold ρc,ϕ, the output of the regularized oracle is
in the optimal solution set of the unregularized oracle.
Combining the automatic crossover assumption and Proposition 2, we have a universal Lipschitz constant
for any ρ ≥0.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
37
Corollary 2. Suppose Assumption 6 holds, then for all ρ > 0, and any p1 and p2 from ∆K, ∥wρ(p1) −
wρ(p2)∥≤
Lc
ρc,ϕ ∥p1 −p2∥2.
Proof of Corollary 2
Directly follows by combining Proposition 2 and Assumption 6.
□
The previous results further imply the uniform Lipschitzness with respect to the regularization parameter
ρ for any p ∈∆K.
Corollary 3. Suppose Assumption 6 holds, then for all p from ∆k, and any ρ1 and ρ2 from (0,ρ0],
∥wρ1(p) −wρ2(p)∥≤Lc
√
K
ρ2
c,ϕ |ρ1 −ρ2|.
Proof of Corollary 3
For any p ∈∆K, and any ρ > 0, wρ(p) is also the unique minimizer of
K
X
k=1
pk
ρ cK(w) + ϕ(w).
For simplicity, we assume that ρ1 < ρ2. Then since ρ1 ≥ρc,ϕ, we apply Proposition 2, we have
∥wρ1(p) −wρ2(p)∥≤Lc

p
ρ1
−p
ρ2

2
≤Lc∥p∥2

1
ρ1
−1
ρ2
 ≤Lc
√
K
ρ2
c,ϕ
|ρ1 −ρ2|.
The first inequality holds by applying Proposition 2 and the last inequality follows from the the fact that
∆K is compact and Assumption 6. Similarly, if ρ1 < ρc,ϕ ≤ρ2, the above analysis also applies because
wρ1(p) = wρc,ϕ(p) for any p ∈∆K by Assumption 6 and that |ρ1 −ρ2| ≥|ρc,ϕ −ρ2|. In the last case where
ρ1 < ρ2 ≤ρc,ϕ, then wρ1(p) = wρ2(p) = wρc,ϕ(p) for any p ∈∆K. Thus the desired result still trivially holds.
□
A.1.1.
A Sufficient Condition for the Automatic Crossover Property
In this part, we let
h(w,p) := PK
k=1 pkck(w) for simplicity. W ∗(p) := arg minw∈S h(w,p) and h∗(p) := minw∈S h(w,p). Then we
demonstrate that the automatic crossover property is quite common, for example, it holds for any convex
objective c(·,·) as long as it satisfies the following linear growth condition stated in Assumption 7.
Assumption 7 (Linear Growth). There exists µ > 0 such that for any p ∈∆K and w ∈S, it holds that
h(w,p) −h∗(p) ≥µdist(w,W ∗(p)).
Note that, for example, any piecewise linear function satisfies the linear growth condition.
Theorem 5. Suppose Assumption 7 holds. Then, for all ρ ∈(0,ρc,ϕ], the regularized oracle wρ(p) auto-
matically crosses over (Assumption 6) with the unregularized solution set W ∗(p), i.e., wρ(p) ∈W ∗(p). The
phase transitioning constant of the crossover is ρc,ϕ :=
µ
∇ϕ, where ∇ϕ := supw∈S ∥∇ϕ(w)∥∗< ∞.
Proof of Theorem 5
We let ¯wρ(p) := arg minw∈W ∗(p) ∥w −wρ(p)∥denote the projection of wρ(p) to the
unregularized optimal solution set W ∗(p). For any p ∈∆K and any ρ ≥0, we have
0 ≥[h(wρ(p),p) + ρϕ(wρ(p))] −[h( ¯wρ(p),p) + ρϕ( ¯wρ(p))]
= [h(wρ(p),p) −h( ¯wρ(p),p)] + ρ[ϕ(wρ(p)) −ϕ( ¯wρ(p))]
= [h(wρ(p),p) −h( ¯wρ(p),p)] + ρ[ϕ(wρ(p)) −ϕ( ¯wρ(p)) −∇ϕ( ¯wρ(p))T(wρ(p) −¯wρ(p))]
+ ρ∇ϕ( ¯wρ(p))T(wρ(p) −¯wρ(p))
≥µ∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥+ ρ
2∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥2 −ρ∥∇ϕ( ¯wρ(p))∥∗∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥
≥∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥(µ + ρ
2∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥−ρ∇ϕ).

38
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
The first inequality follows from the optimality of wρ(p). The first term of the second inequality holds because
of Assumption 7, and the second term in the second inequality holds due to the 1-strong convexity of ϕ. If
ρ ≤
µ
∇ϕ := ρc,ϕ, then µ + ρ
2∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥−ρ∇ϕ ≥0. Thus, ∥wρ(p) −¯wρ(p)∥has to be zero; otherwise, the
right side is a positive number and we have a contradiction.
□
A.2.
Proof of Theorem 1
Proof of Theorem 1.
We first show that limρ→0 J ∗
ρ = J ∗. Recall that J ∗= R(w ◦f ∗) and J ∗
ρ = R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ).
As defined at the beginning of Section 3, the function w(·) : ∆K →S arbitrarily selects a value from the
optimal solution set given by W(·). Specifically, for any given p ∈∆K, w(p) outputs an arbitrary value from
the set W(p) = arg minw∈S
PK
k=1 pkck(w).
We first show that, for any sequence {ρn} that converges to zero and for any given x,
K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x))) →
K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x))) point-wise as n →∞.
Let ϵ > 0 be fixed. Note that ck(·) is Lipschitz and, therefore, uniformly continuous. Thus, there exists
a δ > 0 such that, for any ¯wn, if ∥wρn(f ∗(x)) −¯wn∥< δ, then |ck(wρn(f ∗(x))) −ck( ¯wn)| < ϵ. By utilizing
the convergence result provided by Proposition 1, there is a value of N such that for all n > N, it holds
that dist(wρn(f ∗(x)),W(f ∗(x))) < δ. Then we let ¯wn := arg minw∈W(f∗(x)) ∥wρn(f ∗(x)) −w∥. It is important
to note that for any ¯w1, ¯w2 ∈W(f ∗(x)), we have PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck( ¯w1) = PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck( ¯w2). Therefore, for all
n > N, the following holds
|
K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x))) −
K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x)))| < ϵ,
where again note that w(·) : ∆K →S arbitrarily selects a value from the optimal solution set. This shows
that PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x))) converges to PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x))) point-wise as n →∞.
Then, by the dominated convergence theorem we have that
R(wρn ◦f ∗) := Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x)))
#
→R(w ◦f ∗) := Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(w(f ∗(x)))
#
as n →∞.
(11)
Note that
R(wρn ◦f ∗) := Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x)))
#
≤Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x))) + ρnϕ(wρn(f ∗(x)))
#
≤Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))) + ρnϕ(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)))
#
≤Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))) + ρn ¯ϕ
#
= R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) + ρn ¯ϕ
≤Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f ∗(x)))
#
+ ρn ¯ϕ
= R(wρn ◦f ∗) + ρn ¯ϕ.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
39
The first inequality holds due to the presence of an additional non-negative regularization term. The
second inequality arises from the definition of wρn(·). Specifically, wρn(f ∗(x)) is the minimizer of
minw∈S
PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck(w) + ρnϕ(w) for any given x while wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)) is not. The third inequality holds
because the decision regularization is upper-bounded by ¯ϕ. Then the last inequality holds because f ∗
ρn is the
minimizer of minf∈H Ex
PK
k=1 f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(f(x))). Notice that the above chain of inequalities demonstrates
that R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) ∈[R(wρn ◦f ∗) −ρn ¯ϕ,R(wρn ◦f ∗) + ρn ¯ϕ]. Now let ϵ > 0 again be fixed. Since ρn →0, there
exists N1 such that, for all n > N1, ρn <
ϵ
2¯ϕ and therefore |R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) −R(wρn ◦f ∗)| ≤ϵ/2. At the same
time, by (11), there exists N2 such that, for all n > N2, we have |R(wρn ◦f ∗) −R(w ◦f ∗)| < ϵ
2. Therefore,
considering N = max{N1,N2}, we have that for all n > N,
|R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) −R(w ◦f ∗)| ≤|R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) −R(wρn ◦f ∗)| + |R(wρn ◦f ∗) −R(w ◦f ∗)|
≤ϵ
2 + ϵ
2 = ϵ.
Therefore, as ρn converges to zero, we have
J ∗
ρn := R(wρn ◦f ∗
ρn) →R(w ◦f ∗) = J ∗.
If Assumptions 1.B and 2.A-2.B hold, Lemma 3 shows that, the class of function F := {c◦wρ ◦f : X ×Ξ →
R|ρ ∈(0,ρ0],f ∈H} has a finite bracketing number. Therefore, we apply Theorem 3.2 in Sen (2018)(see also
Wainwright (2019) and Van der Vaart (2000)) and have
ˆRn(wρ ◦f) →R(wρ ◦f) with probability 1,
(12)
uniformly for ρ ∈(0,ρ0] and f ∈H. Then by (12), we have
| ˆJ n
ρ −J ∗
ρ| = max
n
ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ),R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ) −ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ )
o
≤max
n
ˆRn(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ),R(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) −ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ )
o
≤max
n
| ˆRn(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ )|,|R(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) −ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ )|
o
,
where the second inequality holds due to the fact that ˆRn(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ) ≥ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) and that R(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) ≥
R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ), because ˆf n
ρ minimizes ˆRn(wρ ◦f) and f ∗
ρ minimizes R(wρ ◦f). By the uniform convergence of
the empirical risk in ρ ∈(0,ρ0] and f ∈H, guaranteed by (12), for any positive ϵ > 0, there exists N such
that for all n > N, supρ∈(0,ρ0] | ˆRn(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ ) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ )| < ϵ and supρ∈(0,ρ0] |R(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) −ˆRn(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ )| < ϵ
with probability 1. Thus, we conclude that supρ∈(0,ρ0] | ˆJ n
ρ −J ∗
ρ| →0 with probability 1 as n →∞. Therefore,
since {ρn}∞
n=1 satisfies ρn ∈(0,ρ0] and ρn →0 as n →∞, we have that
| ˆJ n
ρn −J ∗| ≤|J ∗
ρn −J ∗| +
sup
ρ∈(0,ρ0]
| ˆJ n
ρ −J ∗
ρ| →0 with probability 1, as n →∞.
Now we prove (ii) and (iii) simultaneously. Note that
dist(wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x)) =
inf
u∈W(f∗(x))∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)) + wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)) −u∥
≤∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))∥+
inf
u∈W(f∗(x))∥wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)) −u∥
≤∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))∥+ dist(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x))).
(13)

40
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
The first inequality follows from the triangle inequality. The second inequality holds by the definition of
dist(·,·). In the remaining part of this proof, we separately establish the convergence in probability of the
first and second terms above, both holding Dx-almost surely over x.
Due to the compactness of S, with any sequence of ρn converging to zero, the sequence wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))
has accumulation points. Let wρn(m)(f ∗
ρn(m)(x)) be any subsequence converging to an accumulation point
¯w(x) ∈S. Note that we have
J ∗= lim
m→∞Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck(wρn(m)(f ∗
ρn(m)(x)))
#
≥Ex
" K
X
k=1
f ∗
k(x)ck( ¯w(x))
#
,
where the equality follows from the convergence of J ∗
ρ →J ∗when ρ →0, and the first inequality holds
by Fatou’s lemma. Therefore, Dx almost surely for all x, ¯w(x) must lie in the set W(f ∗(x)). Then
dist(wρn(m)(f ∗
ρn(m)(x)),W(f ∗(x))) ≤∥wρn(m)(f ∗
ρn(m)(x)) −¯w(x)∥= 0. The aforementioned reasoning holds for
every converging subsequence n(m), then the original sequence dist(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x))) also converges
to zero Dx-almost surely for all x.
Now we aim to demonstrate the convergence of ˆf n
ρ to f ∗
ρ for any fixed ρ ∈(0,ρ0]. Note that the first
condition required by Theorem 5.7 in Van der Vaart (2000) is the uniform convergence in f, which is already
established in (12). The second condition, which requires f ∗
ρ to be a well-separated point given each ρ,
is implied by Assumption 1.C combined with Assumption 2.C. Then we apply Theorem 5.7 in Van der
Vaart (2000) and have that, for each ρ ∈(0,ρ0], ˆf n
ρ convergences to f ∗
ρ in probability as n →∞. Due to the
continuity of wρ(·), we have ∥wρ( ˆf n
ρ (x)) −wρ(f ∗
ρ (x))∥converges to zero in probability for all x.
Then we want to show the following claim: supρ∈(0,ρ0] ∥wρ(f ∗
ρ (x)) −wρ( ˆf n
ρ (x))∥converges to zero in prob-
ability, Dx-almost surely for all x. By the uniform convergence of | ˆR(wρ ◦f) −R(wρ ◦f)| presented in (12),
for any δ > 0, there exists N, such that for any n ≥N, supρ∈(0,ρ0] | ˆR(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ ) −R(wρ ◦ˆf n
ρ )| < δ/2. If the
desired claim is not true, there exists ϵ > 0 and a subsequence {m(n)} with Px(supρ∈(0,ρ0] ∥wρ(f ∗
ρ (x)) −
wρ( ˆf m(n)
ρ
(x))∥> ϵ) > 0 for all n = 1,...,∞. Then for each n, one may choose a ρ that achieves Px(∥wρ(f ∗
ρ (x))−
wρ( ˆf m(n)
ρ
(x))∥≥ϵ) > 0. Then by Assumption 2.C, there must exist a δ > 0 such that supρ∈(0,ρ0] |R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ )−
R(wρ ◦ˆf m(n)
ρ
)| ≥δ. Then we notice that, for this subsequence {m(n)}, so that there exists a positive δ such
that
sup
ρ∈(0,ρ0]
| ˆJ m(n)
ρ
−J ∗
ρ|
=
sup
ρ∈(0,ρ0]
| ˆR(wρ ◦ˆf m(n)
ρ
) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ )|
≥
sup
ρ∈(0,ρ0]
|R(wρ ◦ˆf m(n)
ρ
) −R(wρ ◦f ∗
ρ )| −
sup
ρ∈(0,ρ0]
| ˆR(wρ( ˆf m(n)
ρ
)) −R(wρ( ˆf m(n)
ρ
))|
≥δ −δ/2 = δ/2 > 0.
This contradicts the uniform convergence of
ˆJ n
ρ
to J ∗
ρ in probability. Therefore, for any decreasing
sequence {ρn}∞
n=1 with ρn > 0 and ρn →0, we have ∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))∥≤supρ∈(0,ρ0] ∥wρ( ˆf n
ρ (x)) −
wρ(f ∗
ρ (x))∥→0 with probability 1 for Dx-almost surely. Then, returning to (13), we have
dist(wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x)) ≤∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn(f ∗
ρn(x))∥+ dist(wρn(f ∗
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x)))
→0,
Dx −almost surely,with probability 1.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
41
Thus (ii) is proved.
Finally, if we have an accumulation point of ˆf n
ρn, denoted as ¯f, we have
dist(wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)),W( ¯f(x))) ≤∥wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)) −wρn( ¯f(x))∥+ dist(wρn( ¯f(x)),W( ¯f(x)))
≤Lw∥ˆf n
ρn(x) −¯f(x)∥+ dist(wρn( ¯f(x)),W( ¯f(x)))
→0,
as n →∞for all x ∈X.
Knowing
that
dist(wρn( ¯f(x)),W( ¯f(x)))
→
0
holds
by
Proposition
1.
Then
by
(ii),
dist(wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)),W(f ∗(x)) →0, Dx-almost surely with probability 1, as n →∞. Thus, for any accumulation
point of wρn( ˆf n
ρn(x)), denoted by ¯w, it holds that ¯w ∈W( ¯f(x)) for all x ∈X and that ¯w ∈W(f ∗(x))
Dx-almost surely with probability 1. That is, W( ¯f(x)) ∩W(f ∗(x)) ̸= ∅, Dx-almost surely with probability
1. Then if ¯f ̸= f ∗, it contradicts with Assumption 1.C. Thus with the uniqueness assumption, the true
hypothesis f ∗can be recovered by ˆf n
ρn.
□

42
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Appendix B:
Supplementary Lemmas and Proofs for Sections 3.2 and 4
B.1.
Lemmas and Proofs for Section 3.2
Proof of Proposition 2
Let p,p′ ∈RK
+ be fixed. We let hρ(·,p) : S →R be defined by hρ(w,p) :=
PK
k=1 pkck(w) + ρϕ(w). Since ϕ(·) is a 1-strongly convex function, then hρ(·,p) is ρ-strongly convex and it
holds for all w ∈S and g ∈∂whρ(w,p) that
hρ(w′,p) −hρ(w,p) ≥gT(w′ −w) + ρ
2∥w′ −w∥2
∀w′ ∈S.
(14)
Since wρ(p) = arg minw∈S hρ(w,p), the first-order optimality condition implies there exists a subgradient
g ∈∂h(wρ(p),p) such that gT(w′ −wρ(p)) ≥0 for all w′ ∈S. Applying this condition in (14) with w ←wρ(p)
w′ ←wρ(p′) yields
hρ(wρ(p′),p) −hρ(wρ(p),p) ≥ρ
2∥wρ(p′) −wρ(p)∥2.
Switching the role of p and p′ yields
hρ(wρ(p),p′) −hρ(wρ(p′),p′) ≥ρ
2∥wρ(p) −wρ(p′)∥2.
Adding the above two inequalities together yields
ρ∥wρ(p) −wρ(p′)∥2 ≤hρ(wρ(p),p′) −hρ(wρ(p′),p′) + hρ(wρ(p′),p) −hρ(wρ(p),p)
= [hρ(wρ(p),p′) −hρ(wρ(p),p)] −[hρ(wρ(p′),p′) −hρ(wρ(p′),p)]
=
K
X
k=1
(p′
k −pk)ck(wρ(p)) −
K
X
k=1
(p′
k −pk)ck(wρ(p′))
=
K
X
k=1
(p′
k −pk)(ck(wρ(p)) −ck(wρ(p′)))
≤∥p −p′∥2∥c(wρ(p)) −c(wρ(p′))∥2
≤Lc∥p −p′∥2∥wρ(p) −wρ(p′)∥,
where the last inequality uses Assumption (3.A). Dividing by ∥wρ(p) −wρ(p′)∥leads to (6), and combining
the resulting inequality again with (3.A) yields (7).
□
Proof of Theorem 3
Due to Proposition 2, in particular, the Lipschitz property of c(·) in (7), we can
apply the vector contraction inequality from Maurer (2016) which, stated in terms of empirical Rademacher
complexities, yields
ˆRn(c ◦wρn ◦H) ≤
√
2L2
c
ρn
ˆRn(H).
Taking expectations of both sides of the above inequality, with respect to i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from
the distribution D, yields
Rn(c ◦wρn ◦H) ≤
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H).
Then, a direct application of Theorem 2 yields the desired result.
□

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
43
Proof of Corollary 1
According to Theorem 3, we have
R(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) ≤ˆRn(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) +
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + ¯c
s
log( 2
δ )
2n
with probability at least 1 −δ
2. Then we apply Hoeffding’s inequality and have
ˆRn(wρn ◦f ∗
H) ≤R(wρn ◦f ∗
H) + ¯c
s
2log( 2
δ )
n
with probability at least 1 −δ
2. Note that
ˆRn(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) ≤ˆRn(wρn ◦f ∗
H),
then we have
R(wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn) ≤R(wρn ◦f ∗
H) +
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + 3¯c
2
s
2log( 2
δ )
n
with probability at least 1−δ
2. If the hypothesis class H is well-specified, then f ∗
H is f ∗by Lemma 2 and the
same result holds for f ∗.
□
B.2.
Proofs and Supplementary Results for Section 4
Example 4 (Linear nominal optimization problem). Consider an example with a linear objective
function in the optimization stage, i.e., cj(w) is a linear function cT
j w for some cj ∈Rd for all j = 1,...,K.
Suppose we use the decision regularization function ϕ(w) := 1
2∥w∥2
2. For any p ∈∆K, let ¯c(p) := PK
j=1 pjcj.
Then, note that
wρ(p) = arg min
w∈S

¯c(p)Tw + ρ
2∥w∥2
2
 
= arg min
w∈S
 ρ
2∥(¯c(p)/ρ) −w∥2
2
 
= ΠS(¯c(p)/ρ),
where ΠS(·) is the Euclidean projection operator onto S. Then, (ICEO-ρ) is the problem of minimizing a
sum of linear functions composed with projection operators, which is generally non-convex. At best, when
S is a polyhedron, i.e., S := {w ∈Rd : Aw ≤b} and when we adopt a linear hypothesis class H = {x 7→Bx ∈
∆K : B ∈RK×p}, we can formulate (ICEO-ρ) as a bilinear quadratic optimization problem. Indeed, (ICEO-ρ)
can be reformulated as
min
B,wi,λi
1
n
n
X
i=1
K
X
j=1
1{ξi = ˜zj}(Bxi)jcT
j wi
(ICEO-ρ-LP)
s.t.
ρ
2wT
i wi +
K
X
j=1
(Bxi)jcT
j wi + 1
2(
K
X
j=1
(Bxi)jcj + ATλ)T(
K
X
j=1
(Bxi)jcj + ATλ))
+ λT
i b ≤0,
∀i = 1,...,n
Awi ≤b,
∀i = 1,...,n
λi ≥0,
∀i = 1,...,n
Note that the dual function of the nominal quadratic optimization is
−1
2(
K
X
j=1
(BTxi)jcj + ATλ)T(
K
X
j=1
(BTxi)jcj + ATλ)) −λTb

44
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
thus the dual problem becomes
min
λ≥0
1
2(
K
X
j=1
(BTxi)jcj + ATλ)T(
K
X
j=1
(BTxi)jcj + ATλ)) + λTb.
The first two group of constraints in (ICEO-ρ-LP) is to guarantee that wi and λi are the optimal primal and
dual solutions. The second and third group of constraints are for the primal and dual feasibility.
□
Proof of Proposition 4
Considering the kernel function K(p,p′) = (c+pTp′)s with p ∈RK, we first general-
ize the result of Example 13.19 from Wainwright (2019). When the input p and p′ are K-dimensional vectors,
the empirical kernel matrix can have rank at most (s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K! . Therefore, the left-hand side of Inequality (13.56)
from Wainwright (2019) can be upper-bounded by δm
q
1
m
(s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K! . Then we can apply Theorem 13.17 from
Wainwright (2019) and set λm = 2δ2
m to achieve inequality (4). Moreover, the empirical Rademacher com-
plexity can be upper-bounded by ¯c
q
1
m
(s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K! with some constant ¯c. Then if we have θm ≥¯c3b
q
1
m
(s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K! ,
we can apply Theorem 14.1 from Wainwright (2019) and therefore have the desired result inequality (4).
□
Proof of Corollary 4
The proof follow from a slight modification of the proof of Theorem 4. We first
consider
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥wρ(f(xi))) −˜wρ(f(xi))∥1 ≤Lc
d
X
j=1
( 1
n
n
X
i=1
|wρ,j(f(xi)) −˜wρ,j(f(xi))|2)
1
2 .
Then noted that
EDf(x)[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|2] ≤EDp[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|2] + 2 ¯w2
j TV(Df(x),Dp),
because |wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|2 is bounded by ¯w2
j for all p ∈∆K. Thus,
EDf(x)[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|2]1/2 ≤EDp[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|2]1/2 + ¯wj
q
2TV(Df(x),Dp).
Following the same reasoning of the proof in Theorem 4, the desired result follows.
□
Proof of Theorem 4
By Theorem 3 (i), for any ρ, we have
R(wρ ◦f) ≤ˆRn(wρ ◦f) +
√
2L2
c
ρ
Rn(H) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ )
2n
.
Noted that
1
n
n
X
i=1
|c(wρ(f(xi)),ξi) −c( ˜wρ(f(xi)),ξi)| ≤Lc
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥wρ(f(xi))) −˜wρ(f(xi))∥1
= Lc
d
X
j=1
1
n
n
X
i=1
|wρ,j(f(xi)) −˜wρ,j(f(xi))|
(15)
When the approximated oracle has a uniform error, we combine (15) and Assumption 4 to have
1
n
n
X
i=1
|c(wρ(f(xi)),ξi) −c( ˜wρ(f(xi)),ξi)| ≤Lc
d
X
j=1
Eunif
j
.
(16)
When the oracle is noised, we consider two different distributions Df(x) and Dp. We let Df(x) denote the
distribution of f(x) given a hypothesis f and the distribution of x, Dx. Moreover, we let Dp denote the

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
45
distribution used to generate training samples {(pi,wi)}m
i=1 for oracle approximation. Then, we apply the
error bound (5) with distribution Df(x) and Dp respectively and have
1
n
n
X
i=1
|wρ,j(f(xi)) −˜wρ,j(f(xi))| ≤EDf(x)[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|] + Eprob
j
(n,δ/2d;G),
and
EDp[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|] ≤1
m
m
X
i=1
|wρ,j(pi)) −˜wρ,j(pi)| + Eprob
j
(m,δ/2d;G),
each with probability at least 1 −
δ
2d. Considering the total variation between Df(x) and Dp, we have the
following
EDf(x)[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|] ≤EDp[|wρ,j(p)) −˜wρ,j(p)|] + diamj(S)TV(Df(x),Dp),
where diamj(S) is the diameter of S in the j-th coordinate and TV denotes the total variation. This result
holds because |wρ,j(·) −˜wρ,j(·)| is continuous and bounded by diamj(S). Thus,
1
n
n
X
i=1
∥wρ(f(xi))) −˜wρ(f(xi))∥1 ≤
d
X
j=1
"
1
m
m
X
i=1
|wρ,j(pi) −˜wρ,j(pi)| + Eprob
j
(n,δ/2d;G) + Eprob
j
(m/2d,δ;G)
#
+ diamj(S)TV(Df(x),Dp),
with probability at least 1 −δ. Therefore, we have
(15) ≤Lc
d
X
j=1
"
1
m
m
X
i=1
|wi,j −˜wρ,j(pi)| + Eprob
j
(n,δ/2d;G) + Eprob
j
(m,δ/2d;G)
#
+ diam(S)LcTV(Df(x),Dp),
(17)
with probability at least 1 −δ. Here we slightly abuse the notation and let diam(S) denote the summation
of coordinate-wise diameter along all coordinates. Then (9) and (10) follow from combining (16) and (17)
with Theorem 3.
□

46
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Appendix C:
Approximating the Optimal Solution Oracle by Polynomials
In this section, we provide two examples of using polynomial functions to approximate the optimal solution
mapping: (i) interpolation using Bernstein polynominals, which satisfies a uniform error bound, and (ii)
polynomial kernel regression, which satisfies a high-probability error bound.
C.1.
Bernstein Polynomials
One example for approximating the optimal solution mapping is interpolation using Bernstein polynomials,
for which we review the definition below.
Definition 3 (Bernstein Approximation (De Klerk et al. (2008))). For a given function ω :
∆K →R, the Bernstein approximation with order s, Bs(ω) : ∆K →R, is defined by:
Bs(ω)(p) :=
X
α∈I(K,s)
¯w
α
s
 s!
α!pα,
∀p ∈∆K,
where I(K,s) := {α ∈NK
0 |PK
i=1 αi = s}, α! := Πiαi!, and pα := pα1
1 ···pαK
K .
□
Using Bernstein polynomials, based on a result of De Klerk et al. (2008), we can achieve a uniform bound
of the approximation error as described in Assumption 4.
Proposition 3. For a given ρ > 0, suppose that we use the Bernstein approximation method (Definition
3) applied separately to each coordinate function wρ,j(·) to construct an approximate optimal solution mapping
˜wρ(·). Then, ˜wρ(·) satisfies the uniform error bound in Assumption 4 with Eunif
j
=
ΩLc
ρ√s ,where Ω> 0 is an
absolute constant.
Proof of Proposition 3
This result directly follows from Theorem 3.2 in De Klerk et al. (2008) together
with the Lipschitz property from Proposition 2.
□
Given the result in Proposition 3, we can immediately obtain a generalization bound for the Bernstein
approximation method by applying item (i) of Theorem 4. While the Bernstein polynomial method provides
a strong uniform error bound guarantee, there is a significant drawback in the number of samples required to
obtain this bound. Indeed, to accomplish this approximation, it involves knowing function values of wρ,j(·)
on the grid ∆K,s := {w ∈∆K : sw ∈NK
0 } which has
 K+s
K

many points in total. As such, the number of
calculations of wρ(·) may be prohibitively large, which motivates the use of regression methods.
C.2.
Polynomial Kernel Regression
In this section, we consider using the less computationally prohibitive regression methods that lead to high-
probability bounds as in Assumption 5. As an exemplary case, we consider the polynomial kernel regression
method. In this setting, we allow for the possibility of a “noised oracle” whereby the optimal solution mapping
is not computed exactly. Specifically, the noised oracle outputs wρ(p) + σε instead of wρ(p), where ε is a
d-dimensional standard Gaussian random vector and σ is a scalar that represents the standard deviation
of the noise. The approximate oracle ˜wρ(·) is constructed on independent samples {(pi,wi)}m
i=1 where pi is
drawn from the reference distribution Dp and wi is computed from the noised oracle. That is, we assume
that wi = wρ(pi) + σεi for {εi}m
i=1 that are i.i.d. realizations of Gaussian random variables. These samples
can be achieved by first generating {pi}m
i=1 randomly from following any user-chosen distribution Dp over

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
47
the simplex ∆K and then calculating {wi}m
i=1 from a (possibly randomized) algorithm for approximating
wρ(·). Note that we do assume that the noise is Gaussian, which may be a reasonable assumption for some
algorithmic schemes for approximating wρ(·).
The approximate optimal solution mapping is learned using polynomial kernels k(p,p′) = (c + pTp′)s,
where s ∈N is the degree parameter. In the remaining part of this section, we let G denote a function class
induced by a polynomial kernel of degree s and let ∥· ∥G denote any norm defined on G. Note that G is a
convex, star-shaped function class Wainwright (2019). For the function class G and a given sample {pi}m
i=1,
let τj(G,{pi}m
i=1,r) := infu∈G:∥u∥G≤r( 1
m
Pm
i=1(u(pi) −wρ,j(pi))2)1/2 denote the fitting ability for wρ,j using
the kernel function class G within a user-defined radius r. Given the function class G and a given sample
{(pi,wi)}m
i=1, the method of kernel ridge regression estimates the approximate optimal solution mapping
˜wρ(·) by solving:
min
u∈G:∥u∥G≤r
1
m
m
X
i=1
(u(pi) −wi,j)2
(18)
The corresponding high-probability approximation error bound for learning the noised oracle using poly-
nomial kernel ridge regression.
Proposition 4. Let G denote a function class induced by a polynomial kernel of degree s, suppose that
the noise of the output has standard deviation σ, and that we construct the approximate solution mapping
˜wρ(·) using kernel ridge regression (18) with a user-defined radius r > 0. Then, there exist absolute constants
¯c, ¯c′ such that for all δm ≥¯c0
σ
r
(s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K!
1
m, we have
1
m
m
X
i=1
( ˜wρ,j(pi) −wρ,j(pi))2 ≤¯c1(¯c′
1τj(G,{pi}m
i=1,r) + r2δ2
m),
with probability at least 1 −¯c2 exp(−¯c′
2
mr2
σ2 δ2
m) for each coordinate j = 1,...,K. Moreover, for any θm that
satisfies θm ≥¯c3
q
1
m
(s−1+K)!
(s−1)!K! , if it also holds that mθ2
m ≥¯c0 log(4log( 1
θm )), then

Ep[( ˜wρ,j(p) −wρ,j(p))2]1/2 −
 
1
m
m
X
i=1
( ˜wρ,j(pi) −wρ,j(pi))2
!1/2
≤¯c3r2θm
with probability at least 1 −¯c4 exp(−¯c′
4
mθ2
m
r2 ) for each coordinate j = 1,...,K.
The main body of the proof is a generalization of the result in Example 13.19 of Wainwright (2019). We
have the corresponding generalization bound in the following corollary.
Corollary 4. Suppose Assumption 3 holds and that the hypothesis class H has bounded multi-variate
Rademacher complexity Rn(H). Suppose further that we employ kernel ridge regression (18) using a function
class G induced by a polynomial kernel of degree s under the same conditions as in Proposition 4. Then, for
any δ ∈(0,1] and ρn > 0, the following inequalities hold for all f ∈H:
R(wρn ◦f) ≤ˆRn( ˜wρn ◦f) + Lc
d
X
j=1
[¯c3r2(θm + θn) + τj(G,{pi}m
i=1,r) + ¯c′
1rδm]
+
√
2L2
c
ρn
Rn(H) + Lc ¯wj
q
2TV(Df(x),Dp) + ¯c
s
log( 1
δ )
2n

48
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
with probability at least 1−δ′ over i.i.d. data {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1 drawn from the distribution D and over m indepen-
dent samples {(pi,wi)}m
i=1, where δ′ = δ + ¯c2 exp(−¯c′
2
mr2
σ2 δ2
m) + ¯c4(exp(−¯c′
4
mθ2
m
r2 ) + exp(−¯c′
4
nθ2
n
r2 )) and δm,θm,
and θn are chosen to satisfy the conditions in Proposition 4.
Finally, in Section C.3 we provide an alternative and exact computational approach in the semi-algebraic
case when we use a polynomial function to approximate the optimal oracle.
C.3.
Computational Methods for the Semi-Algebraic Case
In this section, we present an approach based on polynomial optimization in the case where the objective
of the downstream optimization problem is semi-algebraic and we use a linear hypothesis class. In this case,
when we additionally use a polynomial approximation ˜wρ(·), we can reformulate the approximate ICEO
formulation (Approx-ICEO-ρ) as a polynomial optimization problem, which can be solved with a hierarchy
of semi-definite optimizaiton problems. Specifically we assume that both c and ϕ are semi-algebraic functions
and we consider the linear hypothesis class H = {f(x) : f(x) = Bx + b,(B,b) ∈B} where B(X) = {(B,b) ∈
RK×p × RK : f(x) ∈∆K ∀x ∈X} ensures that the output of the hypothesis returns a feasible probability
vector. In this section, we demonstrate an exact solution method for the semi-algebraic case by transforming
the (Approx-ICEO-ρ) to a polynomial optimization program. Before we reach the reformulated problem, we
first review the definitions of semi-algebraic sets and semi-algebraic functions.
Definition 4 (Semi-algebraic Set (Lasserre (2015))). K ⊂Rn is a basic semi-algebraic set if
K = {x ∈Rn : gj(x) ≥0,j = 1,...,m}
for some polynomial functions (gj)m
j=1, i.e., (gj)m
j=1 ⊂R[x], where R[x] denotes the ring of real polynomials.
Similarly, a semi-algebraic set is defined by not only a finite sequence of polynomial inequalities, but also
equations, or finite union of these.
Definition 5 (Semi-algebraic Function (Lasserre (2015)).). Let K be a semi-algebraic set of Rn.
A function f : K →R is a semi-algebraic function if its graph Ψf := {(x,f(x)) : x ∈K} is a semi-algebraic
set of Rn × R.
Functions generated by finitely many of dyadic operations {+,×,÷,∨,∧} and monadic operations | · | and
(·)1/q, q ∈N, on polynomials are semi-algebraic.
Note that with the linear hypothesis class, we need an additional constraint Bx + b ∈∆K, to guarantee
that the output f(x) is a valid probability vector for any x ∈X. We also assume that X is a polyhedron, i.e.
X := {x ∈Rp : Ax ≥a} for some A ∈Rm×p and a ∈Rm. Then the problem Approx-ICEO-ρ becomes:
min
B,b
1
n
n
X
i=1
c(wi,ξi)
(Poly-Approx-ICEO-ρn)
s.t.
wi = ˜wρ(Bxi + b)
Bx + b ∈∆K,∀x ∈X = {x ∈Rp : Ax ≥a}
Note that the approximated oracle ˜wρ(·) is constructed by polynomial kernels, so the first group of constraints
are polynomial functions. Then we show that the second group of constraints can be reformulated to a group
of linear constraints using the following proposition.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
49
Proposition 5. Suppose X := {x ∈Rp : Ax ≥a} for some A ∈Rm×p and a ∈Rm, then the constraint
Bx + b ∈∆K,∀x ∈X
can be rewritten as the following group of constraints by introducing new decision variables yk ∈Rm,k =
1,...,K, z,u ∈Rm























aTyk ≥−bk
∀k = 1,...,K
ATyk = Bk
∀k = 1,...,K
aTz ≥1 −1Tb
ATz = BT1
aTu ≥−1 + 1Tb
ATu = −BT1
yk,z,u ≥0
∀k = 1,...,K
Proof of Proposition 5:
The condition of
Bx + b ∈∆K
can be represented by the following constraints:
BT
k x + bk ≥0,
∀k = 1,...,K
(19)
1T(Bx + b) ≥1
(20)
1T(Bx + b) ≤1
(21)
(19) represents the non-negativity constraints, while (20) and (21) consist of the normalization constraint.
We first rewrite the non-negativity constraint for a component k, for all x such that Ax ≥a as
0 ≤min
BT
k x + bk
s.t.
Ax ≥a.
Then consider the dual problem of the above linear programming and we have:
−bk ≤max
aTyk
s.t.
ATyk = Bk
yk ≥0.
which reduces to find a feasible solution of the following group of constraints





aTyk ≥−bk
ATyk = Bk
yk ≥0.
(22)
Then we rewrite (20) for all x ∈X as
1 ≤min
1TBx + 1Tb
s.t.
Ax ≥a,

50
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
similarly by considering the dual problem
1 −1Tb ≤max
aTz
s.t.
ATz = BT1
z ≥0,
which reduces to the following group of constraints





aTz ≥1 −1Tb
ATz = BT1
z ≥0.
(23)
Finally, we consider the constraint (21)
1 ≥max
1TBx + 1Tb
s.t.
−Ax ≤−a
by strong duality, it is equivalent to
1 −1Tb ≥min
−aTu
s.t.
−ATu = BT1
u ≥0
which reduces to





aTu ≥−1 + 1Tb
ATu = −BT1
u ≥0.
(24)
Therefore, the condition Bx + b ∈∆K,∀x ∈X can be represented by combining (22), (23), and (24).
□
We have now shown that problem (Poly-Approx-ICEO-ρn) is a problem optimizing a basic semi-algebraic
function on a basic semi-algebraic set which, by Proposition 11.10 of Lasserre (2015), can be reformulated
as a polynomial optimization problem, which can be solved by solving a hierarchy of semi-definite problems.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
51
Appendix D:
Supplementary Materials for Section 5
Demand generation (multi-product newsvendor). For
K = {5,10,15},
we
generate
scenarios
{˜z1,..., ˜zK} randomly in the following manner. First, we randomly generate an aggregated demand vector
in the dimension of K = 15, where each component follows a Normal distribution with a mean of 70 and a
standard deviation of 15. Then, for each k, we split the aggregated demand between two products using the
weights uk and 1 −uk, where uk follows a uniform distribution U[0,1]. We generated the scenarios once and
used the demand scenarios listed in Table 1 for all numerical experiments in Section 5.1.
Scenarios Product 1 Product 2
1
15.080
76.154
2
47.238
6.483
3
4.120
56.635
4
21.646
37.001
5
8.686
66.519
6
8.989
84.359
7
2.149
23.506
8
7.857
82.529
9
1.774
77.951
10
57.281
17.009
11
5.628
108.726
12
40.191
46.200
13
82.417
5.146
14
19.817
71.711
15
24.311
42.974
Table 1
Randomly generated demand scenarios for multi-product newsvendor problem
Demand generation (quadratic minimum cost network flow). For K = {5,10,15}, we generate sce-
narios {˜z1,..., ˜zK} randomly in the following manner. First, we randomly generate an aggregated vector
that its k-th element represents P4
d=1 ˜zk,d. This is the sum of ξd over all edges. Each component of this
aggregated vector follows a Normal distribution with a mean of 15 and a standard deviation of 5. Then, for
each k, we split the aggregated demand across four edges using a weight vector randomly sampled from the
K-th simplex ∆K following the Dirichlet distribution. We generated the scenarios once and used the demand
scenarios listed in Table 2 for all numerical experiments in Section 5.2.

52
Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
Scenarios
Edge 1
Edge 2
Edge 3
Edge 4
1
1.411441
16.519779
0.548652
3.598200
2
2.919887
2.408818
2.081370
2.163493
3
0.123442
8.085430
0.276777
3.432811
4
8.932937
0.769055
1.413136
0.100291
5
4.889119
2.813464
1.819007
7.213648
6
10.608435
0.143297
11.535804 0.494919
7
0.004825
0.010799
0.184079
0.018554
8
0.493836
11.108500
3.756536
6.436532
9
0.647171
8.852180
6.165669
2.576713
10
5.981172
1.493690
7.191768
1.763514
11
8.081012
13.955062
0.332960
7.415544
12
3.645159
6.734041
6.581146
3.503203
13
9.534242
1.280481
6.823592
3.215876
14
4.553855
5.306134
2.320332
9.995780
15
0.338866
5.585264
1.949093
6.221872
Table 2
Randomly generated flow scenarios for quadratic cost network flow problem
Appendix E:
Comparison with Policy Optimization
To illustrate the applicability of our performance guarantees, we briefly compare with performance guarantees
of policy optimization methods. Policy optimization methods involve directly learning the policy function
π : X →S, which is a mapping from the feature space to the set of feasible decisions S. This is achieved by
estimating the policy function using a hypothesis π ∈P based on the collected training data set {(xi,ξi)}n
i=1.
That is, applying the ERM principle with policy optimization would lead to minimizing the empirical risk
min
π∈P
ˆRn(π).
One of the advantages of the policy optimization approach is that generalization bounds and finite sample
guarantees are apparent from standard statistical learning theory. For example, in Theorem 13 of Bertsimas
and Kallus (2020), a generalization bound is provided with two terms. The first term has a convergence rate
of O(n−1
2 ), while the second term involves the empirical Rademacher complexity of the policy class P.
Both policy optimization and ICEO suffer from a bias introduced by using a hypothesis class, P and H,
respectively. Indeed, a suitable hypothesis class should be computationally tractable and have a relatively
small Rademacher complexity. For example, a linear class would satisfy both of these. Unfortunately, a
hypothesis class that satisfies both of these requirements may introduce a bias due to model mis-specification.
For policy optimization methods, there may not exist π∗∈P that is “close enough” to some function out-
putting values in the set W(f ∗(x))). Similarly, for ICEO, there may not exist f ∗
H ∈H that fullly characterizes
the true underlying hypothesis f ∗. However, we want to point out that, in practice we generally expect the
bias introduced by ICEO to be less than that of policy optimization. It is because ICEO methods model the
conditional distribution while the latter model the conditional distribution. Noted that the optimal solution
set W(·) may have a complicated structure and require an intricate modeling class P. ICEO does not need to
include w(·) as part of the model and only needs to approximate f ∗(·) within H, whereas policy optimization
necessitates the use of a flexible enough class P to appropriately model the mapping w(f ∗(·)). Thus ICEO
can be advantageous, especially in situations where the optimization oracle w(·) is complex.

Qi, Grigas, Shen: Integrated Conditional Estimation-Optimization
53
In light of the above discussion, let us solidify our intuition further by comparing the generalization bound
of policy optimization with the result provided in Theorem 3. First, note that according to Proposition 1
and Theorem 1, we may take ρn as any sequence approaching zero, for example, ρn =
1
log(n) suffices. Then
according to the result of Corollary 1, the left-hand side quantifies the error between the out-of-sample risk
induced by the policy wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn relative to the policy wρn ◦f ∗
H and converges to zero at rate of ˜O(n−1
2 ). For
comparison, policy optimization gives a similar bound of error between the out-of-sample risks induced by a
learned policy ˆπn and the best policy π∗within the policy class P with the same convergence rate of O(n−1
2 ).
In both cases, the constant in the convergence bound will be controlled by the Rademacher complexity of
the corresponding class, either H for ICEO or P for policy optimization. Both methods may introduce some
bias, but as we have already argued, we expect it to be easier to achieve smaller bias with smaller complexity
for ICEO. In the following, we use a special case (albeit, an extreme one) to illustrate how the flexibility of
ICEO can lead to less bias and smaller Rademacher complexity (i.e., faster convergence of the finite-sample
performance bound).
Example 5. We consider a special case where X is the simplex ∆K, which means that the decision-maker
has the ability to know the probability vector p directly through the contextual information. In this special
case, ICEO has nothing to learn, therefore the hypothesis class should be selected as the singleton identity
map H = {f : f(p) = p ∀p ∈∆K}. Then, the multi-variate Rademacher complexity Rn(H) = 0, and so the
regularization coefficient ρ can be set to zero, i.e., ρn = 0 for all n. On the other hand, policy optimization,
which by its presumption is not allowed to use knowledge of the oracle w(·), requires a larger hypothesis
class P to successfully learn the oracle w(·) and so we generally expect Rn(P) > Rn(H) = 0.
In addition, considering the fact that, in Corollary 1, the left-hand side quantifies the error between the
out-of-sample risk induced by the policy wρn ◦ˆf n
ρn relative to the policy wρn ◦f ∗
H. One may notice that wρn ◦f ∗
H
is not the optimal policy w ◦f ∗
H, which introduces bias by setting the decision regularization parameter ρ as
a small positive value. However, as demonstrated in Proposition 1, wρn ◦f ∗
H converges to the optimal policy
w ◦f ∗
H as ρn converges to zero when sample size grows large.
On the other hand, an additional issue that may also limit the applicability of policy optimization is ensur-
ing the feasibility of the output. Unlike in classical machine learning problems like regression or classification,
it is difficult to ensure that the hypothesis class P even guarantees the feasibility of its outputs, whereby
π(x) ∈S for all π ∈P and x ∈X. This issue does not vanish as sample sizes grow.
Moreover, learning the conditional distribution f ∗(·) is arguably more interpretable than policy opti-
mization, as the ICEO approach follows with the estimate-then-optimize structure, and may be easier to
accomplish with “simpler” classes F since the constraints on the outputs are much simpler (we only need to
ensure that f(x) ∈∆K).