TITLE: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs Under Subadditive or Submodular Processing Speeds
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.0168
---

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style file template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
under Subadditive or Submodular Processing Speeds
Dimitris Fotakis
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Greece, fotakis@cs.ntua.gr
Jannik Matuschke
Research Center for Operations Management, KU Leuven, Belgium, jannik.matuschke@kuleuven.be
Orestis Papadigenopoulos
Data Science Institute, Columbia University, USA
Malleable scheduling is a model that captures the possibility of parallelization to expedite the completion
of time-critical tasks. A malleable job can be allocated and processed simultaneously on multiple machines,
occupying the same time interval on all these machines. We study a general version of this setting, in which
the functions determining the joint processing speed of machines for a given job follow different discrete
concavity assumptions (subadditivity, fractional subadditivity, submodularity, and matroid ranks). We show
that under these assumptions the problem of scheduling malleable jobs at minimum makespan can be
approximated by a considerably simpler assignment problem. Moreover, we provide efficient approximation
algorithms for both the scheduling and the assignment problem, with increasingly stronger guarantees for
increasingly stronger concavity assumptions, including a logarithmic approximation factor for the case of
submodular processing speeds and a constant approximation factor when processing speeds are determined by
matroid rank functions. Computational experiments indicate that our algorithms outperform the theoretical
worst-case guarantees.
Key words : malleable scheduling; makespan minimization; approximation algorithms; (fractional)
subadditivity; submodularity; matroids
1

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
1. Introduction
The use of parallelization, i.e., the simultaneous processing of a job on multiple machines to expe-
dite its completion, is wide-spread in task scheduling systems, where careful planning is crucial to
reduce the overall makespan of time-critical schedules. In computing, the advent of massive par-
allelism has enabled or significantly facilitated a diverse range of applications including Cholesky
factorization (Dongarra et al. 1998), molecular simulation (Bernard et al. 1999), web search index
update (Wu and Loiseau 2015), or training neural networks (Fujiwara et al. 2018). Also in the con-
text of production and logistics, parallelism is used in a wide variety of operational task scheduling
applications, such as quay crane allocation in naval logistics (Imai et al. 2008, Blazewicz et al. 2011),
workforce assignment in production (Dolgui et al. 2018), recharging electrical vehicles (Nguyen et al.
2018), textile production (Serafini 1996, Mourtos et al. 2021), disaster relief operations (van der
Ster 2010), or cleaning activities on trains (Bartolini et al. 2017).
A frequently used model for capturing parallelization in scheduling, including many of the afore-
mentioned examples, is that of malleable or moldable jobs (Du and Leung 1989). At a conceptual
level, a malleable job can be assigned to an arbitrary subset of the available machines to be pro-
cessed non-preemptively and in unison, i.e., with the same starting and completion time on each of
the allocated machines. Importantly, the malleable scheduling model allows the scheduler to decide
on the degree of parallelization for each individual job by choosing the set of machines to which it
is assigned, in contrast to non-malleable parallel machine models in which each task is assigned to
a single machine.
In this work, we study a new generalized model of malleable scheduling that significantly goes
beyond the identical machine setting that has been predominantly studied in literature before.
We show that, under natural discrete concavity assumptions on the functions determining the
processing speed of machine sets (subadditivity, fractional subadditivity, submodularity, matroid
ranks), increasingly strong approximation results can be obtained for this generalized model. Our
first main result shows how the task of finding a schedule of small makespan can be approximated by

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
the significantly simpler task of finding an assignment of jobs to machine sets. We further provide
efficient approximation algorithms for this latter assignment problem, which via the first result also
translate into approximation algorithms for the scheduling problem (see Table 1 for a summary
of the resulting approximation factors). Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of our approach
in a computational study for this latter heuristic and the aforementioned assignment-to-schedule
transformation.
1.1. The Malleable Scheduling Model
Consider a set of jobs J to be assigned on a set of machines M. Each job j ∈J is equipped with a
processing time function fj : 2M →R≥0 that specifies the time fj(S) needed for the completion of
j when assigned to a subset of machines S ⊆M. A schedule consists of an assignment S = (Sj)j∈J
that specifies a non-empty set of machines Sj ⊆M for each job j ∈J, and of a starting time
vector t = (tj)j∈J. In such a schedule (S,t), the machines in Sj all jointly process job j for the
same interval of time, starting at time tj and finishing at time tj + fj(Sj). At any given moment,
each machine can only process a single job, i.e., there are no jobs j,j′ ∈J with Sj ∩Sj′ ̸= ∅and
tj ≤tj′ < tj +fj(Sj). The makespan of a schedule (S,t) is Cmax := maxj∈J tj +fj(Sj), i.e., the time
when all jobs are completed.
We are interested in finding schedules of minimum makespan. Throughout this article, we will
call this the Scheduling problem. Related to this problem is the Assignment problem, which
asks for an assignment S minimizing the maximum load L(S) := maxi∈M
P
j∈J:i∈Sj fj(Sj) over all
machines. Note that the latter problem does not include information on the starting times of
jobs and that the maximum load in any assignment S is a lower bound on the makespan of any
schedule (S,t) using that same assignment. We will discuss the relation between Scheduling and
Assignment further in Section 1.3 below.
Rather surprisingly, and despite the significant theoretical and practical interest in the model,
most of the work on scheduling malleable jobs considers the case of identical machines. Note that
in this case, the processing time of a job only depends on the number of allocated machines, i.e.,

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
fj(S) = ¯fj(|S|) for some function ¯fj : Z≥0 →R≥0. In this setting, it is commonly assumed that
the processing time ¯fj(k) is non-increasing in the number of machines k, whereas the product
k · ¯fj(k), i.e., the number of machine hours needed to complete the job, is non-decreasing. The
latter assumption is known as the monotone work assumption. It accounts for the fact that, in
most practical applications, the amount of work needed to complete a job does not decrease when
using parallelization (rather, parallelization often incurs a communication/coordination overhead)
and that the combined processing speed of a set of machines is not larger than the sum of their
individual processing speeds, i.e., no synergies are obtained from combining multiple machines.
The identical machine case is very well understood from an optimization perspective. Constant-
factor approximation algorithms for the problem are known since the work of Turek et al. (1992). A
line of work establishing improved approximation results (Mouni´e et al. 1999, Jansen and Porkolab
2002, Mouni´e et al. 2007) recently culminated in a polynomial-time approximation scheme, implicit
in the combined work of Jansen and Th¨ole (2010) and Jansen and Land (2018). Thus, the minimum
makespan can be approximated efficiently up to arbitrary precision in the identical machine case,
matching the complexity of the corresponding non-malleable scheduling problem known as P||Cmax
(Hochbaum and Shmoys 1987).
Literature on malleable scheduling beyond the identical machine setting is scarce. A model
similar to malleable scheduling in which unrelated machines have been studied is that of splittable
jobs. In this model, each job can be split into arbitrary fractions that can be distributed on
different machines (without any requirement for synchronization). The time required for processing
a fraction xij > 0 of job j on machine i is given by sij + pijxij, where sij is a fixed setup time and
pij is a processing time factor. Correa et al. (2015) provide a (1 + φ)-approximation algorithm for
this setting, where φ ≈1.62 is the golden ratio, and show that this factor is tight for a natural
LP relaxation of the problem. In the malleable model, non-identical machines have only recently
been studied for the setting of speed-implementable processing-time functions (Fotakis et al. 2023).
In this setting, each machine i is associated with an unrelated “speed” sij for each job j, and

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
processing time is a function of the total allocated speed, i.e., fj(S) = ¯fj(P
i∈S sij) for some function
¯fj : R≥0 →R≥0. The monotone work assumption naturally extends to this setting by requiring
s · ¯fj(s) to be non-decreasing. Fotakis et al. (2023) devised an LP-based 3.16-approximation for
this setting.
A significant limitation inherent to models as the two discussed above, in which the contribution
of a machine to a job can be expressed by a single number, is their inability to capture interaction
effects caused by different combinations of machines when processing the same job. Complicated
interdependencies may arise, e.g., from combining machines of different types or characteristics,
from operational requirements, or from the local topology of the processing platform. In computing,
e.g., modern heterogeneous parallel systems are typically consist of CPUs, GPUs, and I/O nodes,
featuring different architectures and memory restrictions (Bleuse et al. 2017). To make optimal use
of such systems, scheduling algorithms need to take the different architectures and the topology
of the underlying communication network into consideration (Bampis et al. 2020). Another exam-
ple is workforce assignment in production, where the assumption of identically-skilled workers is
inappropriate in environments characterized by short-term contracts and an absence of standard-
ized training (Nakade and Nishiwaki 2008), in sheltered work centers for the disabled (Borba and
Ritt 2014), or in teams combining highly-trained specialized workers (Walter and Zimmermann
2016). These and similar situations require models capturing the combinatorial interaction effects
of machines or workers assigned to the same task.
1.2. Generalized Malleable Scheduling with Concave Processing Speeds
In this work, we investigate a generalized setting in which processing times depend on the actual set
of machines used for a job. This model not only allows for machines to be distinctively well-suited
for different jobs but it also captures combinatorial relations between different machines, such as
the incompatibility to jointly process the same job.
To extend the monotone work assumption to the set function context, we define gj(S) := 1/fj(S)
for every j ∈J and S ⊆M (as jobs have to be allocated to non-empty machine set, we assume

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
w.l.o.g. that fj(∅) = ∞and gj(∅) = 0 for all j ∈J). Intuitively, gj(S) corresponds to the joint pro-
cessing speed with which the machines in S process job j, which is represented by one (normalized)
unit of work in the numerator. We thus refer to the function gj : 2M →R≥0 as the speed function
for job j ∈J. Unless noted otherwise, we will assume that each gj is given by a value oracle that,
given a set S, returns the value gj(S).
Recall that the monotone work assumption for the identical machine setting implies the absence
of synergies in processing speed when allocating more machines to a job. To impose a similar
assumption on the processing speed functions gj, we consider the following four classes of functions
from the field of discrete convexity:
• subadditivity: A function g : 2M →R≥0 is subadditive if g(S ∪T) ≤g(S)+g(T) for all S,T ⊆
M.
• fractionally subadditivity: A function g : 2M →R≥0 is fractionally subadditive, if g(T) ≤
P
S⊆T α(S)g(S) for all T ⊆M and for all α : 2T →[0,1] that fulfill P
S⊆T :i∈S α(S) ≥1 for all i ∈T.
• submodularity: A function g : 2M →R≥0 is submodular if g(S ∪T) + g(S ∩T) ≤g(S) + g(T)
for all S,T ⊆M. This definition is equivalent to the following diminishing returns property: g(S ∪
{i}) −g(S) ≥g(T ∪{i}) −g(T) for all S ⊆T ⊆M and i ∈M \ T.
• matroid ranks: A matroid on the ground set M is a non-empty set family F ⊆2M such that
(i) T ∈F implies S ∈F for all S ⊆T and (ii) for every S,T ∈F with |S| < |T| there is an i ∈T \ S
such that S ∪{i} ∈F. The rank function of a matroid F is defined by r(T) := maxS⊆T :S∈F |S| for
T ⊆M. A function g : 2M →R≥0 is a scaled matroid rank if g(S) = αr(S) for all S ⊆M, where
α > 0 and r is the rank function of some matroid.
Each of these classes captures the concepts of “no synergies” or “diminishing returns” for set
functions with an increasing degree of restrictiveness (i.e., subadditive functions constitute a super-
class of fractionally subadditive functions, which form a superclass of submodular functions etc.).
All four classes have been widely studied, receiving particular attention in operations research and
economics literature for their applications in diverse fields such as auction markets (Candogan

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
et al. 2015), cooperative game theory (Bondareva 1963, Feige 2009), inventory management (Levi
et al. 2014), machine learning (Bach 2013), or queuing theory (Ahn and Lewis 2013); also see the
survey by Iwata (2008) and the textbook by Murota (2003).
In Appendix EC.1.1, we discuss how subadditive or fractionally subadditive processing speeds,
respectively, arise naturally in the context of parallel computing on heterogeneous architectures,
when the parallelization behavior of individual tasks is governed by the monotone work assumption
or when it follows Amdahl’s law on speedup in latency (Amdahl 1967), respectively. In particular,
the setting we describe there encompasses the CPU/GPU environment studied by Bleuse et al.
(2017).
We remark that it is natural to assume processing speeds to be monotone (i.e., S ⊆T implies
g(S) ≤g(T)). However, all our results work without this assumption, so we do not require processing
speeds to be monotone. Before we elaborate our results for the generalized malleable scheduling
model under the aforementioned discrete concavity assumptions, we highlight some computational
and practical challenges inherent to malleable scheduling, and the resulting distinction of assigning
and scheduling.
1.3. Assigning vs. Scheduling and Practical Challenges
A particular challenge in malleable scheduling, both in terms of computation and practical imple-
mentation of schedules, is the need to coordinate schedules on different machines to allow jobs to
be processed in unison. In particular, this feature of malleable scheduling motivates the distinction
between assignment and schedule.
Recall that the Assignment problem asks for an assignment minimizing the maximum machine
load (ignoring starting times), whereas the Scheduling problem asks for a schedule of minimum
makespan (including starting times). In classic non-malleable scheduling these two problems are
equivalent, as any assignment can be turned into a schedule whose makespan equals the maximum
machine load, just by letting each machine process the jobs assigned to it in arbitrary order.
This is no longer true in malleable scheduling, as starting times for jobs cannot be determined

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
independently on each machine. Indeed, it is easy to construct examples of assignments S such
that any schedule (S,t) using this assignment has a makespan of at least |J|/2 times the maximum
machine load; see Appendix EC.1.2.1 for details. There, we also argue that, by appropriately
choosing the processing speeds that do not fulfill any of the discrete concavity assumptions above,
we can construct instances where the load of an optimal solution to Assignment is a factor of
|J|/2 lower than the makespan of an optimal solution to Scheduling (which in principle could
make use of a distinct assignment).
From a computational point of view, the need for synchronization seems to make finding good
(i.e., low-makepsan) schedules considerably harder than the task of finding good assignments.
Indeed, the Assignment problem has a natural and well-structured IP formulation—based on
binary variables x(S,j) indicating the set of machines S assigned to job j—that is amenable to
column generation approaches; see Appendix EC.1.3 for details. Straightforward IP formulations
for the Scheduling problem, on the other hand, such as time-indexed formulations, not only incur
a considerable blow-up in the number of variables and constraints, but also appear to be much less
well-structured.
Finally, executing schedules that rely heavily on parallelization requires frequent regrouping and
well-organized synchronization of sets of machines to process different jobs in unison, creating
a managerial challenge. In particular, such schedules are susceptible to delays that can easily
propagate throughout the schedule. In fact, due to the interdependence of schedules on different
machines, a delay in a single job can make it necessary to reschedule jobs on all machines, even
those not involved in processing the delayed job; see Fig. 1. Similarly, small delays of multiple jobs,
even when processed on disjoint sets of machines, can accumulate to a significant extension of the
makespan. As we discuss below, the algorithms presented in this article produce schedules that
mitigate these practical concerns by keeping the degree of parallelism low and exhibiting a special
structure that is not susceptible to potential propagation of delays across multiple machines (even
though such uncertainties are not explicitly considered in our model).

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
(a)
(b)
Figure 1
(a) Original schedule (x-axis is the time and y-axis the set of machines); (b) Delay propagating through
a schedule: A unit-time delay in the upper-left job causes a cascade of delays.
1.4. Our Results
In the following, we give an overview of our results and point to the corresponding sections where
they are discussed in detail.
1.4.1. Turning Assignments Into Schedules
Our first result is a transformation that turns
any given assignment into a schedule (with a slightly modified assignment), addressing both the
computational and practical challenges described in Section 1.3. We show that the resulting sched-
ule incurs only a bounded increase in makespan compared to the original assignment. Thus, the
Scheduling problem can be approximated via the simpler Assignment problem. The resulting
schedules moreover have a beneficial structure that significantly facilitates their implementation:
only the first job processed on any machine is processed across multiple machines, all later jobs
are handled exclusively by a single machine; see Fig. 2. This makes the schedule easy to execute
and robust, as delays in individual jobs can only affect other jobs on the same machine but cannot
propagate through the schedule.
For fractionally subadditive speed functions, the increase in makespan is bounded by a factor
of 3.1462 in the worst-case. This carries over to subadditive functions at a logarithmic (in the
number of machines) loss via a well-known pointwise approximation result. Our transformation is
based on the Bondareva-Shapley theorem (Bondareva 1963), a result from cooperative game theory
that guarantees the existence of the solution to an inequality system defined by a fractionally
subadditive function. While, in general, finding such a solution may require to solve an LP of

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Figure 2
Well-structured assignment/ feasible schedule: Each machine processes at most one job in combination
with other machines (x-axis is the time and y-axis the set of machines).
exponential size, it can be found by a simple greedy algorithm in the case of submodular functions.
Thus, the entire procedure can be carried out in polynomial time for submodular processing speeds
(with the same worst-case guarantee of 3.1462). These results are discussed in detail in Section 2.
Moreover, in Section 5, we report on the results of computational experiments that demonstrate
that applying the transformation in practice results in a much smaller loss than the theoretical
worst-case guarantee (approximately 1.17 on average and in no case larger than 2), making it
possible to find near-optimal solutions to Scheduling via the simpler Assignment problem.
1.4.2. Approximating the Assignment Problem
In the second part of the paper, we
turn our attention to devising efficient approximation algorithms for both the Assignment and
Scheduling problem. For the special case where processing speeds are defined by scaled matroid
ranks, we show that a 4-approximation for Assignment can be obtained by making use of an
appropriate intersection of two matroids. Furthermore, the assignment computed by the algorithm
is well-structured, immediately implying a 4-approximation algorithm for Scheduling as well.
These results are discussed in Section 3.
In Section 4, we present a greedy heuristic for approximating both Assignment and Schedul-
ing, which applies to various classes of speed functions ranging from subadditive to submodular.
The algorithm runs in phases, where, in each phase, a constant fraction of not-yet-assigned jobs
is scheduled within a multiplicative factor of the target makespan. To achieve this, our heuristic
makes critical use of the structural insights derived in the earlier transformation result, concurrently
executing two assignment subroutines based on the Generalized Assignment problem (Shmoys

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
and Tardos 1993) and Welfare Maximization for the class of speed functions at hand (Schrijver
2003, Feige 2009), respectively.
The algorithm gives a polylogarithmic and a logarithmic approximation guarantee for subad-
ditive and fractionally subadditive processing speeds, respectively, assuming access to a demand
oracle. Further, the algorithm can be implemented efficiently using a value oracle for the case of
submodular functions. As we show, access to a stronger demand oracle is necessary in the for-
mer case, as any algorithm obtaining a non-trivial approximation factor for Assignment with
fractionally subadditive processing speeds given by a value oracle would require an exponential
number of queries to this oracle. As an interesting artifact of our results, we furthermore make two
observations regarding Feige’s (2009) algorithm for subadditive Welfare Maximization: (i) The
algorithm also works for non-monotone functions—despite monotonicity being listed as one of its
requirement. (ii) The algorithm can also be applied to a truncated version of the welfare problem,
even when the demand oracle is not aware of this truncation; see Appendix EC.3.2 for details.
Finally, we provide improved approximation guarantees for the case of identical jobs, namely, a log-
arithmic approximation for subadditive and a constant approximation for fractionally subadditive
speed functions. In Table 1 we present a summary of our results.
We remark that even when processing speeds are scaled matroid ranks, both Assignment
and Scheduling generalize the “restricted assignment” variant of the classic (non-malleable)
scheduling problem of minimizing the makespan on unrelated machines. They thus inherit the lower
bound of 1.5 on the obtainable approximation factor (unless P = NP) established by Lenstra et al.
(1990). For fractionally subadditive processing speeds, we show a slightly stronger lower bound of
2 on the obtainable approximation factor (again unless P = NP) that holds even when given access
to a demand oracle; see Appendix EC.1.4.
In Section 5 we further discuss computational results on the empirical performance of our heuris-
tic for submodular processing speeds, showing that it significantly outperforms its worst-case
guarantees for a number of problem instances.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Speed Functions
Transformation
Approximation
Approximation
Assignment →Schedule
(Distinct Jobs)
(Identical Jobs)
Subadditive
O(log m)a
O(log m log min{n,m})b
O(log m)b
Fractionally Subadditive
3.1462a
O(log min{n,m})b
O(1)b
Submodular
3.1462
O(log min{n,m})
O(1)
Scaled Matroid Ranks
3.1462
4
2
Table 1
Summary of results. For each type of speed function, we report the maximum increase in makespan
when transforming an assignment into as schedule (Section 2) and the factor of the approximation algorithms for
the Assignment problem with distinct and identical jobs, respectively (Sections 3 and 4). We denote by n and m
the number of jobs and machines, respectively. Results marked with a are algorithmic but without polynomial
run-time; results marked with b require a demand oracle instead of a value oracle.
1.4.3. Follow-up Results
A natural question in the context of the model introduced in this
paper is for which class of processing speed functions it is possible to obtain constant-factor approx-
imation algorithms. Our results imply that in order to obtain a constant-factor approximation for
Scheduling with submodular processing speeds it is sufficient to find a constant-factor approx-
imation for the corresponding Assignment problem. However, the existence of such a constant-
factor approximation is still open and an interesting subject for future research. Some progress
in this direction has already been made: In follow-up work (Fotakis et al. 2024) to the present
paper, we devised a constant-factor approximation for Assignment with M ♮-concave process-
ing speeds, an important subclass of submodular functions. There, we also explore a connection
between Assignment and the Max-Min Fair Allocation problem, which asks to distribute
indivisible goods among a set of agents so as to maximize egalitarian welfare. In particular, any
constant-factor approximation for Assignment with submodular processing speeds would imply
a resource-augmented constant-factor approximation for the latter problem (Fotakis et al. 2024,
Section 5).
2. Transforming Assignments into Schedules
In this section, we present a transformation that turns any given assignment of jobs to machine sets
into a schedule, at a bounded increase in makespan, depending on the assumptions on processing

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
speeds, thus bounding the gap between optimal values for Assignment and Scheduling problem.
The transformation is based on the following concept of a well-structured assignment.
We say an assignment S is well-structured if for every i ∈M there is at most one j ∈J with i ∈Sj
and |Sj| > 1, i.e., every machine shares at most one job with other machines. A well-structured
assignment can be turned into a schedule whose makespan equals the maximum machine load:
At time 0, let every machine process its only shared job (if it exists), then process the remaining
jobs assigned to each machine in arbitrary order on that machine. Thus it suffices to show that
arbitrary assignments can be transformed into well-structured assignments at a bounded increase
in makespan. We first establish that this is possible for fractionally subadditive functions, in the
following theorem.
Theorem 1. Assume that all processing speed functions are fractionally subadditive. For any
assignment S, there exists a well-structured assignment S′ with L(S′) ≤µ⋆L(S), where µ⋆=
infλ∈(0,1)
e(1−λ)/λ
λ(e(1−λ)/λ−1) ≤3.1462.
The proof of Theorem 1 is based on an interesting connection to cooperative game theory and
uses the Bondareva-Shapley theorem (Bondareva 1963), which states that cost-sharing games with
fractionally subadditive cost functions have a non-empty core. In general, computing such an ele-
ment of this core may require solving an exponentially-sized LP. However, in the case of submodular
processing speeds, such an element can be found by a simple greedy algorithm. With this, the
entire transformation can be carried out in polynomial time for submodular processing speeds. We
hence obtain the following theorem.
Theorem 2. Assume that all processing speed functions are submodular. There is an algorithm
that, given an assignment S, computes in polynomial time a well-structured assignment S′ with
L(S′) ≤µ⋆L(S), where µ⋆is as defined in Theorem 1.
Before we describe and analyze the transformation procedure that proves Theorems 1 and 2, we
also remark that the transformation result for fractionally subadditive functions extends, with a

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
logarithmic loss, to the case that processing speeds are subadditive. This immediately follows from
the fact that any subadditive function can be pointwise ln(|M|)-approximated by a fractionally
subadditive function; see Appendix EC.2.1 for details.
Corollary 1. Assume that all processing speed functions are subadditive. For any assignment S,
there exists a well-structured assignment S′ with L(S′) ≤µ⋆ln(|M|)L(S), where µ⋆is as defined in
Theorem 1.
As a consequence of the aforementioned results, the ratio between the makespan of an optimal
schedule and the maximum machine load in an optimal assignment for the same instance is at
most µ⋆≈3.146 when processing speeds are fractionally subadditive. In Appendix EC.1.2.2, we
also provide a lower bound for the worst-case of this assignment-schedule gap by describing an
instance with additive (thus, in particular, submodular) processing speeds in which the gap reaches
a value of ϕ+1
2
≈1.309, where ϕ is the golden ratio.
2.1. Proof of Theorem 1
Assume that gj is fractionally subadditive for all j ∈J, let S be an assignment, and C := L(S).
The fractional subadditivity of the processing speed functions implies the following lemma.
Lemma 1. There exists ∆∈RM×J such that
1. P
i∈Sj ∆ij = gj(Sj) for all j ∈J,
2. P
i∈T ∆ij ≤gj(T) for all j ∈J and T ⊆Sj.
Proof. Noting that constraints 1 and 2 describe, for each j ∈J, the core of a cost-sharing game
with player set Sj and cost function gj, Lemma 1 follows immediately from the Bondareva-Shapley
theorem, which guarantees that the core of a game with fractionally subadditive cost functions is
non-empty. For completeness, a direct proof of the lemma is given in Appendix EC.2.2.
□
We remark that Lemma 1 holds true even when additionally requiring all coefficients ∆ij to be
nonnegative. However, we refrain from mentioning nonnegativity explicitly in the lemma, because
it is not necessary for the construction of a well-structured assignment described below and because

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
the efficient algorithm described in Section 2.2 to prove Theorem 2 may generate coefficient vectors
with negative entries when gj is not monotone.
Using the coefficients ∆ij given by Lemma 1, let S+
j := {i ∈Sj : ∆ij > 0} for j ∈J and consider
the following feasibility LP with decision variables xij for every j ∈J and i ∈S+
j .
X
i∈S+
j
xij ≥1
∀j ∈J
(LP1)
X
j∈J:i∈S+
j
1
∆ij
xij ≤C
∀i ∈M
x ≥0
We first observe that (LP1) has a feasible solution.
Lemma 2. (LP1) has a feasible solution.
Proof. Define ˜x by ˜xij :=
∆ij
gj(Sj) for j ∈J and i ∈S+
j . Note that P
i∈S+
j ˜xij = P
i∈S+
j
∆ij
gj(Sj) ≥1 by
constraint 1 of Lemma 1. Moreover, P
j∈J:i∈S+
j
1
∆ij ˜xij = P
j∈J:i∈S+
j
1
gj(Sj) ≤C by definition of ˜x and
the fact that the maximum machine load of S is C. Hence ˜x is a feasible solution to (LP1).
□
Now consider an extreme point solution x′ to (LP1). We will turn it into a well-structured
assignment. To this end, consider the support graph G(x′) of x′ on the node set J ∪M, which has
an edge {i,j} for every j ∈J and i ∈S+
j with x′
ij > 0. Noting that (LP1) has the same structure as
the assignment LP used for R||Cmax, the following lemma follows from the classic result by Lenstra
et al. (1990); see Appendix EC.1.5 for details.
Lemma 3. The graph G(x′) has an orientation such that any node has an in-degree of at most 1.
Thus fix an orientation of G(x′) with in-degree at most one. For each job j ∈J, let ij ∈Sj
denote the unique machine such that (ij,j) is an in-edge of node j (if such a machine exists),
and let ¯Sj the set of machines i ∈S+
j such that there is an edge (j,i) in the oriented graph. Let
λ ∈(0,1) be a parameter of the algorithm, whose value we will determine later. We construct a
well-structured assignment S′ as follows. For each job j ∈J, let S′
j = {ij} if ij exists and x′
ijj > λ

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
(“Type 1 assignment”) and let S′
j = ¯Sj otherwise (“Type 2 assignment”). Note that, because every
node has in-degree at most 1, any machine can be assigned to at most one job via a Type 2
assignment. Hence S′ is well-structured.
We will show that the maximum load in this assignment is bounded by

1
λ +
1
1−λ

C and then
explain how to further modify it so as to reduce the load to the value guaranteed in the statement
of Theorem 1. We first argue that the load incurred by Type 1 assignments is bounded by C/λ.
Lemma 4. For i ∈M let J 1
i := {j ∈J : ij = i, x′
ijj > λ}. Then P
j∈J1
i fj({i}) ≤C/λ.
Proof. The lemma follows from
X
j∈J1
i
fj({i}) =
X
j∈J1
i
1
gj({i}) ≤
X
j∈J1
i
1
∆ij
≤1
λ
X
j∈J1
i
1
∆ij
x′
ij ≤C/λ,
where the first inequality follows from constraint 2 in Lemma 1, the second inequality follows from
the fact that x′
ij > λ for all j ∈J 1
i , and the final inequality follows from feasibility of x′.
□
Similarly, also the load incurred by Type 2 assignments can be bounded by
1
1−λC.
Lemma 5. Let j ∈J with S′
j = ¯Sj. Then fj( ¯Sj) ≤
1
1−λC.
Proof. Note that S′
j = ¯Sj implies that P
i∈¯Sj x′
ij ≥1 −λ by construction of S′. We conclude
that
gj( ¯Sj) ≥
X
i∈¯Sj
∆ij ≥1
C
X
i∈¯Sj
x′
ij ≥1 −λ
C
,
where the first inequality follows again from constraint 2 in Lemma 1 and the second inequality
follows from
x′
ij
C ≤∆ij by feasibility of x′.
□
Because any machine participates in at most one Type 2 assignment, Lemmas 4 and 5 already
imply that the load of any machine in the well-structured assignment S′ is bounded by

1
λ +
1
1−λ

C.
This already allows us to ensure L(S′) ≤4C when setting λ = 1
2. The maximum machine load can
be further reduced by modifying S′ (and using a different value for λ) as follows: We reassign all
jobs j ∈J that are assigned via a Type 2 assignment to ¯Sj as follows. For each machine i ∈¯Sj, let
ℓi := P
j′∈J1
i
1
∆ij′ x′
ij′ be the load of machine i due to jobs in J 1
i in the LP solution. For θ > 0, let
Tj(θ) := {i ∈¯Sj : ℓi ≤θ}. Instead of assigning j to ¯Sj, assign it to Tj(θ∗
j), where θ∗
j is a minimizer
of maxi∈Tj(θ)
1
λℓi + fj(Tj(θ)).

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
Lemma 6. Let T be the assignment defined by Tj = Tj(θ∗) if S′
j = ¯Sj and Tj = {ij} otherwise. Then
T is well-structured and L(T) ≤µL(S), where µ :=
e(1−λ)/λ
λ(e(1−λ)/λ−1).
The proof of Lemma 6 follows the lines of the analysis for the approximation algorithm for mal-
leable scheduling with speed-implementable processing times (Fotakis et al. 2023) and is presented
in Appendix EC.2.3. This completes the proof of Theorem 1, in which λ ≈0.466 is chosen so as to
minimize the approximation factor guaranteed in the lemma.
2.2. Proof of Theorem 2
Note that the proof of Theorem 1 discussed above in fact describes an algorithm for turning a
given assignment into a well-structured assignment: (i) find the coefficient vector ∆as guaranteed
by Lemma 1, (ii) compute an extreme point x′ solution to (LP1), (iii) orient the support graph
G(x′) so that every node has in-degree at most 1, (iv) construct the assignment S′, (v) compute
optimal values θ∗
j for every j ∈J that is assigned via a Type 2 assignment, and (vi) reassign those
jobs to the corresponding sets Tj(θ∗
j).
For steps (ii)-(iv) and (vi) it is easy to see that they can be carried out in polynomial time, even
independently from any assumptions on the functions gj. Also determining the values θ∗
j in step
(v) can be done in polynomial time, as the sets Tj(θ) only change at θ ∈{ℓi : i ∈¯Sj} and thus only
| ¯Sj| + 1 different values have to be considered. It remains to argue that step (i) can be carried out
efficiently when gj is submodular for each j ∈J.
Indeed, for submodular gj, the constraints in Lemma 1 describe a polymatroid for each j ∈J.
Thus, a feasible solution ∆can be found by the following simple greedy algorithm. Fix any arbitrary
order ⪯of the machines and for each S ⊆M let πi(S) := {i′ ∈S : i′ ⪯i}. For each j ∈J and
i ∈Sj, define ∆ij := gj(πi(Sj)) −gj(πi(Sj) \ {i}). It is not hard to see that P
i∈Sj ∆ij = gj(Sj) for
all j ∈J by construction. Moreover, P
i∈T ∆ij ≤P
i∈T gj(πi(T)) −gj(πi(T) \ {i}) = gj(T) for all
T ⊆Sj, where the inequality follows from submodularity of gj. Hence, the greedily constructed
coefficients ∆ij fulfill the constraints of Lemma 1. This concludes the proof of Theorem 2.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3. Approximation for Scaled Matroid-Rank Processing Speeds
In this section, we consider the case where each job j ∈J is associated with a matroid Fj on M
and a quota qj ∈R≥0. The processing speed function for job j ∈J is defined by gj(S) := rj(S)/qj,
where rj is the rank function of Fj.
We describe an algorithm which, given an instance of the problem and a target load C, either
computes a well-structured assignment of maximum load at most 4C, or asserts that no assignment
with maximum load at most C exists. Via standard arguments (see Appendix EC.1.5), such a
decision procedure implies a 4-approximation for both Assignment and Scheduling.
Theorem 3. There exists a polynomial-time 4-approximation algorithm for Assignment and for
Scheduling when all processing speed functions are scaled matroid ranks. If all jobs are further-
more identical, the approximation factor improves to 2.
3.1. The Algorithm
The algorithm splits the set of jobs in two classes: those that can be processed within time C on
a single machine, and those that require multiple machines to do so. It then solves the problem
separately for each of the two classes, solving a classic scheduling problem for the first class and a
matroid intersection problem and graph orientation problem for the second.
Partitioning the job set
We first partition the set of jobs into two classes. To this end, define
tj := ⌈qj/C⌉for all j ∈J as well as J1 := {j ∈J : tj = 1} and J2 := J \ J1.
Step 1: Single-Machine Assignments for J1
The first step of the algorithm handles the
jobs in J1 by constructing an instance of the classic problem of makespan minimization on unrelated
machines (with non-malleable jobs). For i ∈M and j ∈J1 let pij = qj if {i} ∈Fj, and pij = ∞
otherwise. We set up the assignment LP for the instance of the non-malleable unrelated machine
scheduling problem R||Cmax with machine set M, job set J1, and processing times p.
X
i∈M
xij = 1
∀j ∈J1
(LP2)

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
X
j∈J1
qjxij ≤C
∀i ∈M
x ≥0
Notice that the fact that tj = 1 implies that qj ≤C for any job j ∈J1. If the LP is feasible, we obtain
an assignment S1 for the jobs in J1 with maximum load at most 2C using the rounding algorithm
of Lenstra et al. (1990) (see Appendix EC.1.5 for details). Otherwise, if the LP is infeasible, then
we can conclude by Lemma 7 (see Section 3.2) that there is no assignment for with makespan at
most C for the given instance and stop the algorithm.
Step 2: Assignment via Matroid Intersection for J2
In the second step of the algorithm,
we define two matroids with ground set M × J2 as follows. First, we define F ′ by
F ′ :=

S ⊆M × J2 : {i ∈M : (i,j) ∈S} ∈Fj and
|{i ∈M : (i,j) ∈S}| ≤tj −1 for all j ∈J2
 
.
Note that F ′ is the direct sum of the matroids Fj for all j ∈J2, each truncated at cardinality tj −1,
respectively. In particular, F ′ is itself a matroid. Second, we define F ′′ by
F ′′ :=

S ⊆M × J2 : |{j ∈J2 : (i,j) ∈S}| ≤1 for all i ∈M
 
,
i.e., F ′′ is the partition matroid that allows at most one job to be assigned to each machine. Let B
be a maximum-cardinality common independent set in F ′ ∩F ′′ (such a set can be computed using
a polynomial-time algorithm for matroid intersection (Schrijver 2003)). If |B| < P
j∈J2(tj −1), then
by Lemma 8 below, we can conclude that there is no assignment of makespan at most C for the
given instance and stop the algorithm. Otherwise, let S2 be the assignment for the jobs in J2
induced by B via S2
j := {i ∈M : (i,j) ∈B}.
Step 3: Merging the Assignments
If the algorithm did not terminate in either of the pre-
ceding steps with a negative answer, it combines the two assignments S1 and S2 into an assignment
S for all jobs in J and returns this assignment. In the proof of Theorem 4 below, we show that

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
the returned assignment has maximum machine load of at most 4C. Moreover, the assignment is
well-structured and can thus be turned into a schedule of makespan 4C. Finally, we remark that
for identical jobs, either J1 or J2 is empty, and therefore the approximation factor improves to 2
for both Assignment and for Scheduling.
3.2. Analysis
In the remainder of this section, we complete the analysis of the algorithm described above. We
start by showing that (LP2) constructed in Step 1 of the algorithm is indeed feasible if there is
an assignment of maximum load C, and hence the algorithm correctly terminates if the LP is
infeasible.
Lemma 7. If there is an assignment of maximum load at most C, then (LP2) has a feasible solu-
tion.
Proof. Let S be an an assignment with maximum load at most C. We first observe that,
without loss of generality, Sj ∈Fj for each j ∈J (otherwise some machines can be removed from
Sj without increasing the processing time). We construct a feasible solution to (LP2) as follows.
For any i ∈M and j ∈J, we set x′
ij =
1
|Sj| if i ∈Sj, and x′
ij = 0 otherwise. For this assignment,
the first and third set of constraints of (LP2) are trivially satisfied. Finally, for the second set of
constraints we obtain:
X
j∈J1
qjx′
ij =
X
j∈J1:i∈Sj
qj
|Sj| =
X
j∈J1:i∈Sj
qj
rj(Sj) =
X
j∈J1:i∈Sj
fj(Sj) ≤C,
for every i ∈M, where the second equality follows from our assumption that Sj ∈Fj and the last
inequality by the feasibility of the optimal solution.
□
The next lemma shows that if the algorithm terminates in Step 2, it correctly concludes that
there is no assignment with maximum load C.
Lemma 8. If there is an assignment of makespan at most C, then there is a B ∈F ′ ∩F ′′ with
|B| = P
j∈J2(tj −1).

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
Proof. Let S be an an assignment with maximum load at most C. As in the proof of Lemma 7,
we assume without loss of generality that Sj ∈Fj.
For j ∈J2 and i ∈Sj, we define x′
ij = (tj −1)/|Sj|. Consider the following LP:
X
i∈Sj
xij = tj −1
∀j ∈J2
X
j∈J2:i∈Sj
xij ≤1
∀i ∈M
0 ≤xij ≤1
∀j ∈J2, i ∈Sj
Note that x′ is a feasible solution to the LP. The first type of constraints is trivially satisfied by x′,
while for the third set of constraints we have 0 ≤x′
ij =
tj−1
|Sj| ≤
tj−1
r(Sj) ≤1 for each j ∈J2 and i ∈M,
since r(Sj) ≥⌈qj/C⌉≥tj in any feasible solution.
Furthermore, note that
fj(Sj) = qj
|Sj| ≥(tj −1)C
|Sj|
= C · x′
ij
for all j ∈J2 and i ∈Sj and, hence, P
j∈J2:i∈Sj x′
ij ≤1
C
P
j∈J2:i∈Sj fj(Sj) ≤1 by feasibility of the
assignment for makespan C.
Notice that the constraint matrix of the above LP is totally unimodular, as it corresponds to
the adjacency matrix of a bipartite graph. Thus, since the right hand side of the constraints is
integral, we know that the LP has an integral solution x∗. Let S∗
j = {i ∈Sj : x∗
ij = 1}. Note that
S∗
j ⊆Sj ∈Fj and |S∗
j | = tj −1 for all j ∈J2. Hence B = {(i,j) : j ∈J2, i ∈S∗
j } ∈F ′. Furthermore,
|{j ∈J2 : i ∈S∗
j }| ≤1 and, thus, B ∈F ′′.
□
We now show that the assignment constructed in Step 3 has maximum load of at most 4C,
establishing Theorem 3.
Theorem 4. If the algorithm reaches Step 3, it constructs a well-structured assignment of maxi-
mum machine load at most 4C.
Proof. Let S be the assignment for all jobs in J arising from combining S1 and S2. Note
that |Sj| = 1 for all j ∈J1 and that |{j ∈J2 : i ∈Sj}| ≤1 for each i ∈M by definition of F ′′ and

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
construction of S2 from B ∈F ′′. Hence S is well-structured. Note further that Sj ∈Fj and |Sj| ≤
tj −1 for all j ∈J2 by definition of F ′ and construction of S2 from B ∈F ′. Thus, |B| = P
j∈J2(tj −1)
implies that |Sj| = tj −1 for all j ∈J2. Therefore fj(Sj) =
qj
rj(Sj) =
qj
tj−1 ≤2C for each j ∈J2. We
conclude that P
j∈J2:i∈Sj fj(Sj) ≤2C for each i ∈M. Because the maximum machine load of the
assignment S1 is also bounded by 2C, we obtain P
j∈J:i∈Sj fj(Sj) ≤4C.
□
4. Approximation for Subadditive or Submodular Speeds
In this section, we develop a practically efficient heuristic for both Assignment and Scheduling
for a class of processing speed functions that includes submodular functions and subadditive func-
tions. The algorithm yields logarithmic approximation guarantees for submodular or fractionally
subadditive processing speeds, and polylogarithmic approximation guarantees for subadditive pro-
cessing speeds. Furthermore, a simple modification of our heuristic yields improved approximation
guarantees for the case of identical jobs.
For fractionally subadditive or subadditive processing speeds, the algorithm requires access to
a demand oracle for each speed function g, which given a vector p ∈RM
≥0 returns a maximizer of
g(S) −P
i∈S pi. We point out that access to such a stronger oracle is necessary for (fractionally)
subadditive processing speeds, as for these functions, no meaningful approximation guarantees can
be achieved using the standard value oracle within a polynomial number of oracle queries, as we
show in the following result (see Appendix EC.3.1 for the proof):
Theorem 5. Any algorithm with approximation guarantee o(n
1
3 ) for fractionally subadditive pro-
cessing speeds requires an exponential number of queries to a value oracle.
Before we present our algorithm and its analysis, we first define the class of instances to which
our results apply.
(α,β)-good functions. Let G be a class of set functions. We say that G is (α,β)-good for α,β ≥1
if the following two properties are fulfilled:
1. For any instance of Assignment with processing speeds from G and any assignment S for
that instance, there exists a well-structured assignment S′ with L(S′) ≤αL(S).

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
2. There exists a β-approximation algorithm for the following Truncated Welfare prob-
lem: Given a collection of set functions g1,...,gk from G on the same ground set M and a
value t ∈R≥0, find disjoint (possibly empty) subsets Tj ⊆M for j ∈{1,...,k} so as to maximize
Pk
j=1 min{gj(Tj), t}.
Our algorithm and its analysis will establish the following metatheorem, which implies the
approximation results for subadditive, fractionally subadditive, and submodular processing speeds,
resepectively, as we show further below. For the remainder of this section, let n := |J| and m := |M|.
Theorem 6. Let G be an (α,β)-good class of set functions. Then there exists a polynomial-time
O(αβ2 log min{n,m})-approximation algorithm for Assignment and Scheduling restricted to
instances with processing speeds from G.
At the heart of the algorithm lies a subroutine that concurrently runs two assignment procedures:
one that tries to assign a maximum number of jobs to individual machines within a given makespan
and another that tries to assign a large number of jobs to disjoint sets of machines via an instance
of Truncated Welfare. These procedures are described and analyzed in Section 4.2, where
we show that properties of (α,β)-good functions ensure that a significant fraction of the jobs can
be assigned by at least one of the two procedures. This establishes the following lemma, whose
repeated application implies Theorem 6.
Lemma 9. Let G be an (α,β)-good class of set functions. There is a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an instance of Assignment with processing speeds from G and C > 0, returns a subset
J ′ ⊆J with |J ′| ≥max{n −m, n
4β} and a well-structured assignment S′ for the jobs in J ′ with
L(S′) ≤4αβC, or correctly outputs that no assignment with maximum load at most C exists for
the jobs in J.
The algorithm proving Theorem 6 runs in phases. In each phase, the algorithm established in the
proof of Lemma 9 is applied to assign a subset of the still unassigned jobs (initially J). Lemma 9
guarantees that in each phase, a
1
4β-fraction of the remaining jobs is assigned. Therefore, after at

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
most log4β/(4β−1) n = O(β log n) phases, all jobs are assigned. Moreover, at most m jobs remain after
the first phase and thus the number of phases is also bounded by O(β log m). As the assignments
constructed in each phase have a maximum load of at most 4αβC, the concatenation of all these
assignments results in an assignment of maximum load at most O(αβ2 log min{n,m}C). As the
partial assignments constructed in each phase are also well-structured, they can be turned into
schedules and concatenated without increasing the makespan; see Appendix EC.1.5 for details.
4.1. Consequences of Theorem 6
We now present several corollaries of Theorem 6 for the various classes of speed functions of interest.
We remark that the classes of subadditive, fractionally subadditive, and submodular set functions
are all closed under truncation.
We first observe that submodular functions given by a value oracle are (3.1462, 4 + ε)-good for
any ε > 0. This follows from Theorem 1 and the (4+ε)-approximation algorithm by Lee et al. (2009)
for Submodular Maximization Over Matroid Constraints, which contains Truncated
Welfare for submodular functions as a special case because the truncation of a submodular
function is again submodular.
Corollary 2. There exists a polynomial-time O(log min{n,m})-approximation algorithm for
Assignment and Scheduling restricted to submodular processing speeds.
In Appendix EC.3.2, we show that a result by Feige (2009) implies a (6 + ε)-approximation for
Truncated Welfare with subadditive functions (for any ε > 0), when assuming that each of the
functions gj is given by a demand oracle. Together with Theorem 1 and Corollary 1, respectively,
this implies that fractionally subadditive functions given by a demand oracle are (3.1462, 6 + ε)-
good and that subadditive functions given by a demand oracle are (3.1462 · ln(m), 6 + ε)-good,
respectively. Hence we obtain the following two corollaries.
Corollary 3. There exists a polynomial-time O(log min{n,m})-approximation algorithm for
Assignment and Scheduling restricted to fractionally subadditive processing speeds given by a
demand oracle.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
Corollary 4. There exists a polynomial-time O(log mlog min{n,m})-approximation algorithm
for Assignment and Scheduling restricted to subadditive processing speeds given by a demand
oracle.
For the case of identical jobs (i.e., with identical processing speed functions) a simple modification
of the above heuristic yields a O(1)-approximation for Assignment and Scheduling. Indeed,
notice that, by Lemma 9, at least
n
4β jobs are scheduled with a makespan at most 4αβC during the
first phase of the heuristic. Now, instead of moving on to the subsequent phase and repeating the
process for the remaining jobs, we create 4β identical copies of the schedule produced in the first
phase, and return their concatenation as the final schedule. Since the jobs are identical (and, thus,
interchangeable), 4β copies suffice for scheduling all of them with makespan at most 16αβ2C. This
observation, in combination with the above discussion on subadditive and submodular functions,
immediately yields the following results.
Corollary 5. There exists a polynomial-time O(1)-approximation algorithm for Assignment
when all jobs are identical with a submodular processing speed function, or when all jobs are identical
with a fractionally subadditive processing speed function that is given by demand oracle.
Corollary 6. There exists a polynomial-time O(log m)-approximation algorithm for Assign-
ment and Scheduling when all jobs are identical with a subadditive processing speed function
that is given by a demand oracle.
4.2. Proof of Lemma 9
The lemma is based on the following corollary, which is a direct consequence of the properties of
(α,β)-good functions, which guarantee the existence of an α-approximate well-structured assign-
ment.
Corollary 7. Assume processing speeds are (α,β)-good and there is an assignment of maximum
load C. Then there is an assignment S and sets J1,J2 ⊆J with J = J1 ˙∪J2 such that
• |Sj| = 1 for all j ∈J1 and P
j∈J1:i∈Sj fj(Sj) ≤αC for all i ∈M,

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
• Sj ∩Sj′ = ∅for all j,j′ ∈J2 with j ̸= j′ and fj(Sj) ≤αC for all j ∈J2.
Thus, there exists an assignment such that at least half the jobs are assigned to individual machines
with maximum load αC, or at least half the jobs are assigned to disjoint sets of machines, each
with a processing time of at most αC. As a consequence, one of the two assignment procedures
described below will be able to assign either at least n
2 jobs with maximum load 2αC, or at least
n
4β jobs with maximum load of 4αβC.
The first assignment procedure, which assigns a maximal number of jobs to individual machines
within a given target makespan, is based on the following result that follows directly from a classic
approximation result for the Generalized Assignment problem (Shmoys and Tardos 1993); see
Appendix EC.3.3 for details.
Lemma 10. Assume there exists an assignment S for some set of jobs J1 ⊆J with maximum load
C′ such that |Sj| = 1 for all j ∈J1. Then we can construct in polynomial-time an assignment that
assigns at least |J1| jobs (possibly different from J1) with a maximum load at most 2C′.
The second assignment procedure, which assigns jobs to disjoint sets of machines, uses the β-
approximation algorithm for Truncated Welfare available for (α,β)-good classes of functions.
Lemma 11. Assume there exists a set J2 ⊆J with |J2| ≥|J|/2 and an assignment S of the jobs in
J2 with maximum load C′ such that |{j ∈J2 : i ∈Sj}| ≤1 for each i ∈M and that all processing
speeds come from a class of (α,β)-good functions. Then we can construct in polynomial time a set
of jobs J ′ ⊆J with |J ′| ≥|J|/(4β −1) and an assignment S′ of the jobs in J ′ with maximum load
at most 4βC′.
Proof. Consider the Truncated Welfare instance on ground set M with functions gj given
by the processing speeds and with t := 1/C′. Note that setting Tj = Sj for j ∈J2 and Tj = ∅for
j ∈J \ J2 induces a feasible solution of value P
j∈J2 min{gj(Tj),t} = |J2|/C′ ≥|J|/(2C′) to this
instance of Truncated Welfare. Because the functions gj come from an (α,β)-good class of
functions, we can apply the β-approximation for Truncated Welfare to obtain disjoint subsets
T ′
j for j ∈J with P
j∈J min{gj(Tj),t} ≥|J2|/(βC′) ≥|J|/(2βC′).

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
Let J ′ := {j ∈J : gj(T ′
j) ≥1/(4βC′)} and note that
|J|
2βC′ ≤
X
j∈J
min{gj(Tj),t} ≤|J ′|
C′ + |J \ J ′|
4βC′ ,
where the second inequality follows from the fact that min{gj(S),t} ≤t = 1/C′ for all S ⊆M and
j ∈J. Rearranging yields |J| ≤(4β −1)|J ′|, hence setting S′
j = T ′
j for j ∈J ′ yields the statement of
the lemma.
□
By Corollary 7, either the premise of Lemma 11 is fulfilled with C′ = αC, implying |J|/(4β −1)
jobs can be assigned within makespan (4αβ)C, or Lemma 10, again with C′ = αC, guarantees
the assignment of |J1| = |J \ J2| ≥|J|/2 jobs in time 2αC. Finally, for the sets J1 and J2 of
Corollary 7, note that |J2| ≤m (as jobs in J2 are processed on disjoint machine sets) and hence,
|J1| = |J| −|J2| ≥|J| −m, where m is the number of machines. Therefore, J ′ must also satisfy
|J ′| = max{|J1|,|J2|} ≥|J| −m. This concludes the proof of Lemma 9.
5. Computational Study
In this section, we provide an empirical evaluation of our O(log min{n,m})-approximation algo-
rithm presented in Section 4 on synthetic data. We start by describing the submodular speed
functions we consider and the LP-based lower bound we use as a baseline. Using this baseline,
we then present the empirical approximation ratios for the Assignment and Scheduling prob-
lem for each of these functions on randomly generated input. Finally, we provide examples of the
application of Theorem 2 on small instances where the optimal assignment can be computed via
an MILP formulation.
5.1. Implementation Details
We remark that we use a simple variant of our O(log min{n,m})-approximation heuristic, where
we use the standard greedy 1
2-approximation algorithm for solving the submodular welfare problem
(with monotone functions) of Lemma 11. Even though using the
 1 −1
e

-approximation algorithm
due to Vondrak (2008) might lead to better constants in the approximation guarantee, the greedy
approach is significantly more practical and easy to implement. For solving the scheduling problem,

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
we first compute an approximate assignment using the heuristic of Section 4 and, then, we apply
the transformation of Section 2 on the produced assignment.
The algorithm has been implemented in Python 3.8. We have used GurobiTM 9.1 Solver for
all the associated optimization problems (i.e., computation of the optimal solution via an MILP
formulation, computation of LP-based lower bounds, and implementation of the algorithm). Finally,
we have used SageMath for implementing various operations on matroids. The experiments have
been conducted on a machine with 3.2 GHz 8-core CPU and 8 GB RAM.
5.2. Instance Sets
We compute the empirical approximation ratio of our heuristic for a varying number of n jobs and
m machines on the following three classes of processing speed functions. The functions from each
of these three classes are known to be monotone submodular.
• Coverage: We consider k slots and a frequency parameter p ∈(0,1). For each job j and
machine i, let Bi,j ⊆[k] be a subset of the k slots, such that each slot is contained in Bi,j indepen-
dently with probability p. The speed function of each job j on a set S ⊆M is defined as
gj(S) = 1
Lj
·

[
i∈S
Bi,j
,
where Lj is a random constant indicating the total load of job j.
In the following simulations, we choose frequency p = 0.2 and number of slots k = m, where m
is the number of machines. For each job j, we choose load Lj ∼U[1,1000].
• Budget-Additive: For each job j, we define a budget Wj and a set of weights wi,j for each
i ∈M. For the budget and the weights, we have Wj ∼U[1,Wmax] and wi,j ∼U[1,wmax], where
Wmax,wmax fixed constants, with Wmax ≫wmax. The speed function of each job j of load Lj on a
set S ⊆M is defined as
gj(S) = 1
Lj
· min
X
i∈S
wi,j,Wj

.
Specifically, for each job j, we choose Lj ∼U[1,1000], wmax = 100, and Wmax = 100 · m, where m
is the number of machines.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
• Independent-Matching: For each job j, we define k slots, each associated with a weight
wℓ,j ∼U[1,wmax]. We define a bipartite graph Gj between the set of slots, [k], and the set of
machines, M. For each slot ℓand machine i, with probability p, we consider an edge {ℓ,i} with
weight equal to wℓ,j (such that all the edges adjacent to the same slot have the same weight). For
every matching σ ⊆[k] × M on Gj, we denote by wj(σ) the total weight of the edges in σ.
Further, we consider a random partition S
ℓ∈[b] Bℓ,j on the k slots, such that each slot is placed
into some group uniformly at random. We define a partition matroid on the slots such that any
set R ⊆[k] is independent if |R ∩Bℓ,j| ≤r for each ℓ∈[b], for some rank r. Let Ij be the family of
independent sets in the above matroid.
For some random load Lj, the speed function for job j is defined as
gj(S) = 1
Lj
· max

wj(σ) | σ ⊆[k] × M a matching on Gj between R ∈Ij and S′ ⊆S

.
In our simulations, we set wmax = 100, p = 0.1, r = 2, k = ⌊m
4 ⌋+ 1, and b = ⌊m
8 ⌋+ 1, where m is
the number of machines. Finally, for each job j, we have Lj ∼U[1,1000].
5.3. Lower Bounds
In order to estimate the empirical approximation ratio of our heuristic, we need to be able to
compute (or lower bound) the makespan of the optimal assignment in any given instance.
We take two different routes depending on the size of the instance:
• MILP formulation: For relatively small instances, we are able to exactly compute the
makespan of the optimal assignment by constructing the following mixed integer linear program-
ming (MILP) formulation:
minimize:
C
s.t.:
X
S⊆M
x(S,j) ≥1
∀j ∈J
X
j∈J
X
S⊆M:i∈M
1
gj(S)x(S,j) ≤C
∀i ∈M
x(S,j) ∈{0,1}
∀j ∈J, S ⊆M \ {∅}.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Note that in order to model all possible assignments from jobs to (subsets of) machines, we need
exactly n · (2m −1) binary variables. Unfortunately, the exponential dependence on m allows the
usage of the above formulation only for a small number of machines.
• LP relaxation: For larger instances where the MILP approach becomes computationally
intractable, we can compute a lower bound to the makespan via the following relaxation, which
uses the fact that the processing speeds in our computational experiments are monotone and
submodular:
minimize:
C
s.t.:
X
i∈M
xij ≥1
∀j ∈J
X
j∈J
1
gj({i})xij ≤C
∀i ∈M
max
j∈J
1
gj(M) ≤C
∀j ∈J
x ≥0
.
Let C∗be the value of an optimal solution of the LP above. It is not hard to see that C∗is
a lower bound on the maximum load in any assignment. Indeed, for any assignment S, setting
xij =
gj({i})
gj(Sj) for i ∈Sj and xij = 0 otherwise, and C = L(S) yields a feasible solution to the LP.
We remark that C∗can be quite far from the optimal value of Assignment, particularly in cases
where the number of jobs is smaller than the number of machines—a fact which is reflected in
our simulations. Nevertheless, the above lower bound appears to be sufficient for showing that the
empirical approximation ratio of our algorithms relatively small in practice.
5.4. Empirical Evaluation of the O(log min{n,m})-Approximation Heuristic
For each of the instances described above we computed a feasible assignment using the heuristic
from Section 4 and compared this against the LP-based lower bound described above. The observed
ratios of assignment makespan to the respective lower bound for that instance, grouped by number

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
of jobs and machines, are plotted in subfigure (a) of Figs. 3 to 5 for the three different types of speed
functions, respectively. We further transformed each of the resulting assignments into a feasible
schedule using the algorithm described in Theorem 2. Again we compare the makespan of the
resulting schedule against the LP-based lower bound on the makespan of an optimal assignment.
The observed ratios, again grouped by number of jobs and machines, are plotted in subfigure (b)
of Figs. 3 to 5 for the different types of speed functions, respectively.
As we observe, the empirical approximation ratios reported in Figs. 3 to 5 take significantly
smaller values comparing to the theoretically proven guarantees. It is important to note that, for the
scheduling problem, we use as a baseline the same LP-based lower bound used for the assignment
problem. This fact implies that the actual approximation ratios for this case can be even smaller
than they appear. Finally, for all the speed functions, and especially for Coverage, we observe
the following interesting phenomenon: the empirical approximation guarantee appears to be higher
when the number of jobs is smaller than the number of machines. In particular, we believe that
the above phenomenon is partially explained by the fact that the LP-based lower bound we use
is weak for these instances. Indeed, this is because the lower bound interpolates between the case
of scheduling the heaviest job on all the machines (which is weak for more than one jobs), and
the case where each job can be fractionally assigned to more than one machines (which has an
unbounded integrality gap).
5.5. Empirical Evaluation of Theorem 2 on Optimal Assignments
In addition to the empirical evaluation of our heuristic, we further experimentally study the empir-
ical loss due to the application of Theorem 2 on optimal assignments. In this case, for small enough
number of jobs and machines, denoted by n and m, respectively, an optimal assignment is com-
puted efficiently via the MILP formulation described above. In Fig. 6, we report the ratio between
the makespan of the scheduled produced by applying Theorem 2 on the optimal assignment and
the makespan of this assignment, for each of the speed functions defined above. We remark that
for the case of Independent-Matching, we slightly modify the number of slots and groups to

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
32
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
be k = ⌊m⌋+ 1 and b = ⌊m⌋+ 1, respectively. The reason behind this modification is that, for the
original values of k,b and for small number of machines, the optimal assignment is always a valid
schedule where each job is assigned to a single machine.
As we can see, the approximation loss for all instances lies between 1 and 2, which is smaller than
the theoretically proven guarantee of 3.1462. In fact, the average empirical approximation ratio
for all the instances is approximately 1.179. An interesting observation is that in many examples,
the reported ratio is exactly 1. In these cases, the optimal assignment is already well-structured
and hence applying Theorem 2 has no effect. Finally, we can see that for any speed function the
approximation loss decreases as the ratio of jobs to machines increases. This phenomenon matches
our intuition that, for a fixed number of machines and as the number of jobs increases, more
and more jobs are already assigned as singletons in an optimal assignment. The reasoning behind
this intuition is that this type of allocation minimizes the total work (number of machines times
processing time) invested in each job, and is thus, on a large scale, yields the most efficient way of
using the machines.
Acknowledgements
We thank two anonymous reviewers for numerous thoughtful comments
that helped improving the paper. Dimitris Fotakis was supported by the Hellenic Foundation for
Research and Innovation (H.F.R.I.) under the “First Call for H.F.R.I. Research Projects to support
Faculty members and Researchers and the procurement of high-cost research equipment grant”,
project BALSAM, HFRI-FM17-1424. Jannik Matuschke was supported by FWO research project
G072520N “Optimization and analytics for stochastic and robust project scheduling”. Orestis
Papadigenopoulos was partially supported by the NSF Institute for Machine Learning, Award
number 2019844.
In Memoriam
Our friend and co-author Orestis Papadigenopoulos tragically passed away
on October 26, 2023. Our community has lost an incredibly talented researcher and a wonderful
person. We dedicate this article to his memory.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
33
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
(a) Assignment using the heuristic of Section 4.
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
(b) Scheduling via applying Theorem 2 to the produced assignments.
Figure 3
Empirical approximation ratio for Coverage speed functions. Each point in the x-axis is labeled as
n
m,
where n and m is the number of jobs and machines, respectively.
References
Hyun-Soo Ahn and Mark E Lewis. Flexible server allocation and customer routing policies for two parallel
queues when service rates are not additive. Operations Research, 61(2):344–358, 2013.
Gene M Amdahl. Validity of the single processor approach to achieving large scale computing capabilities.
In Proceedings of the April 18-20, 1967, spring joint computer conference, pages 483–485, 1967.
Francis Bach. Learning with submodular functions: A convex optimization perspective. Foundations and
Trends® in Machine Learning, 6(2-3):145–373, 2013.
Evripidis Bampis, Konstantinos Dogeas, Alexander Kononov, Giorgio Lucarelli, and Fanny Pascual. Schedul-
ing malleable jobs under topological constraints. In 2020 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium (IPDPS), pages 316–325. IEEE, 2020.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
34
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
(a) Assignment using the heuristic of Section 4.
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
2
4
6
8
10
(b) Scheduling via applying Theorem 2 to the produced assignments.
Figure 4
Empirical approximation ratio for Budget-Additive speed functions. Each point in the x-axis is labeled
as
n
m, where n and m is the number of jobs and machines, respectively.
Enrico Bartolini, Mauro Dell’Amico, and Manuel Iori. Scheduling cleaning activities on trains by minimizing
idle times. Journal of Scheduling, 20(5):493–506, 2017.
P-E Bernard, Thierry Gautier, and Denis Trystram. Large scale simulation of parallel molecular dynamics.
In Proceedings 13th International Parallel Processing Symposium and 10th Symposium on Parallel and
Distributed Processing. IPPS/SPDP 1999, pages 638–644. IEEE, 1999.
Jacek Blazewicz, TC Edwin Cheng, Maciej Machowiak, and Ceyda Oguz. Berth and quay crane allocation:
a moldable task scheduling model. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 62(7):1189–1197, 2011.
Rapha¨el Bleuse, Sascha Hunold, Safia Kedad-Sidhoum, Florence Monna, Gr´egory Mouni´e, and Denis Trys-
tram.
Scheduling independent moldable tasks on multi-cores with GPUs.
IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, 28(9):2689–2702, 2017.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
35
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
1
2
3
4
5
(a) Assignment using the heuristic of Section 4.
10
10
20
10
50
10
80
10
100
10
120
10
150
10
200
10
10
20
20
20
50
20
80
20
100
20
120
20
150
20
200
20
10
50
20
50
50
50
80
50
100
50
120
50
150
50
200
50
10
100
20
100
50
100
80
100
100
100
120
100
150
100
200
100
2
4
6
8
10
(b) Scheduling via applying Theorem 2 to the produced assignments.
Figure 5
Empirical approximation ratio for Matroid-Matching speed functions. Each point in the x-axis is
labeled as
n
m, where n and m is the number of jobs and machines, respectively.
5
2
10
2
5
3
10
3
5
5
10
5
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
(a)
5
2
10
2
5
3
10
3
5
5
10
5
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
(b)
5
2
10
2
5
3
10
3
5
5
10
5
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
(c)
Figure 6
Empirical approximation loss due to Theorem 2 for (a) Coverage, (b) Budget-Additive, and (c)
Independent-Matching speed functions. Each point in the x-axis is labeled as
n
m, where n and m is
the number of jobs and machines, respectively.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
36
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Olga N Bondareva. Some applications of linear programming methods to the theory of cooperative games.
Problemy kibernetiki, 10(119):139, 1963.
Leonardo Borba and Marcus Ritt. A heuristic and a branch-and-bound algorithm for the assembly line
worker assignment and balancing problem. Computers & Operations Research, 45:87–96, 2014.
Ozan Candogan, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Pablo A Parrilo.
Iterative auction design for tree valuations.
Operations Research, 63(4):751–771, 2015.
Jos´e Correa, Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela, Jannik Matuschke, Leen Stougie, Ola Svensson, V´ıctor Verdugo,
and Jos´e Verschae.
Strong LP formulations for scheduling splittable jobs on unrelated machines.
Mathematical Programming, 154(1):305–328, 2015.
Alexandre Dolgui, Sergey Kovalev, Mikhail Y Kovalyov, Sergey Malyutin, and Ameur Soukhal. Optimal
workforce assignment to operations of a paced assembly line. European Journal of Operational Research,
264(1):200–211, 2018.
Jack J. Dongarra, Iain S Duff, Danny C. Sorensen, and Henk A. Van der Vorst. Numerical linear algebra for
high-performance computers. SIAM, 1998.
Jianzhong Du and Joseph Y.-T. Leung. Complexity of scheduling parallel task systems. SIAM Journal on
Discrete Mathematics, 2(4):473–487, 1989.
Uriel Feige. On maximizing welfare when utility functions are subadditive. SIAM Journal on Computing,
39(1):122–142, 2009.
Dimitris Fotakis, Jannik Matuschke, and Orestis Papadigenopoulos. Malleable scheduling beyond identical
machines. Journal of Scheduling, 26:425–442, 2023.
Dimitris Fotakis, Jannik Matuschke, and Orestis Papadigenopoulos. A constant-factor approximation for
generalized malleable scheduling under M ♮-concave processing speeds. Mathematical Programming,
2024.
Ikki Fujiwara, Masahiro Tanaka, Keniiro Taura, and Kentaro Torisawa.
Effectiveness of moldable and
malleable scheduling in deep learning tasks. In 2018 IEEE 24th International Conference on Parallel
and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), pages 389–398. IEEE, 2018.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
37
Dorit S. Hochbaum and David B. Shmoys. Using dual approximation algorithms for scheduling problems
theoretical and practical results. Journal of the ACM, 34(1):144–162, 1987.
Akio Imai, Hsieh Chia Chen, Etsuko Nishimura, and Stratos Papadimitriou. The simultaneous berth and
quay crane allocation problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
44(5):900–920, 2008.
Satoru Iwata. Submodular function minimization. Mathematical Programming, 112(1):45–64, 2008.
Klaus Jansen and Felix Land. Scheduling monotone moldable jobs in linear time. In 2018 IEEE International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), pages 172–181. IEEE, 2018.
Klaus Jansen and Lorant Porkolab. Linear-time approximation schemes for scheduling malleable parallel
tasks. Algorithmica, 32(3):507–520, 2002.
Klaus Jansen and Ralf Th¨ole. Approximation algorithms for scheduling parallel jobs. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 39(8):3571–3615, 2010.
Jon Lee, Vahab S. Mirrokni, Viswanath Nagarajan, and Maxim Sviridenko.
Non-monotone submodular
maximization under matroid and knapsack constraints. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 323–332, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
Jan Karel Lenstra, David B. Shmoys, and ´Eva Tardos. Approximation algorithms for scheduling unrelated
parallel machines. Mathematical Programming, 46:259–271, 1990.
David Simchi Levi, Xin Chen, and Julien Bramel. The logic of logistics: theory, algorithms, and applications
for logistics management. Springer, 2014.
Gregory Mouni´e, Christophe Rapine, and Denis Trystram. Efficient approximation algorithms for scheduling
malleable tasks. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual ACM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and
Architectures, pages 23–32, 1999.
Gr´egory Mouni´e, Christophe Rapine, and Denis Trystram.
A
3
2-approximation algorithm for scheduling
independent monotonic malleable tasks. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(2):401–412, 2007.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
38
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Ioannis Mourtos, Stavros Vatikiotis, and Georgios Zois. Scheduling jobs on unrelated machines with job
splitting and setup resource constraints for weaving in textile manufacturing. In IFIP International
Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems, pages 424–434. Springer, 2021.
Kazuo Murota. Discrete Convex Analysis, volume 10. SIAM, 2003.
Koichi Nakade and Rei Nishiwaki. Optimal allocation of heterogeneous workers in a u-shaped production
line. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 54(3):432–440, 2008.
Nhan-Quy Nguyen, Farouk Yalaoui, Lionel Amodeo, Hicham Chehade, and Pascal Toggenburger.
Elec-
trical vehicle charging coordination algorithms framework. In Energy Management—Collective and
Computational Intelligence with Theory and Applications, pages 357–373. Springer, 2018.
Alexander Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization - Polyhedra and Efficiency. Springer, 2003.
Paolo Serafini. Scheduling jobs on several machines with the job splitting property. Operations Research, 44
(4):617–628, 1996.
David B. Shmoys and ´Eva Tardos. An approximation algorithm for the generalized assignment problem.
Mathematical Programming, 62(1):461–474, 1993.
John Turek, Joel L. Wolf, and Philip S. Yu. Approximate algorithms scheduling parallelizable tasks. In
Proceedings of the fourth annual ACM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, pages
323–332, 1992.
Suzanne van der Ster. The allocation of scarce resources in disaster relief. Master’s thesis, VU Amsterdam,
2010.
Jan Vondrak. Optimal approximation for the submodular welfare problem in the value oracle model. In
Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’08, pages 67–74,
New York, NY, USA, 2008. Association for Computing Machinery.
Matthias Walter and J¨urgen Zimmermann. Minimizing average project team size given multi-skilled workers
with heterogeneous skill levels. Computers & Operations Research, 70:163–179, 2016.
Xiaohu Wu and Patrick Loiseau. Algorithms for scheduling deadline-sensitive malleable tasks. In 2015 53rd
Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pages 530–537.
IEEE, 2015.

Fotakis, Matuschke, and Papadigenopoulos: Assigning and Scheduling Generalized Malleable Jobs
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
39
Dimitris Fotakis is a professor at the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the
National Technical University of Athens. His research focuses on the design and analysis of approx-
imation and online algorithms, algorithmic mechanism design, and online learning.
Jannik Matuschke is an associate professor at the Research Center for Operations Management
at KU Leuven. His research interests lie broadly in the area of combinatorial optimization, in
particular approximation algorithms, game-theoretic models, and robustness.
Orestis Papadigenopoulos was a postdoctoral research scientist at the Data Science Institute of
Columbia University. His research focused on the design and analysis of approximation and online
algorithms, online learning, multi-armed bandits, and combinatorial optimization.