TITLE: Recent Developments in Security-Constrained AC Optimal Power Flow: Overview of Challenge 1 in the ARPA-E Grid Optimization Competition
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.0315
---

LLNL-JRNL-860416
Recent Developments in
Security-Constrained AC Optimal Power
Flow: Overview of Challenge 1 in the
ARPA-E Grid Optimization Competition
I. Aravena, D. Molzahn, S. Zhang, C. Petra , F. Curtis,
S. Tu, A. Wachter, E. Wei, E. Wong, A. Gholami, K.
Sun, X. Sun, S. Elbert, J. Holzer, A. Veeramany
February 12, 2024
Operations Research

Disclaimer 
 
This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States 
government. Neither the United States government nor Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, 
nor any of their employees makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or 
responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or 
process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein 
to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or 
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the 
United States government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC. The views and opinions of 
authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States government or 
Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and shall not be used for advertising or product 
endorsement purposes. 
 

Recent Developments in Security-Constrained AC
Optimal Power Flow: Overview of Challenge 1 in the
ARPA-E Grid Optimization Competition
Ignacio Aravena1,a, Daniel K. Molzahn2,b, Shixuan Zhang2,c
1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 2Georgia Institute of Technology,
aravenasolis1@llnl.gov, molzahn@gatech.edu, zhangshixuanus@gatech.edu
Cosmin G. Petra1,a
1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, aTeam gollnlp
petra1@llnl.gov
Frank E. Curtis3,b, Shenyinying Tu4,b, Andreas W¨achter4,b, Ermin Wei4,b, Elizabeth Wong5,b
3Lehigh University, 4Northwestern University, 5University of California, San Diego, bTeam GO-SNIP
fec309@lehigh.edu, shenyinyingtu2021@u.northwestern.edu, andreas.waechter@northwestern.edu,
ermin.wei@northwestern.edu, elwong@ucsd.edu
Amin Gholami2,c, Kaizhao Sun2,c, Xu Andy Sun6,c
6Masachusetts Institute of Technology, cTeam GMI-GO
a.gholami@gatech.edu, ksun46@gatech.edu, sunx@mit.edu
Stephen T. Elbert7,d, Jesse T. Holzer7,d, Arun Veeramany7,d,
7Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, dGrid Optimization Competition Organization Team
steve.elbert@pnnl.gov, jesse.holzer@pnnl.gov, arun.veeramany@pnnl.gov
Abstract: The optimal power flow problem is central to many tasks in the design and operation of electric
power grids. This problem seeks the minimum cost operating point for an electric power grid while satisfying
both engineering requirements and physical laws describing how power flows through the electric network.
By additionally considering the possibility of component failures and using an accurate AC power flow
model of the electric network, the security-constrained AC optimal power flow (SC-AC-OPF) problem is of
paramount practical relevance. To assess recent progress in solution algorithms for SC-AC-OPF problems
and spur new innovations, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy
(ARPA-E) organized Challenge 1 of the Grid Optimization (GO) competition. This special issue includes
papers authored by the top three teams in Challenge 1 of the GO Competition (Teams gollnlp, GO-SNIP,
and GMI-GO). To introduce these papers and provide context about the competition, this paper describes
the SC-AC-OPF problem formulation used in the competition, overviews historical developments and the
state of the art in SC-AC-OPF algorithms, discusses the competition, and summarizes the algorithms used
by these three teams.
Key words : security-constrained AC optimal power flow; optimization competition; complementarity
constraints; large-scale optimization; nonlinear optimization
1

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
1. Introduction
The Security-Constrained Alternating Current Optimal Power Flow (SC-AC-OPF) problem is
central to almost all optimization models in electric power grids. This problem seeks optimal
settings for power generation and grid control equipment so as to minimize operating cost while
ensuring that the system can continue to be operated in the event of localized equipment failures.
The SC-AC-OPF problem is a large-scale, nonsmooth, nonconvex, and nonlinear optimization
problem, which, in the simplified case without security constraints, has been shown to have multiple
local minima (Hiskens and Davy 2001, Bukhsh et al. 2013, Molzahn 2017) and a corresponding
feasibility problem that is strongly NP-hard (Bienstock and Verma 2019). The nonlinearities of the
SC-AC-OPF problem involve products and trigonometric functions, its constraints are nonconvex
and nonsmooth, and the problem can have several million variables and constraints. Furthermore,
SC-AC-OPF must be solved frequently every few minutes for each power system. These attributes
make SC-AC-OPF an extremely difficult problem for which no effective exact method is known.
Rapidly emerging technologies like renewable generation, batteries, and electric vehicles motivate
the development of new techniques for solving SC-AC-OPF problems. Further, improvements in
SC-AC-OPF software have the potential to save $6B to $19B of electricity costs yearly in the US
(ARPA-E 2018), even without taking into account the potential gains in reliability.
To advance the state-of-the-art in this high-risk, high-reward topic, the Advanced Research
Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) in the US Department of Energy (DOE) launched the Grid
Optimization (GO) Competition – Challenge 1, focusing on SC-AC-OPF, in 2018. This paper
overviews the ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 from the perspective of both the organizers
and the top-three teams in the competition. We introduce the SC-AC-OPF problem from Chal-
lenge 1 to specialists in operations research (Section 2), present a historical review and discuss
recent developments (Section 3), discuss the competition (Section 4), compare our teams’ algo-
rithms (Section 5), and provide concluding remarks (Section 6).

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
2. Problem Formulation
The SC-AC-OPF problem seeks to minimize the production cost of generators to supply the load
demands using an alternating current (AC) network. This section introduces the classical version of
this problem to non-specialists with a basic understanding of direct current (DC) electrical circuits.
We cover the most recurrent questions from researchers without a power engineering background
during the competition, such as “why are there angles?” and “why are there two types of power?”
We start by reviewing AC circuits and phasor notation. This section is similar in spirit to (Frank
and Rebennack 2016, Bienstock et al. 2022), but we take a deeper look at power in AC circuits.
We then describe the elemental components of a power grid: buses, generators, loads, shunts, and
branches. We finally present the SC-AC-OPF problem by bringing those components together.
2.1. Alternating current circuits
AC circuits operating in steady-state are similar to steady-state DC circuits in that their quantities
of interest can be determined by solving algebraic, often linear, equations. The key difference
between the two is that, while steady-state DC circuits can be algebraically described using only
real numbers, AC circuits require complex numbers representing sinusoids, which we call phasors.
We next summarize these concepts. For further details, the reader is referred to Section EC.1 of
the electronic companion material for this article as well as textbooks in circuit theory, such as
(Alexander and Sadiku 2008, Part 2), (Hayt 2018).
Steady-state voltages and currents in an AC power system are modeled via sinusoidal waveforms.
We denote a voltage waveform as v(t) =
√
2V cos(ωt), where V is the root mean square (RMS)
voltage and ω is the angular frequency. Power system models are derived using the fundamental
equations for the resistors, inductors, and capacitors: iR(t) = v(t)/R (Ohm’s Law), iL(t) = 1/L ·
R t
−∞v(τ)dτ (Faraday’s Law), and iC(t) = C dv
dt (t) (Ampere-Maxwell’s Law), where R, L, and C
denote resistance, inductance, and capacitance, respectively.
Applying these equations to the voltage waveform v(t) reveals that resistors relate voltages
and currents via scalar multiplication, i.e., iR(t) =
√
2 V
R cos(ωt). Capacitors and inductors relate

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
voltages and currents by both scalar multiplication and a π/2 phase shift (in opposite directions
for inductors versus capacitors), i.e., iL(t) =
√
2 V
ωL cos
 ωt −π
2

and iC(t) =
√
2V ωC cos
 ωt + π
2

.
Observe that the voltage and current waveforms all have the same frequency ω.
These relationships motivate electrical engineers to represent AC circuit signals as elements of
the complex plane, where multiplication and phase shift correspond to multiplication by complex
numbers. Moreover, note that sinusoids can be orthogonally decomposed into components with
phases 0 and π/2. This decomposition naturally maps to the real and imaginary axes on the
complex plane, enabling addition of sinusoids to take place via these orthogonal components. We
refer to this representation of sinusoids as elements in the complex plane as phasors.
Formally, we define the phasor transformation Fω : Sω →C, where Sω is the set sinusoidal
functions with frequency ω, as:
Fω
 √
2Acos(ωt + ϕ)

= Aexp(iϕ) ≡A ϕ,
(1)
where i = √−1. For simplicity, we denote phasors using a dot below its corresponding symbol, e.g.,
Fω(v(t)) =
•v. The phasor transformation is bijective with inverse F −1
ω (
•x) = ℜ
 •x ·
√
2exp(iωt)

.
The phasor representation of the voltage and current relationships for a generic circuit element e
(resistor, capacitor, or inductor) can be expressed as
•ie = Ye •v, which is identical to Ohm’s law, but
with complex quantities, where Ye is called the admittance of the element; YR = 1/R, YL = −i/(ωL),
and YC = iωC. The addition of currents is performed along the real and imaginary axes in the same
fashion as in DC circuits. We also note that parallel admittances are added directly to obtain the
total admittance. Conversely, the total equivalent admittance for a series connection of admittances
is the reciprocal of the sum of their reciprocals. The real and imaginary parts of an admittance Y
are the conductance G and susceptance B, respectively, i.e., G = ℜ(Y ) and B = ℑ(Y ).
Power in AC circuits is also represented using complex quantities, though complex power is not
a phasor as defined above. We first review instantaneous power. For an element with voltage v(t) =

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
√
2V cos(ωt + α) and current i(t) =
√
2I cos(ωt + β), the instantaneous power is p(t) = v(t) · i(t)
which, via the variable change τ = t + α/ω (time translation to align with voltage), yields:
p(τ) = v(τ) · i(τ) =
√
2V cos(ωτ) ·
√
2I cos(ωτ + β −α)
= V I cos(α −β)
 1 + cos(2ωτ)

+ V I sin(α −β) cos(2ωτ + π/2).
(2)
Instantaneous power has three components, all proportional to the product of RMS voltage and
current: (i) one continuous component, which is also proportional to the cosine of the phase differ-
ence between voltage and current; (ii) one sinusoidal component, with double the frequency of the
circuit proportional to the cosine of the phase difference; and (iii) another sinusoidal component
of double frequency, but proportional to the sine of the phase difference and with a π/2 phase shift
with respect to the other sinusoidal component. Observe that only the first component can make
actual work (spending energy over time), whereas the second is necessary for the first, and both
become larger as the phase difference becomes closer to zero. The third component, on the other
hand, cannot produce any work over time. The first and second component of instantaneous power
is only present for resistors (producing work), whereas inductors and capacitors only have the third
component (storing and releasing energy from their magnetic and electric fields, respectively).
To obtain meaningful power quantities when working with phasors, we define complex power as
•s =
•v ·
•i∗, where
•i∗denotes the complex conjugate of the current phasor, and hence we have:
•s =
•v ·
•i∗= V α · I −β = V I α −β = V I cos(α −β)
|
{z
}
p
+i V I sin(α −β)
|
{z
}
q
,
(3)
where p is referred to as the active power, representing the first and second components of instan-
taneous power, and q is referred to as the reactive power, representing the third component of
instantaneous power.
The analysis of large-scale power systems is built, mostly, out of the elements reviewed in this
section. Aspects not reviewed here, which are also relevant in the study of power systems, are the
treatment of transformers, three-phase circuits, the per-unit system, and symmetrical components.
For the purposes of this paper, it suffices to say that the per-unit system and symmetrical compo-
nents can be used to obtain a single-phase equivalent power system model. When applied to this

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
model, the material reviewed above provides the basis for understanding the SC-AC-OPF problem
considered in Challenge 1 of the GO Competition. For further details on these topics, the reader
is referred to power systems textbooks, such as (Gonen 2016, Glover et al. 2016).
2.2. Power grid components
This section reviews the components of the power system in the OPF problem, their power and
voltage variables, and the constraints on those variables. Each of these components can have
two modes of operation, one for base-case (normal) conditions and another for post-contingency
(emergency) conditions, as well as constraints indicating how to transition from base case to post-
contingency mode. A contingency event, in this context, corresponds to the abrupt disconnection
of a generator, line, or transformer, leaving the rest of the system to adjust to new operating
conditions in order to avoid a cascading failure or blackout. The base to post-contingency transition
constraints presented in this section assume that no decision can be made in between base-case
and post-contingency states, but rather the transition is dictated by automatic controller actions
based on local observations. This is commonly referred to as a preventive model in the literature. 1
We denote base-case parameters and variables with a 0 subscript and contingency parameters
and variables with a k ∈K subscript, where K ̸∋0 is the set of contingencies. For notational
convenience, we let K0 := K ∪{0} denote the set of all system conditions.
From this section onward, we use the same notation as in ARPA-E’s GO Competition Challenge 1
(ARPA-E 2019), except that we use upper case for parameters and lower case for variables.
2.2.1. Buses
Buses correspond to the nodes in the electrical network where generators, loads,
branches, and shunts connect to the rest of the grid. Each bus n in the set of buses N has voltage
phasors vn,0 θn,0 in the base case and vn,k θn,k in each post-contingency condition k ∈K, with
(RMS) voltage magnitude limits:
V n ≤vn,0 ≤V n ∀n ∈N,
(4)
V E
n ≤vn,k ≤V
E
n
∀n ∈N,k ∈K,
(5)

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
where V E
n ≤V n ≤V n ≤V
E
n for all n ∈N are lower and upper voltage bounds. Since angles only
make sense relative to one another, a reference bus nref ∈N is chosen to have θnref,k = 0 for all
k ∈K0.
2.2.2. Generators
Generators transform primary energy sources into electrical power that
is injected into the power system, that is, they act as voltage sources from Section 2.1. Each
generator g in the set of generators G can inject active power pg,0 (base case), pg,k (post-contingency)
and reactive power qg,0 (base case), qg,k (post-contingency) into the network within certain limits:
P g ≤pg,k ≤P g,
Qg ≤qg,k ≤Qg ∀g ∈G,k ∈K0
(6)
Let n(g) denote the bus where the generator is connected. In the base case, both active and reactive
injections can be decided freely, within the above limits, irrespective of the voltage magnitude at
the generator’s bus, vn(g),0. In post-contingency state k ∈K, however, if the generator is in the set of
generators that remain online G(k) ⊆G, the generator’s behavior is constrained by two controllers.
First, the voltage control system attempts to maintain the base-case voltage magnitude vn(g),0 in
the post-contingency state by injecting or absorbing reactive power; voltage magnitude increases
with reactive power injection. The voltage control system only allows the post-contingency voltage
vn(g),k to deviate from vn(g),0 after depleting the generator’s reactive power capability, fixing qg,k to
its upper limit if voltage decreases post-contingency and to its lower limit if voltage increases post-
contingency (Stott 1974). This behavior is modeled via the following complementarity constraints:
ν+
n(g),k −ν−
n(g),k = vn(g),k −vn(g),0
(7)
0 ≤ν−
n(g),k ⊥Qg −qg,k ≥0 ∀g ∈G(k),k ∈K
(8)
0 ≤ν+
n(g),k ⊥qg,k −Qg ≥0 ∀g ∈G(k),k ∈K
(9)
where ν+
n(g),k and ν−
n(g),k are the voltage increase and decrease, respectively, in post-contingency k.
Second, the droop control system, also referred to as the automatic generation control system,
adjusts the post-contingency active power pg,k following the post-contingency deviation in system

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
frequency δk for k ∈K. This system increases generation if there is a frequency decrease (δk < 0,
indicating a lack of generation) and decreases it in case of a frequency increase (δk > 0, indicating a
generation excess) (Jaleeli et al. 1992). Each generator g may have a different droop slope Ag ≥0,
indicating how much to increase or decrease production per each unit of frequency deviation. The
droop control saturates at the active power limits, as a generator can only operate within them.
This behavior can be modeled as the following complementarity constraints:
ρ+
g,k −ρ−
g,k = pg,k −(pg,0 + Agδk)
(10)
0 ≤ρ−
g,k ⊥P g −pg,k ≥0 ∀g ∈G(k),k ∈K
(11)
0 ≤ρ+
g,k ⊥pg,k −P g ≥0 ∀g ∈G(k),k ∈K
(12)
where ρ+
g,k and ρ−
g,k are the upward and downward deviations from the linear response of generator g
in post-contingency k due to saturation at minimum and maximum power output, respectively. If
generator g ∈G is not online in post-contingency k ∈G, i.e., g /∈G(k), then it cannot provide power:
pg,k = qg,k = 0 ∀g ∈G \ G(k),k ∈K
(13)
2.2.3. Loads
Loads are modeled as constant withdrawals of active and reactive power from
the system. The load at bus n ∈N is denoted as P L
n for active power and QL
n for reactive power.
2.2.4. Shunts
In the context of OPF, shunts correspond to variable inductors or capacitors—
or a mixture of the two—connecting between a bus and the ground, thereby “deviating” current
from its main path from generator to consumers.2 Shunts are used to withdraw (inductor) or inject
(capacitor) reactive power to the grid, helping with reactive power and voltage control.
The total susceptance of shunts at bus n ∈N is denoted bn,k for k ∈K0 and is bounded as follows:
Bn ≤bn,k ≤Bn ∀n ∈N,k ∈K0
(14)
2.2.5. Branches
Branches correspond to the paths traversed by electricity from generators
to loads. This paper covers AC transmission lines, as they are the most prevalent branch in existing

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
o(e)
pe,o,k + iqe,o,k
iBCH
e
/2
iBCH
e
/2
Ge + iBe
d(e)
pe,d,k + iqe,d,k
vo(e),k θo(e),k
vd(e),k θd(e),k
Figure 1
Equivalent circuit for transmission line e ∈E(k) (k ∈K0), from bus o(e) ∈N to bus d(e) ∈N. The
circuit uses one resistor and one inductor, with combined admittance Ge + iBe, to model the thermal
losses and magnetic fields around the conductors. The circuit also uses two capacitors, with admittance
iBCH
e
/2 each, to model the effect of electric fields between the conductor and the ground. Complex
power is defined as entering the line at both o(e) and d(e).
power systems. Other types of branches, not covered here, include transformers, phase-shifters, and
DC transmission lines; the reader is referred to (Gonen 2016) for further information.
Each transmission line e in the set of lines E has two terminals, origin o and destination e, which
are connected to buses o(e) ∈N and d(e) ∈N, respectively. Each line e is modeled using the circuit
presented in Fig. 1. The complex power from bus o(e) entering line e through its o terminal in
system condition k ∈K0 can be expressed as
pe,o,k + iqe,o,k = vo(e),k θo(e),k
"
iBCH
e
2
· vo(e),k θo(e),k
∗
+

(Ge + iBe)
 vo(e),k θo(e),k −vd(e),k θd(e),0
∗#
which, when separated in real (active) and imaginary (reactive) parts, yields
pe,o,k =Gevo(e),k −Ge cos
 θo(e),k −θd(e),k

vo(e),k vd(e),k −Be sin
 θo(e),k −θd(e),k

vo(e),k vd(e),k
(15)
qe,o,k = −
 Be + BCH
e
/2

v2
o(e),k + Be cos
 θo(e),k −θd(e),k

vo(e),k vd(e),k −
Ge sin
 θo(e),k −θd(e),k

vo(e),k vd(e),k
(16)
for all e ∈E,k ∈K0. Analogous equations for the power into the d terminal from the d(e) bus are,
for all e ∈E,k ∈K0,
pe,d,k =Gevd(e),k −Ge cos
 θd(e),k −θo(e),k

vd(e),k vo(e),k −Be sin
 θd(e),k −θo(e),k

vd(e),k vo(e),k
(17)
qe,d,k = −
 Be + BCH
e
/2

v2
d(e),k + Be cos
 θd(e),k −θo(e),k

vd(e),k vo(e),k −
Ge sin
 θd(e),k −θo(e),k

vd(e),k vo(e),k
(18)

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Lines disconnected in post-contingency case k ∈K cannot carry power, and thus
pe,o,k = pe,d,k = qe,o,k = qe,d,k = 0 ∀e ∈E \ E(k),k ∈K
(19)
Equations (15)–(18) are derived using the polar representation of voltages and rectangular repre-
sentation of power, yielding the so-called polar formulation of the OPF problem. Alternatively, one
can chose to represent voltage in rectangular coordinates, leading to the rectangular formulation.
Another choice is to use complex current instead of complex power, yielding the IV formulation.
Further changes of variables exist, yielding additional formulations of the OPF problem. We refer
to (Molzahn and Hiskens 2019) for a details on alternative OPF formulations.
Each transmission line can admit a certain maximum current determined, primarily, by its
thermal capacity. In order to limit the current magnitude using only complex power and voltage,
observe that
•s =
•v ·
•i∗=⇒|
•s| = |
•v| · |
•i|, and thus one can write the current magnitude limit as:
q
p2
e,o,0 + q2
e,o,0 ≤Reve,o,0 + σe,o,0,
q
p2
e,d,0 + q2
e,d,0 ≤Reve,d,0 + σe,d,0 ∀e ∈E
(20)
where Re > 0 is the thermal rating of line e, and σe,o,0 ≥0 and σe,d,0 ≥0 are overload slack variables.
For post-contingency situations, RE
e ≥Re is defined as the emergency rating of line e and
q
p2
e,o,k + q2
e,o,k ≤RE
e ve,o,k + σe,o,k,
q
p2
e,d,k + q2
e,d,k ≤RE
e ve,d,k + σe,d,k ∀e ∈E(k),k ∈K
(21)
is enforced, where σe,o,k ≥0 and σe,d,k ≥0 are overload slack variables.
2.3. SC-AC-OPF problem formulation
Along with their individual constraints, all components of the power grid in conjunction must
respect active and reactive power balance at each node n ∈N:
X
g∈G(k):
n(g)=n
pg,k −P L
n −
X
e∈E(k):
o(e)=n
pe,o,k −
X
e∈E(k):
d(e)=n
pe,d,k = σP
n,k ∀n ∈N,k ∈K0
(22)
X
g∈G(k):
n(g)=n
qg,k −QL
n + bn,kv2
n,k −
X
e∈E(k):
o(e)=n
qe,o,k −
X
e∈E(k):
d(e)=n
qe,d,k = σQ
n,k ∀n ∈N,k ∈K0
(23)

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
where σP
n,k and σQ
n,k, for all k ∈K0, are slack balance variables, and G(0) = G and E(0) = E.
Piecing all components together, the SC-AC-OPF model is:
min
p,q,b,v,θ
δ,ν,ρ,σ
X
g∈G
Cg(pg,0) +
X
e∈E
(Ce(σe,o,0) + Ce(σe,d,0)) +
X
n∈N
 CP
n
 σP
n,0

+ CQ
n
 σQ
n,0

+
1
|K|
 X
e∈E(k)
(Ce(σe,o,k) + Ce(σe,d,k)) +
X
n∈N
 CP
n
 σP
n,k

+ CQ
n
 σQ
n,k

!
s.t.
Base case constraints, k = 0: (4),(6),(14),(15)–(18),(20),(22),(23)
Transition constraints, k ∈K: (8)–(12)
Post-contingency constraints, k ∈K: (5),(6),(13),(14),(15)–(18),(19),(21),(22),(23)
(24)
where Cg is the generation cost function corresponding to fuel cost for thermal generators, opportu-
nity costs for hydros, etc.; Ce is a convex increasing penalization function for line overloading; and
CP
n and CQ
n are convex penalization functions that are nonlinear and symmetric with respect to 0
for power imbalance. In a nutshell, the SC-AC-OPF model (24) seeks to minimize the operation
cost for the base case (normal operation) while ensuring that there exists a feasible operating point
to which the system would deviate in case of a contingency event.
3. History of Power Systems Optimization and Recent Developments
3.1. Historical Review of Power System Optimization
Power system optimization dates back to the earliest days of interconnected power grids. Since the
early 1900s, system operators solved economic dispatch problems to schedule the generators’ power
outputs in order to minimize system-wide operating costs (Noakes and Arismunandar 1962). Later
formulations described by Stahl (1931) and Steinberg and Smith (1943) included approximations
of power losses in transmission lines. Operators solved economic dispatch problems using special-
ized computing machines (see Johnson and Umbenhauer (1939)), potentially augmented with loss
approximations from network analyzers, that is, analog computers that approximately modeled
the transmission network (George et al. 1949). With the advent of digital computing in the 1950s

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
(Cohn 2015), economic dispatch formulations such as those considered by Early (1953) and Squires
(1960) more accurately modeled power losses in transmission lines.
Building on this foundation, J.L. Carpentier at ´Electricit´e de France first formulated what is
now called the optimal power flow (OPF) problem (Carpentier 1962). The OPF problem extends
the economic dispatch problem to consider additional constraints such as line flow and voltage
magnitude limits. The solving of OPF problems was motivated by the increasing interconnectivity
of transmission systems (Cohn 2017). Around the same time Carpentier formulated the OPF
problem, erroneous programming of a single relaying device caused a widescale blackout of the
Northeastern United States and Ontario, Canada in 1965. To avoid similar blackouts, T. Dy-Liacco
proposed an extension to OPF problems known as security constraints. Security-constrained OPF
(SC-OPF) problems ensure that an operating point will withstand all component failures within a
specified set of contingencies (often including the individual failures of each component, i.e., N −1
security) without causing a cascade of further failures (Dy Liacco 1967, Stott et al. 1987). (In
this section, the terminology SC-OPF refers to the general class of security-constrained optimal
power flow problems that either consider an AC power flow model as in Challenge 1 of the GO
Competition or instead focus on various approximated or relaxed power flow models, while SC-AC-
OPF refers specifically to SC-OPF problems that use an AC power flow model.) The importance
of security was widely recognized; reflecting on another blackout, Carpentier (1979) noted “. . . the
general failure of 19 December 1973 lasted only 3h but caused a loss of production for the country
estimated to be at least the equivalent of 50 years’ savings through economic dispatch . . . ” .
The first algorithms for SC-OPF problems were based on solving the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker con-
ditions using diverse approximations for gradients and Hessians within first- and second-order
methods (Cory and Henser 1972, Alsac and Stott 1974). These approaches are effective for small
systems, but do not scale to practically sized power grids. Subsequent advances during the 1980s
came from the adoption of formal decomposition techniques in SC-OPF. In particular, Benders
decomposition was employed to solve a simplified SC-OPF (linearized, active power only) with cor-
rective actions (i.e., dispatch decisions in contingency subproblems) (Pereira et al. 1985). This work

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
was later extended to the full nonlinear SC-AC-OPF problem using a generalized Benders decom-
position technique (Monticelli et al. 1987), though this extension does not guarantee convergence
due to the contingency subproblems’ nonconvexity. During the 1980s, most industrial implemen-
tations were based on linear programming technology (Alsac et al. 1990), which was much more
mature than nonlinear programming technology at that point. By the end of the 1980s, nonlinear
programming techniques became competitive alternatives for SC-AC-OPF algorithms that showed
promise for scaling up to industry requirements (Papalexopoulos et al. 1989).
Despite continuing progress in the subsequent decades (see Huneault and Galiana (1991), Momoh
et al. (1999), Panciatici et al. (2014) for OPF literature surveys), there are still several challenges
that need to be addressed both in the formulation and solution of SC-OPF problems (Momoh
et al. 1997, Stott and Alsa¸c 2012, Capitanescu et al. 2011, Capitanescu 2016). One key challenge
is the nonconvex nature of the problem, which prevents its direct use in computing electricity
prices (dual variables) and precludes global optimality guarantees. As will be discussed further
in Section 3.2, operators have resorted to convex (usually linear) approximations of SC-AC-OPF
problems to compute prices and solve globally the approximated problems while recovering feasible
but suboptimal solutions for the original SC-AC-OPF problem in post-processing steps. Other
challenges include the need to extend modeling capabilities (e.g., transient stability requirements
(Bruno et al. 2002, Yuan et al. 2003) and limits on the number of post-contingency corrective
actions (Capitanescu et al. 2011, Phan and Sun 2015)), scale to larger networks, and improve
solution speed for the use of SC-AC-OPF algorithms in near-real-time operations.
Parallel computing has demonstrated promising results for addressing the aforementioned scala-
bility and speed challenges. As the first parallel computing approach to SC-OPF, Rodrigues et al.
(1994) decomposed the computations for a dual simplex method with constraint generation to
solve a linear approximation of the problem. Subsequent work solved the nonlinear SC-AC-OPF
problem in parallel by decomposing the factorizations in an interior point method (Qiu et al.
2005, Petra 2019). Other recent parallel computing approaches, such as the work by Liu et al.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
(2013), decompose the SC-AC-OPF problem at the formulation level by separating the problem
into base-case and contingency subproblems. Subproblems are solved using off-the-shelf nonlin-
ear programming packages such as Ipopt (W¨achter and Biegler 2006), and coordination among
subproblems is achieved through first-order methods, similar to earlier work (Pereira et al. 1985).
With increasing computational capabilities, engineers have generalized SC-OPF formulations for
applications beyond scheduling generator setpoints (Kirschen and Strbac 2018). Generalizations of
SC-OPF problems are used to, e.g., optimize the statuses of switches that determine the network
topology (Lyon et al. 2016), choose the generators’ on/off statuses in unit commitment problems
(Padhy 2004), manage uncertainty from stochastic generators (Bienstock et al. 2014), compute
stability margins (Avalos et al. 2009), and plan system expansions (Mahdavi et al. 2019).
3.2. Approximating Optimal Power Flow Problems
Many applications require solutions to SC-OPF problems within demanding time constraints, e.g.,
approximately 10 minutes for real-time applications. The computational difficulties of SC-AC-OPF
problems have traditionally precluded direct solution within this time frame. Thus, operators often
resort to power flow approximations that apply various assumptions based on characteristics of
typical transmission systems to linearize the power flow equations (Stott and Hobson 1978, Stott
et al. 2009, Molzahn and Hiskens 2019). While these approximations provide advantages in com-
putational speed and reliability, they may neglect important aspects of the power system physics
(e.g., voltage magnitudes and reactive power) and can introduce significant errors that impact both
the achievable cost and the feasibility of the resulting solutions (Overbye et al. 2004, Purchala et al.
2005, Coffrin et al. 2012, Dvijotham and Molzahn 2016). Nevertheless, operators have a long his-
tory of using power flow linearizations. For instance, the so-called “DC power flow” approximation
was first used for fault analysis problems in the early 1900s (Wilson 1916) and the New York Power
Pool employed linearizations to optimize near-real-time generator dispatch in 1981 (Elacqua and
Corey 1982). Engineers have developed a wide variety of power flow approximations that model
power losses in transmission lines, use proxy constraints to address more complex characteristics

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
such as stability and voltage magnitude limits, and are tailored for particular applications. Molzahn
and Hiskens (2019) provide a recent survey of power flow approximations.
Complementing these approximations, researchers have recently developed a wide range of power
flow relaxations formulated as linear, second-order cone, and semidefinite programs (Low 2014a,b,
Molzahn and Hiskens 2019). Relaxations enclose the nonconvex OPF feasible regions within a larger
convex set and thus provide bounds on the globally optimal objective value. Moreover, whenever
the solution to a convex relaxation is feasible for the original problem, the solution is guaranteed to
be a global optimizer. Additionally, infeasibility of a convex relaxation certifies infeasibility of the
nonconvex problem. At the same time, convex relaxations have a major practical disadvantage: they
may have solutions that are infeasible for the original problem and recovering a feasible solution
can be challenging (Venzke et al. 2020).
In contrast to the outer enclosures used for convex relaxations, recently developed convex restric-
tions construct convex regions contained within an OPF problem’s nonconvex feasible region. Using
fixed-point theorems (Brouwer 1911), convex restrictions are constructed via a self-mapping set
around a nominal operating point (Lee et al. 2019, Cui and Sun 2019). Convex restrictions have
been applied to compute feasible paths between operating points (Lee et al. 2020) and solve robust
AC-OPF problems that account for uncertain power injections (Lee et al. 2021).
4. Competition Description
Recent developments in nonlinear optimization methods, alternative power flow modeling, and
other technologies have raised the question of whether traditional approaches to SC-AC-OPF
problems may be complemented or replaced by more sophisticated methods. Several optimization
competitions have been organized to answer this question, notably including the Grid Optimization
(GO) Competition run by the Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) in the U.S.
Department of Energy. This paper focuses on SC-AC-OPF problems in the form considered in
Challenge 1 of the GO Competition as presented in Section 2 (ARPA-E 2019).
We note that subsequent ARPA-E competitions that consider different problem formulations are
underway or forthcoming. Moreover, other power grid competitions have focused on applications of

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
metaheuristics (IEEE PES Working Group on Modern Heuristic Optimziation 2014) and machine
learning (Marot et al. 2020, 2021b, Donnot 2020b,a, Marot et al. 2021a) as well as maintenance
scheduling problems (Ruiz et al. 2020, Crognier et al. 2021). More generally, competitions are fre-
quently used to spur innovation in optimization, machine learning, and computer science. Existing
platforms for conducting these competitions (e.g., Kaggle (2022)) do not provide computational
resources on the scale needed by the GO Competition, especially timed runs on fixed hardware,
thus necessitating customized hardware and software for this competition. The remainder of this
section summarizes Challenge 1 of the ARPA-E GO Competition with a focus on aspects of the
competition structure and computing platform that strongly influenced the solution algorithms.
With membership drawn from academia, national laboratories, and industry, 27 teams par-
ticipated in the ARPA-E GO Challenge 1 competition. The teams had expertise in areas such
as electric power systems, optimization, high-performance computing, and applied mathematics.
Several teams included the developers of numerical optimization and modeling packages such
as Ipopt (W¨achter and Biegler 2006), SNOPT (Gill et al. 2021), Knitro (Byrd et al. 2006),
BARON (Sahinidis 1996), PowerModels.jl (Coffrin et al. 2018), and Gravity (Hijazi et al. 2018).
The year-long competition involved three trial events before the final submission deadline, with
increasingly difficult datasets released before and after each trial event for testing and evaluation.
The teams’ implementations produced outputs for the full solutions SC-AC-OPF problems within
specified computational time requirements. These outputs were then scored by the competition
organizers to determine each team’s place within four different categories on the competition’s
leaderboard. We next summarize key aspects of the competition.3
4.1. Datasets
The datasets provided in the competition consist of input files describing the network and scenarios
for the load demands and generator costs. These datasets are formatted according to power system
industry standards (namely, an extension of the data format used by the power system simulation
tool PSS/E), chosen for its familiarity throughout the field of power systems.4 The trials and the

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
final event used a mix of previously published and unseen networks, each of which included a variety
of scenarios. The final event was conducted with 17 synthetic networks (each with 20 scenarios)
and 3 actual industrial networks (each with 4 scenarios) for a total of 352 SC-AC-OPF problems.
The industry datasets correspond to actual systems used in practical applications. As these
datasets are confidential, the teams only received their overall scores for these datasets rather
than detailed results. The synthetic datasets used in the competition were developed as part of
the ARPA-E program “Generating Realistic Information for the Development of Distribution and
Transmission Algorithms” (GRID DATA). Building on efforts dating back to at least the 1970s
(Zaininger et al. 1977), the GRID DATA program created realistic, but not real datasets for use
in the GO competition and other settings, i.e., datasets that are realistic enough to accurately
benchmark algorithms, but free of confidential information and thus are publicly shareable.5 The
methodologies for creating synthetic grids included “top-down” approaches that obfuscated infor-
mation from actual industry datasets (Huang et al. 2018, Soltan et al. 2019, Fioretto et al. 2020,
Mak et al. 2020) and “bottom-up” approaches that built systems from scratch from geographic
data such as population density and zoning information (Thiam and DeMarco 2016, Birchfield
et al. 2017b). Researchers have performed many studies assessing and validating the realism of
these synthetic networks (Hines et al. 2010, Birchfield et al. 2017a,b, Kersulis et al. 2018, Li et al.
2018, Babaeinejadsarookolaee et al. 2021). These and other datasets are available at two reposito-
ries, DR POWER (Rice et al. 2020) and BetterGrids (Nielsen et al. 2019). Several datasets from
the GO Competition are also in the PGLib-OPF library (Babaeinejadsarookolaee et al. 2019).
The competition’s datasets have networks ranging in size from 500 to 30,000 buses and include
thousands of contingencies. The corresponding SC-AC-OPF problems thus have tens of thousands
of variables and constraints in the base case alone. Considering contingencies yields problems with
hundreds of millions of variables and constraints, thus posing significant computational challenges.
4.2. Computing Platform and Architecture
Teams participating in the GO Competition provided code implementing their algorithms to the
competition organizers who then ran each team’s code on the same computing platform. Each team

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
accessed computing hardware, housed at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), with six
24-core computing nodes (two Intel Xeon E5-2670 v3 (Haswell) CPUs per node), each of which has
64 GB of memory, for a total of 144 cores.6 This hardware was intended to represent the typical
computing resources that an Independent System Operator (ISO) may have available to solve
SC-AC-OPF problems in practical settings. The computing platform used the Centos operating
system. Teams could access a number of optimization solvers (e.g., Gurobi, Cplex, Mosek, Ipopt,
Knitro), programming languages (e.g., Python, Julia, Matlab), and modeling tools (e.g., GAMS,
AMPL, CVX, JuMP).7 Decomposition strategies and parallel computing (MPI between nodes and
pthreads within each node) were key to efficiently using the computing hardware.
Figure 2
Workflow summary showing how teams’ submissions were managed by the competition’s organizers.
Teams used a website to specify details like the programming language, location of their code, division
of the competition, and datasets. The competition platform retrieved and executed each teams’ code,
evaluated the outputs to compute a score for each problem, and stored and reported the results. See
Appendix EC.2 for further details.
The full computing cluster at PNNL had over 500 nodes with up to 250 reserved for the exclusive
use of the GO Competition. Challenge 1 accounted for over 200,000 computing tasks from 70,000
problems and used 16 million CPU-hours (wall clock) while generating over 200 petabytes of data.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
To manage these computing tasks, Fig. 2 shows the competition organizer’s workflow in executing
the teams’ codes and evaluating the results. Appendix EC.2 provides further details.
The organizers tracked hardware failures to automatically requeue and rerun affected submis-
sions. Problems that timed out with no results were automatically rerun once. Computing runs
that resulted in bad or infeasible results within the time limit were generally not rerun unless
there was reason to suspect resource contention issues, e.g., similar runs on other problems were
successful. Clusters of code failures also raised resource issue flags, the most common of which were
network and disk access contention. Other challenges arose in ensuring consistency between runs
executed on a team’s computing hardware and the competition’s platform. For instance, network
traffic could lead to variability in run times. Additionally, differences in hardware and variations in
software versions could affect the result of race conditions. In some cases, extensive troubleshooting
between a team and the organizers was needed to resolve these and other issues.
4.2.1. Required Outputs and Timing Requirements
Each team’s software had to pro-
vide values for the variables associated with both the base case and each contingency. However,
the values for the base-case and post-contingency variables did not have to be computed simul-
taneously. Rather, the software was divided into two components: Code 1, which determined the
base-case solution, i.e., values of the variables associated with nominal operation, and Code 2, which
produced values for every contingency. More precisely, Code 1 observed the combined base-case and
contingencies problem in order to optimize the base-case solution subject to the contingencies, but
was only asked to provide a base-case solution. Afterwards, Code 2 was run to produce values for
post-contingency variables using the base-case solution that was determined by the run of Code 1.
The motivation for these two components of the software is that many industrial applications of
SC-AC-OPF problems do not need explicit values for the post-contingency variables. Rather, the
key requirement is obtaining base-case generator setpoints along with a strong degree of confidence
that the base-case solution is secure against contingencies. This may not require explicit solutions
for each contingency. However, the competition organizers needed post-contingency solutions to

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
assess the security of the solution. With strict time limits for computing the base-case variables in
Code 1 and permissive time limits for the post-contingency variables in Code 2, the competition
assessed the practical relevance of the software with respect to both speed and security.
The competition was also divided into two categories: real-time and offline optimization with
strict 10-minute and 45-minute time limits, respectively, imposed on the execution of Code 1.
These time requirements reflect the five- to fifteen-minute clearing times used in typical real-time
electricity market operations as well as practical considerations related to assessing many scenarios
in off-line applications. An additional time limit of two seconds per contingency was imposed on
Code 2 regardless of category to prevent teams from submitting software with extremely long
execution times while still maintaining tractability for computing the post-contingency variables.
4.2.2. Solution Evaluation and Scoring Methods
After applying a team’s software to
solve a set of problems, the organizers evaluated the solutions and scored the results. To evaluate a
solution, hard constraints were checked for feasibility and the total objective was computed based
on both the generation costs associated with power production and any penalty terms on the slack
variables. These penalty terms ensured the feasibility of each team’s outputs, despite any potential
violations of power balance and branch flow limit constraints. The penalties were calculated via
piecewise linear functions that significantly disincentivized large constraint violations.
The choice to use penalty functions was motivated by the goal of evaluating and scoring as many
solutions as possible. The competition organizers wanted to match a certain reality of industry
practice. Specifically, if a solver fails for any reason, some kind of solution is still needed and the
best solution available is used as far as possible. From this perspective, any “infeasible” solution
is not really infeasible, but only worse than a feasible one to some degree. If a solution implies a
power imbalance, then devices will adjust according to local control mechanisms in real time, e.g.,
generators will respond according to governor mechanisms and voltage-dependent loads will adjust
their demands. Moreover, the data is also subject to error and uncertainty. However, a solution
with no power imbalance is certainly preferable, so these penalties were especially severe.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
Once the solutions for all the competitors over a set of problem instances were evaluated, the
teams’ algorithms were scored based on the evaluation results. The competition had two scoring
methods. Based on similar benchmarking approaches for other classes of optimization problems
(Mittelmann 2022), the first method computed the geometric mean of the scores for all scenarios
associated with each network to compute a network score, then took the geometric mean of the
network scores across all networks to compute an overall score for the team. The second method
was based on the area under performance profiles that were constructed by comparing the ratios
of teams’ scores for each problem relative to the best score achieved for that problem by any team.
The performance profile method was specifically intended to reward robust solver performance,
at the possible expense of optimality, relative to the geometric mean method. Examination of the
competition results showed that most teams did not change their algorithms in response to the
different scoring methods. Moreover, analytical derivations showed that the two scoring methods
were approximately equal to each other under a monotone transformation, so significantly different
results could not have been expected.
A major challenge in scoring was how to handle the large differences in the scale of the objective
values from one network to another. Generally, larger problems had larger optimal objective values,
so simply adding up the objectives over all problem instances would incentivize good performance
on the larger networks at the expense of performance on the smaller ones. Furthermore, for some
problems, the gaps between the optimal objective and some easily computed relaxation objective or
an objective corresponding to an easily computed heuristic solution might be much larger than the
gaps for other problems. Implicitly, the objective of any optimization problem contains a constant
term that is irrelevant to the quality of any given solution but affects both relative and absolute
measures of optimality. The geometric mean scoring method was an attempt to deal with these
issues in a way that ensured that each problem instance was meaningful to the overall score of a
competitor.
Another major challenge in scoring involved solver outcomes that produced no solution, an
unreadable or incorrectly formatted solution, an infeasible solution, or a very low quality solution.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
To address this challenge, the organizers computed a “worst-case” solution. The worst-case solution
was created by keeping the optimization variables equal to their values in a pre-specified operating
point, projecting to ensure feasibility of hard constraints, and accepting the resulting soft constraint
violation penalties.8 In industry practice, a solver needs to have a highly reliable backup method
that can be used if the main solver fails. The worst-case solution played that role in the competition.
Solutions that either could not be scored otherwise or had poorer objective values than the worst-
case score were assigned the worst-case score. Since these worst-case scores had a substantial
negative impact on the overall results, teams needed to develop robust code that nearly always
produced a correctly formatted solution of at least moderate quality within the specified time limit.
For prize awards, the competition had four divisions, corresponding to the two timing categories
(10 minutes and 45 minutes) and the two scoring methods. Within each division, the top ten eligible
teams were each awarded $100,000, with prize eligibility based on a team’s satisfaction of certain
requirements including being led by a U.S. entity. An eligible team placing in the top ten in each
of the four divisions would win $400,000.
5. Summary of Approaches
This special issue includes three papers on algorithms for solving the SC-AC-OPF problem, as
formulated in the GO Competition, from teams gollnlp, GO-SNIP, and GMI-GO. These teams
ranked first, second, and third, respectively, in Challenge 1 out of the 27 participating teams. In this
section, we briefly summarize the algorithms from each team and refer to the following references
for further details (Petra and Aravena 2021, Curtis et al. 2021, Gholami et al. 2022).
The first team, gollnlp (Petra and Aravena 2021), uses nonconvex relaxations of complementar-
ity constraints, two-stage decomposition with sparse approximation of recourse terms, and asyn-
chronous parallelism, together with state-of-the-art nonlinear programming algorithms to compute
SC-AC-OPF base case solutions that hedge against contingencies. The gollnlp algorithm consis-
tently provided high-quality feasible solutions to problems with different sizes and difficulty levels
on both synthetic and industrial datasets. The gollnlp algorithm produced the best-known solu-
tions in 58% of the cases. In the remaining cases, it attained average gaps (with respect to the best

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
known solutions) of 0.15% for real-time cases (with 10 minutes of execution time) and 0.21% for
offline cases (with 45 minutes of execution time). The gollnlp algorithm was also among the only
three approaches that produced valid solutions for all cases.
The second team, GO-SNIP (Curtis et al. 2021), developed an algorithm based on an interior-
point method that iteratively enforces constraints associated with additional contingencies. This
algorithm uses contingency screening and parallel processing techniques to identify quickly what
seem to be the most important contingencies. GO-SNIP also designed tailored heuristics for com-
plementarity constraints and avoided certain degeneracies by modifying the problem formulation.
The GO-SNIP algorithm obtained the best-known solutions in 20% of the cases, second-best-known
solutions in over half of the cases, and top-ten solutions for almost all of the test cases.
The third team, GMI-GO (Gholami et al. 2022), developed a two-level alternating direction
method of multipliers (ADMM) algorithm for two-stage SC-AC-OPF problems with a conver-
gence guarantee for the first time in the literature. To handle the complementarity constraints,
GMI-GO created a smoothing technique that allows interior-point solvers to be utilized. To ensure
robust performance, GMI-GO incorporated a contingency screening procedure and a massive par-
allel computation framework with safeguarding mechanisms. The GMI-GO algorithm consistently
outperformed the ARPA-E benchmark algorithm (Coffrin 2021) in all instances and achieved the
best-known solutions in about 5% of the test cases.
The methods developed by these three teams share many similarities:
• Due to the large sizes of the SC-AC-OPF problems, all three teams adopted decomposition
algorithms or iterative contingency incorporation strategies, which are often effective in finding
high-quality feasible solution within the given time limits.
• All three teams used contingency ranking and screening techniques in order to focus on those
contingencies that seem to have a large influence on the base case decisions.
• As the original SC-AC-OPF problem formulation involves challenging nonlinear, nonconvex,
and complementarity constraints, some approximation or relaxation techniques are considered in
all three algorithms to simplify the SC-AC-OPF formulation.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
• To better utilize the computational resources, each algorithm is built upon parallel and dis-
tributed computing methods adapted for the purpose of solving SC-AC-OPF problems.
• The implementation details also play an important role: for example, fallback mechanisms for
failures in the solution process are used by each of the three teams. Moreover, the teams have all
chosen C++ as their programming language and used the interior-point solver Ipopt (W¨achter and
Biegler 2006) with the HSL linear solver module (HSL 2002).
Despite these similarities, these algorithms are developed under distinctive assumptions and
formulations, with different numerical performances on the test instances. We therefore encourage
readers to see each paper for further details regarding these algorithms (Petra and Aravena 2021,
Curtis et al. 2021, Gholami et al. 2022). We also note several resources published in other venues
by GO Competition teams based on their work in Challenge 1. These include work by the sixth-
place team Tartan Buffs (Bazrafshan et al. 2020), the eighth-place team Pearl Street Technologies
(Jereminov and Pileggi 2021), and the tenth-place team ARPA-E Benchmark (Coffrin et al. 2018,
Coffrin 2020, Coffrin et al. 2020). The fifth-place team GravityX developed a modeling language,
Gravity, to solve Challenge 1 (Hijazi et al. 2018).
6. Conclusion
Challenge 1 of the ARPA-E GO Competition compared the performance of a broad range of solu-
tion algorithms for SC-AC-OPF problems using state-of-the-art computing hardware and realistic,
large-scale datasets. The results show that algorithms that combine power systems modeling tech-
niques and physics-informed heuristics with advanced numerical optimization methods are capable
of finding high-quality operating points satisfying the constraints of practical SC-AC-OPF problems
within industrially relevant time frames. Thus, these results provide support for efforts to move
nonlinear optimization techniques into industrial applications. This paper has given an overview of
the Challenge 1 competition, including the problem formulation, competition structure, datasets,
computing platform, etc., and summarized both the state of the art in SC-AC-OPF solution tech-
niques and the algorithms used by the three top-performing teams in the competition. For further

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
details of these algorithms, we refer to the three papers we authored for this special issue (Petra
and Aravena 2021, Curtis et al. 2021, Gholami et al. 2022).
We conclude this introductory paper with comments on the advantages and limitations of con-
ducting power systems research within the context of the competition and discuss directions for
future work. The competition had the following significant advantages and research contributions.
• Algorithm development: The competition encouraged teams to create new, highly effec-
tive algorithms for SC-AC-OPF problems that combine existing state-of-the-art techniques with
novel approaches. These algorithms lay the foundation for addressing a wide range of challenging
optimization tasks for future power grids.
• Algorithm benchmarking: The competition enabled benchmarking the performance of
many SC-AC-OPF algorithms on common computing hardware, a consistent and practically rele-
vant problem formulation, and the same scoring method. This fills a key gap in prior literature, as
many earlier OPF algorithms consider incomparable problem formulations and are validated with
inconsistent datasets, varying computing hardware, and limited comparisons to alternatives.
• Building exposure: The ARPA-E GO competition significantly raised the profile of SC-AC-
OPF research and intensely focused the attention of researchers with a diversity of expertise on
this topic. The competition thus provides the groundwork for future efforts in both subsequent GO
Competition challenges and in other areas of power engineering research.
We also note several limiting aspects of performing research in the context of the competition.
• Prioritization of implementation over theory: The GO Competition scoring method
incentivizes teams to focus solely on reducing generation cost and avoiding constraint violations.
These are important goals that are highly relevant to industrial applications. However, this neglects
important complementary goals that focus more on theory, such as assessing the potential subop-
timality of an operating point, proving infeasibility (i.e., certifying when the constraints in (24)
cannot be satisfied with zero-valued slack variables), and bounding worst-case convergence rates.
These and other goals have been the focus of intensive recent research (Molzahn and Hiskens 2019,

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Low 2014a,b). Similarly, while the scoring method encourages developing heuristics that work well
in many instances, there is little benefit for explaining and assessing the limitations to the per-
formance of these heuristics within the context of the competition. Finally, since implementation
quality was of utmost importance to avoid “worst-case” scores from code failures, the benchmark
results from the competition may overlook alternative algorithms that could have performed better
if they had more robust implementations or had better exploited the parallel computing resources.
• Limited scope for off-line computations: As discussed in Section 4.1, the GO Competition
evaluated the teams’ implementations against previously unrevealed datasets, thus precluding the
offline computations needed for many data-driven solution methodologies. However, in practice,
many power grid parameters are relatively constant (e.g., line impedances) and system opera-
tors have good estimates for others (e.g., forecasts of load demands and renewable generation).
Emerging machine learning algorithms perform off-line calculations using this data to inform on-
line computations (Duchesne et al. 2020). Despite their significant promise, such approaches were
not well suited for the GO Competition due to the competition’s structure. In Challenge 2 of the
GO Competition, a Monarch-of-the-Mountain (MoM) event—currently in progress—addresses this
lack of practice with the data. MoM allows teams to use any hardware and any algorithm with no
time limits, only evaluating solutions provided by the teams when they are ready. So far, with 62
scenarios having new solutions out of 84, only 2 show more than a 1% improvement. These results
suggest that the Challenge 2 teams did well without off-line computations.
• Disincentives to disseminating in-progress research: Many leading experts in power
systems optimization were involved in the GO Competition as either members of various teams or in
organizational roles. With competing teams and the organizers keeping their latest findings secret
for the sake of fairness or competitive advantage, research for the competition differed substantially
from the generally open environment that has historically been the norm in the power systems
community. It is therefore essential that ongoing efforts such as the publications in this special issue
as well as a special sessions at conferences and workshops continue to disseminate the knowledge
developed in the GO competition.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
Finally, we note several potential directions for further research. Challenges 2 and 3 of the
GO Competition consider different problem formulations with features like multiple time periods,
corrective controls, adjustable transformer tap settings, line switching, responsive load demands,
and generator startup/shutdown characteristics. Research is also needed into other OPF prob-
lem formulations that are not considered in these challenges, such as uncertainties (Roald et al.
2022), stability considerations (Abhyankar et al. 2017, Geng et al. 2017), distributed solution algo-
rithms (Molzahn et al. 2017), etc.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly appreciate the efforts of all the competition organizers, especially Timothy
Heidel, Kory Hedman, and Richard O’Neill, for their vision and work in designing and managing
the GO competition.
Endnotes
1. Whereas preventive models accurately represent the existing operation paradigm and capa-
bilities of power grids, so-called corrective models are also prevalent in the literature. Corrective
models assume that decisions can be made and coordinated between base case and post-contingency
states, and thus problems can be corrected as supposed to only prevented.
2. Shunts can also be connected between different phases of a bus in a three-phase power system.
These shunts can be equivalently represented by a shunt connected between the bus and the ground,
or a neutral point, using the ∆-Y transformation.
3. Further details on the competition structure are available at https://gocompetition.
energy.gov/challenges/challenge-1.
4. Details regarding the data format are available at https://gocompetition.energy.gov/
challenges/challenge-1/input-data-format.
5. For more information on the GRID DATA program, see https://arpa-e.energy.gov/
technologies/programs/grid-data.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
6. See https://gocompetition.energy.gov/evaluation-platform for further details on the
computing hardware.
7. For the final event, the teams submitted seven Python, four C++, and five each of Julia,
executable binaries, and MATLAB codes.
8. The detailed methodology for computing the worst-case score is available at https://github.
com/GOCompetition/WorstCase.
References
Abhyankar S, Geng G, Anitescu M, Wang X, Dinavahi V (2017) Solution techniques for transient stability-
constrained optimal power flow–Part I. IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution 11(12):3177–
3185.
Alexander C, Sadiku M (2008) Fundamentals of Electric Circuits (McGraw Hill Higher Education), 4th
edition, ISBN 9780071284417.
Alsac O, Bright J, Prais M, Stott B (1990) Further developments in LP-based optimal power flow. IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems 5(3):697–711.
Alsac O, Stott B (1974) Optimal load flow with steady-state security. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems PAS-93(3):745–751.
ARPA-E (2018) Support grants for participation in ARPA-E Grid Optimization (GO) Competition Chal-
lenge 1. Funding Opportunity No. DE-FOA-0001952.
Avalos RJ, Canizares CA, Milano F, Conejo AJ (2009) Equivalency of continuation and optimization methods
to determine saddle-node and limit-induced bifurcations in power systems. IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 56(1):210–223.
Babaeinejadsarookolaee S, Birchfield A, Christie RD, Coffrin C, DeMarco CL, Diao R, Ferris M, Fliscounakis
S, Greene S, Huang R, Josz C, Korab R, Lesieutre BC, Maeght J, Molzahn DK, Overbye TJ, Panciatici
P, Park B, Snodgrass J, Zimmerman RD (2019) The power grid library for benchmarking AC optimal
power flow algorithms. arXiv:1908.02788.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
Babaeinejadsarookolaee S, Snodgrass J, Acharya S, Greene S, Lesieutre B, DeMarco CL (2021) Comparison of
real and synthetic network models of the Western United States with respect to new realism measures.
IEEE Power and Energy Conference at Illinois (PECI).
Bazrafshan M, Baker K, Mohammadi J (2020) Computationally efficient solutions for large-scale security-
constrained optimal power flow. arXiv:2006.00585 .
Bienstock D, Chertkov M, Harnett S (2014) Chance-constrained optimal power flow: Risk-aware network
control under uncertainty. SIAM Review 56(3):461–495.
Bienstock D, Escobar M, Gentile C, Liberti L (2022) Mathematical programming formulations for the alter-
nating current optimal power flow problem. Annals of Operations Research URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-021-04497-z.
Bienstock D, Verma A (2019) Strong NP-hardness of AC power flows feasibility. Operations Research Letters
47(6):494–501.
Birchfield AB, Schweitzer E, Athari MH, Xu T, Overbye TJ, Scaglione A, Wang Z (2017a) A metric-based
validation process to assess the realism of synthetic power grids. Energies 10(8):1233.
Birchfield AB, Xu T, Gegner KM, Shetye KS, Overbye TJ (2017b) Grid structural characteristics as valida-
tion criteria for synthetic networks. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 32(4):3258–3265.
Brouwer LEJ (1911) ¨Uber abbildung von mannigfaltigkeiten. Mathematische Annalen 71(1):97–115.
Bruno S, De Tuglie E, La Scala M (2002) Transient security dispatch for the concurrent optimization of
plural postulated contingencies. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 17(3):707–714, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2002.800940.
Bukhsh WA, Grothey A, McKinnon KIM, Trodden PA (2013) Local solutions of the optimal power flow
problem. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 28(4):4780–4788.
Byrd RH, Nocedal J, Waltz RA (2006) Knitro: An integrated package for nonlinear optimization. Large-Scale
Nonlinear Optimization, 35–59 (Springer).
Capitanescu F (2016) Critical review of recent advances and further developments needed in AC optimal
power flow. Electric Power Systems Research 136:57–68.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Capitanescu F, Ramos JLM, Panciatici P, Kirschen D, Marcolini AM, Platbrood L, Wehenkel L (2011) State-
of-the-art, challenges, and future trends in security constrained optimal power flow. Electric Power
Systems Research 81(8):1731–1741.
Carpentier J (1962) Contribution a l’etude du dispatching ´economic. Bulletin de la Societ´e Fran¸caise des
´Electriciens, 431 – 434, number vol. III in 8.
Carpentier J (1979) Optimal power flows. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems
1(1):3–15.
Coffrin
C
(2020)
PowerModelsSecurityConstrained.jl.
https://github.com/lanl-ansi/
PowerModelsSecurityConstrained.jl.
Coffrin C, Bent R, Sundar K, Ng Y, Lubin M (2018) PowerModels.jl: An open-source framework for exploring
power flow formulations. 19th Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC).
Coffrin C, Knueven B, Holzer J, Vuffray M (2020) The impacts of convex piecewise linear cost formulations
on AC optimal power flow. arXiv:2005.14087 .
Coffrin C, Van Hentenryck P, Bent R (2012) Accurate load and generation scheduling for linearized DC
models with contingencies. IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting.
Coffrin CJ (2021) ARPA-E Grid Optimization Competition: Benchmark algorithm overview. Technical
report, Los Alamos National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States).
Cohn J (2015) Transitions from analog to digital computing in electric power systems. IEEE Annals of the
History of Computing 37(3):32–43.
Cohn JA (2017) The Grid: Biography of an American Technology (The MIT Press).
Cory B, Henser P (1972) Economic dispatch with security using nonlinear programming. 4th Power Systems
Computation Conference (PSCC).
Crognier G, Tournebise P, Ruiz M, Panciatici P (2021) Grid operation-based outage maintenance plan-
ning. Electric Power Systems Research 190:106682, presented at the 21st Power Systems Computation
Conference (PSCC).
Cui B, Sun XA (2019) Solvability of power flow equations through existence and uniqueness of complex fixed
point. arXiv:1904.08855 .

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
Curtis FE, Molzahn DK, Tu S, W¨achter A, Wei E, Wong E (2021) A decomposition algorithm with fast
identification of critical contingencies for large-scale security-constrained AC-OPF. arXiv:2110.01737 .
Donnot B (2020a) L2RPN NEURIPS 2020 – Adaptability Track. https://competitions.codalab.org/
competitions/25427.
Donnot B (2020b) L2RPN NEURIPS 2020 – Robustness Track. https://competitions.codalab.org/
competitions/25426.
Duchesne L, Karangelos E, Wehenkel L (2020) Recent developments in machine learning for energy systems
reliability management. Proceedings of the IEEE 108(9):1656–1676.
Dvijotham K, Molzahn D (2016) Error bounds on the DC power flow approximations: A convex relaxation
approach. 55th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC).
Dy Liacco TE (1967) The adaptive reliability control system. IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems PAS-86(5):517–531.
Early ED (1953) Central power coordination control for maximum system economy. Electric Light and Power
31(14):96–98.
Elacqua AJ, Corey SL (1982) Security constrained dispatch at the New York Power Pool. IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems PAS-101(8):2876–2884.
Fioretto F, Mak TWK, Van Hentenryck P (2020) Differential privacy for power grid obfuscation. IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid 11(2):1356–1366.
Frank S, Rebennack S (2016) An introduction to optimal power flow: Theory, formulation, and examples.
IIE Transactions 48(12):1172–1197.
Geng G, Abhyankar S, Wang X, Dinavahi V (2017) Solution techniques for transient stability-constrained
optimal power flow–Part II. IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution 11(12):3186–3193.
George EE, Page HW, Ward JB (1949) Co-ordination of fuel cost and transmission loss by use of the network
analyzer to determine plant loading schedules. Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical
Engineers 68(2):1152–1163.
Gholami A, Sun K, Zhang S, Sun XA (2022) Solving large-scale security constrained AC optimal power flow
problems. arXiv:2202.06787 .

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
32
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Gill PE, Murray W, Saunders MA, Wong E (2021) User’s guide for SNOPT 7.7: Software for large-scale
nonlinear programming. Technical Report CCoM Technical Report 18-1, Center for Computational
Mathematics, University of California, San Diego.
Glover JD, Overbye T, Sarma MS (2016) Power System Analysis and Design (Cengage Learning), 6th
edition.
Gonen T (2016) Modern Power System Analysis (CRC Press.), 2nd edition, ISBN 9780429101540.
Hayt W (2018) Engineering Circuit Analysis (McGraw Hill), 8th edition, ISBN 9780073545516.
Hijazi
H,
Wang
G,
Coffrin
C
(2018)
Gravity:
A
mathematical
modeling
language
for
opti-
mization
and
machine
learning.
https://www.gravityopt.com/_files/ugd/c6cff5_
e4889c3e27b54023a70a8c0496ff90a0.pdf.
Hines P, Blumsack S, Sanchez EC, Barrows C (2010) The topological and electrical structure of power grids.
43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
Hiskens IA, Davy RJ (2001) Exploring the power flow solution space boundary. IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 16(3):389–395.
HSL (2002) A collection of Fortran codes for large scale scientific computation. http://www.hsl.rl.ac.uk.
Huang Z, Huang R, Makarov YV, Young SJ, Fan R, Tbaileh A, Hou Z, O’Brien J, Fuller JC, Hansen J,
Marinovici LD (2018) Sustainable data evolution technology (SDET) for power grid optimization (final
report). Technical Report PNNL-28338, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, https://www.osti.
gov/biblio/1524091.
Huneault M, Galiana FD (1991) A survey of the optimal power flow literature. IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 6(2):762–770.
IEEE PES Working Group on Modern Heuristic Optimziation (2014) 2014 OPF Problems. https://www.
uni-due.de/ieee-wgmho/competition2014.
Jaleeli N, VanSlyck LS, Ewart DN, Fink LH, Hoffmann AG (1992) Understanding automatic generation
control. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 7(3):1106–1122.
Jereminov M, Pileggi L (2021) Equivalent circuit programming for power flow analysis and optimization.
arXiv:2112.01351 .

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
33
Johnson HH, Umbenhauer MS (1939) Effective load dividing device. Edison Electric Institute – Bulletin
7(8):385–389.
Kaggle (2022) Kaggle Competitions. https://www.kaggle.com/competitions.
Kersulis JA, Hiskens IA, Coffrin C, Molzahn DK (2018) Topological graph metrics for detecting grid anoma-
lies and improving algorithms. 20th Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC) .
Kirschen DS, Strbac G (2018) Fundamentals of Power System Economics (John Wiley & Sons).
Lee D, Nguyen HD, Dvijotham K, Turitsyn K (2019) Convex restriction of power flow feasibility sets. IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems 6(3):1235–1245.
Lee D, Turitsyn K, Molzahn DK, Roald L (2020) Feasible path identification in optimal power flow with
sequential convex restriction. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35(5):3648–3659.
Lee D, Turitsyn K, Molzahn DK, Roald L (2021) Robust AC optimal power flow with convex restriction.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36(6):4953–4966.
Li H, Bornsheuer AL, Xu T, Birchfield AB, Overbye TJ (2018) Load modeling in synthetic electric grids.
IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC).
Liu L, Khodaei A, Yin W, Han Z (2013) A distribute parallel approach for big data scale optimal power
flow with security constraints. IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (Smart-
GridComm), 774–778.
Low SH (2014a) Convex relaxation of optimal power flow—Part I: Formulations and equivalence. IEEE
Transactions on Control of Network Systems 1(1):15–27.
Low SH (2014b) Convex relaxation of optimal power flow—Part II: Exactness. IEEE Transactions on Control
of Network Systems 1(2):177–189.
Lyon JD, Maslennikov S, Sahraei-Ardakani M, Zheng T, Litvinov E, Li X, Balasubramanian P, Hedman KW
(2016) Harnessing flexible transmission: Corrective transmission switching for ISO-NE. IEEE Power
and Energy Technology Systems Journal 3(3):109–118.
Mahdavi M, Sabillon Antunez C, Ajalli M, Romero R (2019) Transmission expansion planning: Literature
review and classification. IEEE Systems Journal 13(3):3129–3140.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
34
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Mak TWK, Fioretto F, Shi L, Van Hentenryck P (2020) Privacy-preserving power system obfuscation: A
bilevel optimization approach. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35(2):1627–1637.
Marot A, Donnot B, Chaouache K, Kelly A, Huang Q, Hossain RR, Cremer JL (2021a) Learning to run a
power network with trust. arXiv:2110.12908 .
Marot A, Donnot B, Dulac-Arnold G, Kelly A, O’Sullivan A, Viebahn J, Awad M, Guyon I, Panciatici P,
Romero C (2021b) Learning to run a power network challenge: A retrospective analysis. NeurIPS 2020
Competition and Demonstration Track, 112–132 (PMLR).
Marot A, Donnot B, Romero C, Donon B, Lerousseau M, Veyrin-Forrer L, Guyon I (2020) Learning to run a
power network challenge for training topology controllers. Electric Power Systems Research 189:106635,
presented at the 21st Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC).
ARPA-E (2019) SCOPF problem formulation: Challenge 1. URL https://gocompetition.energy.gov/
sites/default/files/SCOPF_Problem_Formulation__Challenge_1_20190412.pdf.
Mittelmann H (2022) Benchmarks for Optimization Software. http://plato.asu.edu/bench.html.
Molzahn D, D¨orfler F, Sandberg H, Low S, Chakrabarti S, Baldick R, Lavaei J (2017) A survey of distributed
optimization and control algorithms for electric power systems. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
8(6):2941–2962.
Molzahn DK (2017) Computing the feasible spaces of optimal power flow problems. IEEE Transactionson
Power Systems 32(6):4752–4763.
Molzahn DK, Hiskens IA (2019) A survey of relaxations and approximations of the power flow equations.
Foundations and Trends in Electric Energy Systems 4(1-2):1–221.
Momoh JA, Adapa R, El-Hawary ME (1999) A review of selected optimal power flow literature to 1993.
Parts I and II. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 14(1):96–111.
Momoh JA, Koessler RJ, Bond MS, Stott B, Sun D, Papalexopoulos A, Ristanovic P (1997) Challenges to
optimal power flow. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 12(1):444–455.
Monticelli A, Pereira MVF, Granville S (1987) Security-constrained optimal power flow with post-contingency
corrective rescheduling. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 2(1):175–180.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
35
Nielsen TD, Rouillard T, Makarov N (2019) A semantic search capability for a grid model repository.
IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), repository available at https://www.
bettergrids.org.
Noakes F, Arismunandar A (1962) Bibliography on optimum operation of power systems: 1919-1959. Trans-
actions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. Part III: Power Apparatus and Systems
81(3):864–871.
Overbye TJ, Cheng X, Sun Y (2004) A comparison of the AC and DC power flow models for LMP calculations.
37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
Padhy NP (2004) Unit commitment–A bibliographical survey. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
19(2):1196–1205.
Panciatici P, Campi MC, Garatti S, Low SH, Molzahn DK, Sun XA, Wehenkel L (2014) Advanced optimiza-
tion methods for power systems. 18th Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC).
Papalexopoulos AD, Imparato CF, Wu FF (1989) Large-scale optimal power flow: Effects of initialization,
decoupling and discretization. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 4(2):748–759.
Pereira MVF, Monticelli A, Pinto LMVG (1985) Security-constrained dispatch with corrective rescheduling.
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 18(7):333 – 340, IFAC Symposium on Planning and Operation of Electric
Energy Systems.
Petra CG (2019) A memory-distributed quasi-Newton solver for nonlinear optimization with a small number
of constraints. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 133:337–348.
Petra
CG,
Aravena
I
(2021)
Solving
realistic
security-constrained
optimal
power
flow
problems.
arXiv:2110.01669 .
Phan DT, Sun XA (2015) Minimal impact corrective actions in security-constrained optimal power flow via
sparsity regularization. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 30(4):1947–1956.
Purchala K, Meeus L, Van Dommelen D, Belmans R (2005) Usefulness of DC power flow for active power
flow analysis. IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 454–459.
Qiu W, Flueck AJ, Tu F (2005) A new parallel algorithm for security constrained optimal power flow with
a nonlinear interior point method. IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 447–453.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
36
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Rice MJ, Elbert ST, Kuchar OA, Pinney D, Marinovici LD (2020) Data repository for power system
open models with evolving resources (DR POWER) final scientific/technical report. Technical Report
PNNL-30476, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, https://www.pnnl.gov/main/publications/
external/technical_reports/PNNL-30476.pdf, repository available at https://egriddata.org.
Roald LA, Pozo D, Papavasiliou A, Molzahn DK, Kazempour J, Conejo AJ (2022) Power systems opti-
mization under uncertainty: A review of methods and applications. 22nd Power Systems Computation
Conference (PSCC) .
Rodrigues M, Saavedra OR, Monticelli A (1994) Asynchronous programming model for the concurrent solu-
tion of the security constrained optimal power flow problem. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
9(4):2021–2027.
Ruiz M, Tournebise P, Panciatici P (2020) ROADEF/EURO Challenge 2020: Maintenance planning problem.
https://www.roadef.org/challenge/2020/en/index.php.
Sahinidis NV (1996) Baron: A general purpose global optimization software package. Journal of Global
Optimization 8(2):201–205.
Soltan S, Loh A, Zussman G (2019) A learning-based method for generating synthetic power grids. IEEE
Systems Journal 13(1):625–634.
Squires RB (1960) Economic dispatch of generation directly from power system voltages and admittances.
Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. Part III: Power Apparatus and Systems
79(3):1235–1244.
Stahl ECM (1931) Economic loading of generating stations. Electrical Engineering 50(9):722–727.
Steinberg MJ, Smith TH (1943) Economy Loading of Power Plants and Electric Systems (Wiley).
Stott B (1974) Review of load-flow calculation methods. Proceedings of the IEEE 62(7):916–929.
Stott B, Alsa¸c O (2012) Optimal power flow–basic requirements for real-life problems and their solutions.
12th Symposium of Specialists in Electric Operational and Expansion Planning (SEPOPE).
Stott B, Alsa¸c O, Monticelli AJ (1987) Security analysis and optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE
75(12):1623–1644.

I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
37
Stott B, Hobson E (1978) Power system security control calculations using linear programming, part i. IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems PAS-97(5):1713–1720, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TPAS.1978.354664.
Stott B, Jardim J, Alsa¸c O (2009) DC power flow revisited. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 24(3):1290–
1300.
Thiam FB, DeMarco CL (2016) Automated transmission expansion and routing incorporating electric
and geographic criteria. IEEE Power Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference
(ISGT).
Venzke A, Chatzivasileiadis S, Molzahn DK (2020) Inexact convex relaxations of AC optimal power flow:
Towards AC feasibility. Electric Power Systems Research 187.
W¨achter A, Biegler LT (2006) On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-search algorithm for
large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming 106(1):25–57.
Wilson HR (1916) An approximate method of calculating short-circuit current in an AC system. General
Electric Review 19:475.
Yuan Y, Kubokawa J, Sasaki H (2003) A solution of optimal power flow with multicontingency transient
stability constraints. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 18(3):1094–1102.
Zaininger HW, Wood AJ, Clark HK, Laskowski TF, Burns JD (1977) Synthetic electric utility systems for
evaluating advanced technologies. Technical Report EPRI EM-285, Technology Planning Study 75-615,
Power Technologies, Inc., Schenectady, NY (USA).

e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
ec1
Electronic Companion to: Recent Developments in Security-
Constrained AC Optimal Power Flow: Overview of Challenge 1
in the ARPA-E Grid Optimization Competition
EC.1. Illustrative example of phasor transformation in AC circuits
In this section, we demonstrate how phasors simplify computations in AC circuits, from differential
equations in the time domain to algebraic equations in the complex plane, using the illustrative
circuit of Fig. EC.1.
+
−
v(t)
R
iR(t)
L
iL(t)
C
iC(t)
i(t)
Figure EC.1
Example AC circuit with one voltage source, one resistor, one inductor, and one capacitor. v(t)
denotes the excitation voltage at the source (left), i(t) the total current draw from the source,
iR(t) the current passing by the resistor, which dissipates electrical power as heat, iL(t) the current
by the inductor, which stores electrical energy in its magnetic field, and iC(t) the current by the
capacitor, which stores electrical energy in its electrical field.
The elemental circuit equations for passive elements (not producing power, i.e., resistor, inductor,
and capacitor) imply: iR(t) = v(t)/R (Ohm’s Law), iL(t) = 1/L ·
R t
−∞v(τ)dτ (Faraday’s Law),
iC(t) = C dv
dt (t) (Ampere-Maxwell’s Law), and i(t) = iR(t)+iL(t)+iC(t) (Kirchhoff’s Current Law).
In steady-state, with an excitation v(t) =
√
2V cos(ωt), where V is the root mean square (RMS)
voltage—which is easier to measure than the voltage amplitude—and ω is the angular frequency,
these circuit equations simplify as follows:
iR(t) =
√
2V
R cos(ωt)
(EC.1)
iL(t) =
√
2V
L ·
Z t
−∞
cos(ωτ)dτ =
√
2 V
ωL cos

ωt −π
2

(EC.2)

ec2
e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
0
1
Time t
v(t)
iR(t)
iL(t)
iC(t)
i(t)
Figure EC.2
Oscillogram for voltages and currents in circuit of Fig. EC.1 with R = 2.5Ω, L = 1.3333H, C = 0.75F,
and v =
√
2cos(t) (V = 1 and ω = 1).
iC(t) =
√
2V C d(cos(ωt))
dt
=
√
2V ωC cos

ωt + π
2

(EC.3)
i(t) = iR(t) + iL(t) + iC(t) =
√
2V
R cos(ωt) +
√
2V

ωC −1
ωL

cos

ωt + π
2

(EC.4)
We observe that circuit calculations for steady-state AC circuits correspond to multiplication by a
scalar for resistors (EC.1), or a multiplication by a scalar and a phase shift for inductors (EC.2) and
capacitors (EC.3), leaving the frequency ω unaltered. Further, addition is performed in orthogonal
directions (EC.4): any sinusoidal can be decomposed into a part with phase 0 and a part with phase
π/2, and addition can be performed separately for phase 0 and π/2 because they are orthogonal.
Fig. EC.2 presents the waveforms of iR(t), iL(t), and iC(t) for particular values of the circuit
parameters.
These observations motivate electrical engineers to represent AC circuit quantities as elements of
the complex plane, where multiplication and phase shift correspond to multiplication by complex
numbers, and where addition also takes place in orthogonal components. We map sinusoidal signals
onto the complex plain using the phasor transformation Fω : Sω →C, where Sω is the set sinusoidal
functions with frequency ω, defined in (1), and repeated here for convenience:
Fω
 √
2Acos(ωt + ϕ)

= Aexp(iϕ) ≡A ϕ
We apply the phasor transformation to the circuit equations (EC.1)–(EC.4) to obtain the fol-
lowing compact, algebraic—as oppossed to differential—expressions:
•iR = V
R 0 = 1
R
•v
(EC.5)

e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
ec3
•v = 1 0
•iR = 0.4 0
•iL = 0.6 −π/2
•iC = 0.75 π/2
•i = 0.427 0.359
Figure EC.3
Phasor diagram for voltages and currents in circuit of Fig. EC.1. Same electrical parameters as in
Fig. EC.2.
•iL = V
ωL −π
2 = −i
ωL
•v
(EC.6)
•iC = ωCV
π
2 = iωC
•v
(EC.7)
•i =
•iR +
•iL +
•iC =
 
1
R + i

ωC −1
ωL
!
•v
(EC.8)
The complex plane in Fig. EC.3 presents the phasors for the oscillogram from Fig. EC.2, where
we can observe the scaling and rotation of the current with respect to the voltage for each passive
element, as well as their aggregate.
For each passive element e, their phasor-equivalent equations (EC.5)–(EC.7) can be expressed
as
•ie = Ye •v, identical to Ohm’s law but with complex quantities, where Ye is called the admittance
of the element; YR = 1/R, YL = −i/(ωL), and YC = iωC. Similarly, the addition of currents is
performed along the real and imaginary axes in equation (EC.8), in the same fashion that it would
be done in DC circuits. We can also note that admittance in parallel can be added directly to obtain
the total admittance Y = 1/R +i(ωC −1/(ωL)) (conversely, the total a of series admittance is the
reciprocal of the sum of their reciprocals). We call the real and imaginary parts of an admittance
Y the conductance G and susceptance B, respectively, i.e., G = ℜ(Y ) and B = ℑ(Y ).
As reviewed in Section 2.1, instantaneous power p(t) = v(t) · i(t) (equation (2)) can also be
represented using complex quantities, and we defined complex power as
•s =
•v ·
•i∗(equation (3)).
We noted that the real component of complex power, active power, represents the continuous and
double frequency part of instantaneous power proportional to the cosine of the phase difference
between voltage v(t) and current i(t). The imaginary component of complex power, reactive power,

ec4
e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−0.5
0
0.5
Time t
pR(t)
pL(t)
pC(t)
p(t)
¯p
Figure EC.4
Oscillogram for instant power provided by the source, p(t), and consumed by passive elements,
pR(t), pL(t), and pC(t), in Fig. EC.1. This oscillogram uses the same electrical parameters as in
Fig. EC.2.
•sR = 0.4 0
•sL = 0.6 π/2
•sC = 0.75 −π/2
•s = 0.427 −0.359
Figure EC.5
Complex power diagram for circuit in in Fig. EC.1 using the same electrical parameters as in Fig.
EC.2.
represents the double frequency part of instantaneous power proportional to the sine of the phase
difference between voltage v(t) and current i(t).
These relations can be visually appreciated in Figures EC.4 and EC.5. Figure EC.4 presents the
oscillogram for instantaneous power in the circuit of Fig. EC.1. Figure EC.5 presents the complex
power diagram for the circuit of Fig. EC.1. For the resistor, instantaneous power pR(t) only has a
continuous component of 0.4 and double frequency sinusoidal component with amplitude 0.4, both
proportional to the magnitude of complex power |
•sR| = 0.4 and the cosine of the angle of complex
power ∠
•sR = 1. Analog comparisons between instantaneous and complex power can be made for
the inductor, capacitor, and the source. An additional, perhaps more important, observation from
Fig. EC.5 is that that complex power also obeys balance as current does, that is
•s =
•sR +
•sL +
•sC,
which is a consequence of the definition of complex power.
EC.2. Competition Platform Details
This appendix summarizes the platform developed for Challenge 1 of the GO Competition. An
internal web server is the central point of coordination among entrants, the computing cluster,

e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
ec5
database, code repository, and network file servers. The internal web server manages the running
and evaluation of pending problems, receives progress updates while transitioning through the life
cycle of a submission, and routes those messages to the entrant through a web interface.
The web server validates and stores the details of each submission and then triggers a chain of
events. The team’s code is checked out to the web server from GitHub using a predefined SSH key.
If the submitted code does not yet exist on the login node of the computing cluster, it is copied
from the web server and compiled if necessary. If this fails, logged information is sent to the team
and the submission is marked as terminated. Otherwise, the code is then run.
Each submission includes a Code 1 which a 10-minute time limit for a real-time case and 45-
minute limit for a planning case. Code 1 is expected to generate a solution1.txt file and optionally
a solution2.txt file. If either Code 1 fails to produce the base case solution or produces an
infeasible solution, the submission is terminated and assigned the worst-case score. Each submission
may also include a Code 2 that is then run to generate a solution2.txt file using information
from solution1.txt. Code 2 is not allowed to recreate or modify solution1.txt and has a time
limit of two seconds per contingency. Once both solutions are available, the evaluation script is
launched to generate a score. Once scored, post-processing archives results in a tar.gz file and
stores scenario’s metadata into a database. Should the team wish to review their score or obtain
the results, they can do so through their submission page on the competition’s web site.
Code 1 and Code 2 could be written in two different languages. The primary language was
solicited from the submission webpage. The most common submissions were in the form of Linux
binary executables, C/C++ (gcc versions 4.7/5.2/7.1/8.1), MATLAB R2019a with MATPOWER
v7.0b, Julia (versions 0.64, 0.7. 1.1, 1.2) and Python (versions 2.7.13, 3.7.2). The entrants could
choose from a broad range of compiler and solver versions, though latest versions of them were
provided if there was no specific request. Entrants also had a wide range of choice of solver libraries
compiled with various versions of gcc upon request, including Ipopt v3.12.13, HSL for Ipopt
v2015.06, Python-based Pyomo v5.6.1, Julia-based JuMP (0.18, 0.19), Gurobi v8.1, IBM CPLEX

ec6
e-companion to I. Aravena, D.K. Molzahn, S. Zhang et al.: ARPA-E GO Competition Challenge 1 Overview
v12, MATLAB-based CVX v2.1, GAMS v27, MOSEK v7, Bonmin v1, and AMPL v2019. In most
cases, commercial solver vendors sponsored a multi-use license for the length of the competition.
Teams could also choose between Intel MPI (versions 2017 and 2018) and OpenMPI (versions 1.8.3
and 3.1) implementations with desired combinations of Intel and gcc compilers.