TITLE: Online Algorithms for Multilevel Aggregation
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2019.1847
---

warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications 
 
 
 
 
 
Manuscript version: Author’s Accepted Manuscript 
The version presented in WRAP is the author’s accepted manuscript and may differ from the 
published version or Version of Record. 
 
Persistent WRAP URL: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/115622 
 
How to cite: 
Please refer to published version for the most recent bibliographic citation information. 
If a published version is known of, the repository item page linked to above, will contain 
details on accessing it. 
 
Copyright and reuse: 
The Warwick Research Archive Portal (WRAP) makes this work by researchers of the 
University of Warwick available open access under the following conditions. 
 
Copyright © and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the 
individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. To the extent reasonable and 
practicable the material made available in WRAP has been checked for eligibility before 
being made available. 
 
Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit 
purposes without prior permission or charge. Provided that the authors, title and full 
bibliographic details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata 
page and the content is not changed in any way. 
 
Publisher’s statement: 
Please refer to the repository item page, publisher’s statement section, for further 
information. 
 
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk. 
 

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Marcin Bienkowski
Institute of Computer Science, University of Wroc law, Poland
Martin B¨ohm
CSLog, Universit¨at Bremen, Germany and Computer Science Institute, Charles University, Czech Republic
Jaroslaw Byrka
Institute of Computer Science, University of Wroc law, Poland
Marek Chrobak
Department of Computer Science, University of California at Riverside, USA
Christoph D¨urr
Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS, Laboratoire d’informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, France
Luk´aˇs Folwarczn´y
Institute of Mathematics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic and Computer Science Institute, Charles University,
Czech Republic
 Lukasz Je˙z
Institute of Computer Science, University of Wroc law, Poland
Jiˇr´ı Sgall
Computer Science Institute, Charles University, Czech Republic, sgall@iuuk.mﬀ.cuni.cz
Nguyen Kim Thang
IBISC, Universit´e d’Evry Val d’Essonne, France
Pavel Vesel´y
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK and Computer Science Institute, Charles University,
Czech Republic
1

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
In the Multi-Level Aggregation Problem (MLAP), requests arrive at the nodes of an edge-weighted tree T ,
and have to be served eventually. A service is deﬁned as a subtree X of T that contains the root of T .
This subtree X serves all requests that are pending in the nodes of X, and the cost of this service is equal
to the total weight of X. Each request also incurs waiting cost between its arrival and service times. The
objective is to minimize the total waiting cost of all requests plus the total cost of all service subtrees. MLAP
is a generalization of some well-studied optimization problems; for example, for trees of depth 1, MLAP is
equivalent to the TCP Acknowledgment Problem, while for trees of depth 2, it is equivalent to the Joint
Replenishment Problem. Aggregation problems for trees of arbitrary depth arise in multicasting, sensor
networks, communication in organization hierarchies, and in supply-chain management. The instances of
MLAP associated with these applications are naturally online, in the sense that aggregation decisions need
to be made without information about future requests.
Constant-competitive online algorithms are known for MLAP with one or two levels. However, it has been
open whether there exist constant-competitive online algorithms for trees of depth more than 2. Addressing
this open problem, we give the ﬁrst constant-competitive online algorithm for trees of arbitrary (ﬁxed) depth.
The competitive ratio is O(D42D), where D is the depth of T . The algorithm works for arbitrary waiting
cost functions, including the variant with deadlines.
Key words : algorithmic aspects of networks, online algorithms, scheduling and resource allocation, lot
sizing, multi-stage assembly problem
1. Introduction
Certain optimization problems can be formulated as aggregation problems. They typically arise
when expensive resources can be shared by multiple agents, who incur additional expenses for
accessing a resource. For example, costs may be associated with waiting until the resource is
accessible, or, if the resource is not in the desired state, a costly setup or retooling may be required.
1-level aggregation. A simple example of an aggregation problem is the TCP Acknowledgment
Problem (TCP-AP), where control messages (“agents”) waiting for transmission across a network
link can be aggregated and transmitted in a single packet (“resource”). Such aggregation can reduce
network traﬃc, but it also results in undesirable delays. A reasonable compromise is to balance
the two costs, namely the number of transmitted packets and the total delay, by minimizing their
weighted sum (Dooly et al. 2001). Interestingly, TCP-AP is equivalent to the classical Lot Sizing
Problem studied in the operations research literature since the 1950s. (See, for example, Wagner
and Whitin (1958).)
An example in Figure 1 illustrates an instance of TCP-AP and a schedule of packet transmissions.
The x-axis represents time. Messages, represented by circles, arrive at integer times. Up-arrows

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
0
5
10
15
time
Figure 1
An example of TCP-AP with linear cost function.
point to transmission times and horizontal dashed lines represent waiting times of messages. Assume
that the cost of each packet’s transmission is 10 and that we charge for delay at rate 1 per time
unit. The schedule consists of three transmissions whose total cost is 30. The ﬁrst transmitted
packet will contain 5 messages with total delay 4 + 3 + 3 + 1 + 0 = 11. The total delay of messages
in the second and third transmissions will be, respectively, 12 and 13. So the total cost of the
schedule in Figure 1 is 66.
The oﬄine variant of TCP-AP, that is computing the optimum schedule of transmissions of
messages aggregated into packets, assuming that all arrival times of control messages are known
beforehand, can be naturally represented by an integer linear program. The optimum solution
can also be quite easily and eﬃciently found with dynamic programming, with the fastest known
algorithm for this problem achieving running time O(nlog n) (Aggarwal and Park 1993).
In practice, however, packet aggregation decisions must be done on the ﬂy, in real time. This
gives rise to the online version of TCP-AP, in which an online algorithm receives information
about messages as they are released over time. At each time step, this algorithm needs to decide
whether to transmit the packet with pending messages or not, without any information about
future message releases. Online algorithms for a variety of other scheduling problems (and other
optimization problems) have been a topic of extensive study since 1980’s – see, for example, Sgall
(1998), Borodin and El-Yaniv (1998). With incomplete information about the input sequence,
an online algorithm cannot, in general, guarantee to compute an optimal solution. Thus research
in this area focuses on designing near-optimal algorithms. The quality of solutions computed by
an online algorithm is typically measured by its competitive ratio, which is deﬁned (roughly) as the
worst-case ratio between its cost and the optimum cost (computed oﬄine). Naturally, the smaller
the ratio the better.
The online variant of TCP-AP has been well studied: It is known that the optimal competitive
ratio is 2 in the deterministic case (Dooly et al. 2001), i.e., there is an algorithm that computes
a solution of cost not more than twice the optimum, and it is not possible to achieve a smaller

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
10
2
3
5
8
4
r5
r4
r3
r2
r1
w
s
0
5
10
time
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r1
r2
r3
r5
r1
r2
r5
r4
r5
r2
r3
Figure 2
An example of JRP with linear cost function.
ratio online. With randomization, it is possible to reduce the ratio to e/(e −1) ≈1.582 (Karlin
et al. 2003, Buchbinder and Naor 2009, Seiden 2000). Online variants of TCP-AP that use diﬀerent
assumptions or objective functions were also examined in the literature (Frederiksen et al. 2003,
Albers and Bals 2005).
2-level aggregation. Another optimization problem involving aggregation is the Joint Replen-
ishment Problem (JRP), well-studied in operations research. JRP models tradeoﬀs that arise in
supply-chain management. One such scenario involves optimizing shipments of goods from a sup-
plier to retailers, through a shared warehouse, in response to their demands. In JRP, aggregation
takes place at two levels: items addressed to diﬀerent retailers can be shipped together to the
warehouse, at a ﬁxed cost, and then multiple items destined to the same retailer can be shipped
from the warehouse to this retailer together, also at a ﬁxed cost, which can be diﬀerent for diﬀerent
retailers. Pending demands accrue waiting cost until they are satisﬁed by a shipment. The objective
is to minimize the sum of all shipment costs and all waiting costs.
Figure 2 shows an example of an instance of JRP and a schedule. This instance has ﬁve retail-
ers r1,r2,...,r5, the warehouse is denoted w and the supplier is denoted s. The connections are
represented by a “star” tree, shown on the left, with shipping costs associated with its edges. For
example, the shipping cost from the supplier to the warehouse is 10. On the right, requests are
represented by circles and are arranged in ﬁve rows corresponding to the retailers. There are three
shipments, at times 4, 9 and 13, marked by up-arrows, with their participating retailers listed
below. The ﬁrst shipment serves retailers r1, r2, r3 and r5 and its cost is 10 + 2 + 3 + 5 + 4 = 24.
Assume that the waiting cost is equal to the time elapsed between the request and the ship-
ment that satisﬁes it. Then the waiting cost of the requests served by the ﬁrst shipment will be
(4 + 2 + 1) + (3 + 0) + 3 + 4 = 17.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
Similarly to TCP-AP, JRP can also be represented by an integer linear program (see, for example
(Buchbinder et al. 2008)). In contrast to TCP-AP, however, JRP is known to be NP-hard (Arkin
et al. 1989), and even APX-hard (Nonner and Souza 2009, Bienkowski et al. 2015). The currently
best approximation algorithm, due to Bienkowski et al. (2014), achieves a factor of 1.791, improving
on earlier work (Levi et al. 2005, 2008, Levi and Sviridenko 2006). In the deadline variant of JRP,
denoted JRP-D, there is no cost for waiting, but each demand needs to be satisﬁed before its
deadline. As shown by Bienkowski et al. (2015), JRP-D can be approximated with ratio 1.574.
For the online variant of JRP, Buchbinder et al. (2008) gave a 3-competitive algorithm using
a primal-dual scheme (improving an earlier bound of 5 by Brito et al. (2012)) and proved a lower
bound of 2.64, that was subsequently improved to 2.754 (Bienkowski et al. 2014). The optimal
competitive ratio for JRP-D is 2 (Bienkowski et al. 2014).
Multiple-level aggregation. TCP-AP and JRP can be thought of as aggregation problems on edge-
weighted trees of depth 1 and 2, respectively. In TCP-AP, this tree is just a single edge between the
sender and the recipient. In JRP, this tree consists of the root (supplier) with one child (warehouse)
and any number of grandchildren (retailers). A shipment can be represented by a subtree of this
tree and edge weights represent shipping costs. These trees capture the general problem on trees
of depth 1 and 2, as the children of the root can be considered separately (see Section 2).
This naturally extends to trees of any depth D, where aggregation is allowed at each level. Multi-
level message aggregation has been, in fact, studied in communication networks in several contexts.
In multicasting, protocols for aggregating control messages (see, for example, Bortnikov and Cohen
(1998), Badrinath and Sudame (2000)) can be used to reduce the so-called ack-implosion, the
proliferation of control messages routed to the source. Such global approach is likely to be more
eﬀective than applying aggregation on each link separately (which amounts to solving an instance
of the TCP-AP problem for each link). For example, the root of the tree can represent a web server
that gathers TCP acknowledgements from its open TCP connections. These TCP acknowledgement
messages are very small (40 bytes), yet each individual message needs to be processed by each node
it traverses in order to determine its route through a routing table lookup. With aggregation, only
one such processing is needed, per node, for an aggregated message that contains multiple acknowl-
edgements. As shown experimentally by Badrinath and Sudame (2000), this approach reduces
packet latency. A similar problem arises in energy-eﬃcient data aggregation and fusion in sensor
networks (Hu et al. 2005, Yuan et al. 2003). Outside of networking, tradeoﬀs between the cost
of communication and delay arise in message aggregation in organizational hierarchies (Papadim-
itriou 1996). In supply-chain management, multi-level variants of lot sizing have been studied as
well (Crowston and Wagner 1973, Kimms 1997). The need to consider more tree-like (in a broad
sense) supply hierarchies has also been advocated by Lambert and Cooper (2000).

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
These applications have inspired research on oﬄine and online approximation algorithms for
multi-level aggregation problems. Becchetti et al. (2009) gave a 2-approximation algorithm for the
deadline case. (See also (Brito et al. 2012).) Pedrosa (2013) showed, adapting an algorithm of Levi
et al. (2006) for the multi-stage assembly problem, that there is a (2+ε)-approximation algorithm
for general waiting cost functions, where ε can be made arbitrarily small.
In the online case, Khanna et al. (2002) gave a rent-or-buy solution (that serves a group of
requests once their waiting cost reaches the cost of their service) and showed that their algorithm
is O(log W)-competitive, where W is the sum of all edge weights. However, they assumed that each
request has to wait at least one time unit. This assumption is crucial for their proof, as demonstrated
by Brito et al. (2012), who showed that the competitive ratio of a rent-or-buy strategy is Ω(D),
even for paths with D edges. The same assumption of a minimal cost for a request and a ratio
dependent on the edge-weights is also essential in the work of Vaya (2012), who studies a variant
of the problem with bounded bandwidth (the number of packets that can be served by a single
edge in a single service).
The existence of a primal-dual (2+ε)-approximation algorithm (Pedrosa 2013, Levi et al. 2006)
for the oﬄine problem suggests the possibility of constructing an online algorithm along the lines
of the scheme by Buchbinder and Naor (2009). Nevertheless, despite substantial eﬀort of many
researchers, the online multi-level setting remains wide open. This is perhaps partly due to impos-
sibility of direct emulation of the cleanup phase in primal-dual oﬄine algorithms in the online
setting, as this cleanup is performed in the “reverse time” order.
The case when the tree is just a path has also been studied. An oﬄine polynomial-time algorithm
that computes an optimal schedule was given by Bienkowski et al. (2013). For the online variant,
Brito et al. (2012) gave an 8-competitive algorithm. This result was improved by Bienkowski et al.
(2013) who showed that the competitive ratio of this problem is between 2 + φ ≈3.618 and 5.
A related problem of integrated scheduling and distribution has also been studied in the online
setting (Azar et al. 2016): It resembles JRP, but in our terms, actually corresponds to a 1-level
tree with multiple leaves. While services of those are independent, there is an interplay at the root
of the tree, as each request has to be processed for its own speciﬁed amount of time at the root
before being serviced — like in lot-sizing or JRP, these can be thought of as re-stocking orders, but
fulﬁlled directly by a manufacturer once the items are produced. Azar et al. (2016) consider linear
waiting costs (and preemptive scheduling/production), but, in principle, one could study arbitrary
waiting functions and allow complex aggregation in shipment, as we do in this work.
1.1. Our Contributions
We study online competitive algorithms for multi-level aggregation. Minor technical diﬀerences
notwithstanding, our model is equivalent to those studied by Brito et al. (2012), Khanna et al.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
MLAP and MLAP-L
MLAP-D
upper
lower
upper
lower
depth 1 2∗
[Doo01] 2
[Doo01] 1
1
rand. alg. for depth 1 1.582∗[Kar03] 1.582 [Sei00] 1
1
depth 2 3
[Buc08] 2.754 [Bie14] 2 [Bie14] 2 [Bie14]
ﬁxed depth D ≥2 O(D42D)
2.754
D22D
2
paths of arbitrary depth 5∗
[Bie13] 3.618 [Bie13] 5∗
2
Table 1
Previous and current bounds on the competitive ratios for MLAP for trees of various depths. Ratios
written in bold are shown in this paper. Except the second line in the table, all bounds are for deterministic
algorithms. The references to particular papers were shortened in the following way: [Sei00] (Seiden 2000),
[Doo01] (Dooly et al. 2001), [Kar03] (Karlin et al. 2003), [Buc08] (Buchbinder et al. 2008), [Bie13] (Bienkowski
et al. 2013), and [Bie14] (Bienkowski et al. 2014). Unreferenced results are either immediate consequences of other
entries in the table or trivial observations. Asterisked ratios represent results for MLAP with arbitrary waiting cost
functions, which, though not explicitly stated in the respective papers, are straightforward extensions of the
corresponding results for MLAP-L. Some values in the table are approximations: 1.582 represents e/(e −1) and 3.618
represents 2 + φ, where φ is the golden ratio.
(2002), also extending the deadline variant (Becchetti et al. 2009) and the assembly problem
(Levi et al. 2006). We have decided to choose a more generic terminology to emphasize general
applicability of our model and techniques.
Formally, in our model, an instance of the problem consists of a tree T with positive weights
assigned to edges, and a set R of requests that arrive in the nodes of T over time. These requests
are served by subtrees rooted at the root of T . Such a subtree X serves all requests pending at the
nodes of X at cost equal to the total weight of X. Each request incurs a waiting cost, deﬁned by
a non-negative and non-decreasing function of time, which may be diﬀerent for each request. The
objective is to minimize the sum of the total service and waiting costs. We call this the Multi-Level
Aggregation Problem (MLAP).
In most earlier papers on aggregation problems, the waiting cost function is linear, that is, it is
assumed to be simply the delay between the times when a request arrives and when it is served. We
denote this version by MLAP-L. However, most of the algorithms for this model extend naturally
to arbitrary cost functions. Another variant is MLAP-D, where each request is given a certain
deadline, has to be served before or at its deadline, and there is no penalty associated with waiting.
This can be modeled by the waiting cost function that is 0 up to the deadline and +∞afterwards.
In this paper, we mostly focus on the online version of MLAP, where an algorithm needs to
produce a schedule in response to requests that arrive over time. When a request appears, its
waiting cost function is also revealed. At each time t, the online algorithm needs to decide whether
to generate a service tree at this time, and if so, which nodes should be included in this tree.
The main result of our paper is an O(D42D)-competitive algorithm for MLAP for trees of depth D,
presented in Section 5. A simpler D22D-competitive algorithm for MLAP-D is presented in Section 4.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
No competitive algorithms have been known so far for online MLAP for arbitrary depth trees, even
for the special case of MLAP-D on trees of depth 3.
For both results we use a reduction, described in Section 3, of the general problem to the special
case of trees with rapidly decreasing weights. For such trees we then provide an explicit competitive
algorithm. While our algorithm is compact and elegant, it is not a straightforward extension of the
2-level algorithm. (In fact, we have been able to show that na¨ıve extensions of the latter algorithm
are not competitive.) It is based on carefully constructing a suﬃciently large service tree whenever
it appears that an urgent request must be served. The speciﬁc structure of the service tree is then
heavily exploited in an amortization argument that constructs a mapping from the algorithm’s
cost to the cost of the optimal schedule. We believe that these three new techniques: the reduction
to trees with rapidly decreasing weights, the construction of the service trees, and our charging
scheme, will be useful in further studies of online aggregation problems.
Finally, in Section 6, we discuss several technical issues concerning the use of general functions
as waiting costs in MLAP. In particular, when presenting our algorithms for MLAP we assume that
all waiting cost functions are continuous (which cannot directly capture some interesting variants
of MLAP). This is done, however, only for technical convenience; as explained in Section 6, these
algorithms can be extended to left-continuous functions, which allows us to model MLAP-D as a
special case of MLAP. We also consider two alternative models for MLAP: the discrete-time model
and the model where not all requests need to be served, showing that our algorithms can be
extended to these models as well.
Notes. An extended abstract of this work appeared in the proceedings of 24th Annual Euro-
pean Symposium on Algorithms (ESA) (Bienkowski et al. 2016). (Other results announced in
(Bienkowski et al. 2016) will be published in a separate companion paper.) In a subsequent work,
Azar et al. (2017) study a more general service problem with delays. This problem includes MLAP
as a special case when in addition to the requests from MLAP, we repeat many requests to the
root of the tree. The results of Azar et al. (2017) then imply O(DO(1)) competitive algorithm for
MLAP. Finally, Buchbinder et al. (2017) improve the competitive ratio for MLAP-D (the variant
with deadlines) to O(D). Their approach uses a more subtle charging argument, combined with
a reduction to the case with rapidly decreasing weights (similar to ours), showing that some of
the ideas introduced in this paper could indeed be helpful for ultimately determining the tight
competitive ratio for MLAP.
2. Preliminaries
Weighted trees. Let T be a tree with root r. The parent of a node x is denoted parent(x). The
depth of x, denoted depth(x), is the number of edges on the simple path from r to x. In particular,
r is at depth 0. The depth D of T is the maximum depth of a node of T .

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
For any set of nodes Z ⊆T and a node x, Zx denotes the set of all descendants of x in Z; in
particular, Tx is the induced subtree of T rooted at x. Furthermore, Zi denotes the set of nodes
in Z of depth i in tree T . Let also Z<i = Si−1
j=0 Zj and Z≤i = Z<i ∪Zi. These notations can be
combined with the notation Zx, so, e.g., Z<i
x
is the set of all descendants of x that belong to Z and
whose depth in T is smaller than i.
We will deal with weighted trees in this paper. For x ̸= r, by ℓx or ℓ(x) we denote the weight of
the edge connecting node x to its parent. (In a typical application this weight would represent the
length or the cost of traversing this edge.) For the sake of convenience, we will often refer to ℓx as
the weight of x. We assume that all these weights are positive. We extend this notation to r by
setting ℓr = 0. If Z is any set of nodes of T , then the weight of Z is ℓ(Z) = P
x∈Z ℓx.
Deﬁnition of MLAP. A request ρ is speciﬁed by a triple ρ = (σρ,aρ,ωρ), where σρ is the node of T
in which ρ is issued, aρ is the non-negative arrival time of ρ, and ωρ is the waiting cost function
of ρ. We assume that ωρ(t) = 0 for t ≤aρ and ωρ(t) is non-decreasing for t ≥aρ. MLAP-L is the
variant of MLAP with linear waiting costs; that is, for each request ρ we have ωρ(t) = t −aρ, for
t ≥aρ. In MLAP-D, the variant with deadlines, we have ωρ(t) = 0 for aρ ≤t ≤dρ and ωρ(t) = +∞
for t > dρ, where dρ is called the deadline of request ρ. We assume that all the deadlines in the
given instance are distinct. This may be done without loss of generality, as in case of ties we can
modify the deadlines by inﬁnitesimally small perturbations.
In our algorithm for MLAP with general costs, we will be assuming that all waiting cost functions
are continuous. This is only for technical convenience and we discuss more general waiting cost
functions in Section 6; we also show there that MLAP-D can be considered a special case of MLAP,
and that our algorithms can be extended to the discrete-time model.
A service is a pair (X,t), where X is a subtree of T rooted at r and t is the time of this service. We
will occasionally refer to X as the service tree (or just service) at time t, or even omit t altogether
if it is understood from context.
An instance J = ⟨T ,R⟩of the Multi-Level Aggregation Problem (MLAP) consists of a weighted
tree T with root r and a set R of requests arriving at the nodes of T . A schedule is a set S of
services. For a request ρ, let (X,t) be the service in S with minimal t such that σρ ∈X and t ≥aρ.
We then say that (X,t) serves ρ and the waiting cost of ρ in S is deﬁned as wcost(ρ,S) = ωρ(t).
Furthermore, the request ρ is called pending at all times in the interval [aρ,t]. Schedule S is called
feasible if all requests in R are served by S.
The cost of a feasible schedule S, denoted cost(S), is deﬁned by
cost(S) = scost(S) + wcost(S),

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
where scost(S) is the total service cost and wcost(S) is the total waiting cost, that is
scost(S) =
X
(X,t)∈S
ℓ(X)
and
wcost(S) =
X
ρ∈R
wcost(ρ,S).
The objective of MLAP is to compute a feasible schedule S for J with minimum cost(S).
Online algorithms. We use the standard and natural deﬁnition of online algorithms and the
competitive ratio. We assume the continuous time model. The computation starts at time 0 and
from then on the time gradually progresses. At any time t new requests can arrive. If the current
time is t, the algorithm has complete information about the requests that arrived up until time t,
but has no information about any requests whose arrival times are after time t. The instance
includes a time horizon H that is not known to the online algorithm, which is revealed only at
time t = H. At time H, all requests that are still pending must be served. (In the oﬄine case, H
can be assumed to be equal to the maximum request arrival time.)
If A is an online algorithm and c ≥1, we say that A is c-competitive if cost(S) ≤c·opt(J ) for any
instance J of MLAP, where S is the schedule computed by A on J and opt(J ) is the optimum cost
for J . (Note that the deﬁnition of competitiveness in the literature often allows an additive error
term, independent of the request sequence. For our algorithms, this additive term is not needed.)
Quasi-root assumption. Throughout the paper we will assume that r, the root of T , has only
one child. This is without loss of generality, because if we have an algorithm (online or oﬄine) for
MLAP on such trees, we can apply it independently to each child of r and its subtree. This will
give us an algorithm for MLAP on arbitrary trees with the same performance. From now on, let us
call the single child of r the quasi-root of T and denote it by q. Note that q is included in every
(non-trivial) service. Requests at r can be serviced immediately at cost 0, so we can simply assume
that there are no such requests in R.
Urgency functions. When choosing nodes for inclusion in a service, our online algorithms give
priority to those that are most “urgent”. For MLAP-D, naturally, urgency of nodes can be measured
by their deadlines, where a deadline of a node v is the earliest deadline of a request pending in
the subtree Tv, i.e., the induced subtree rooted at v. But for the arbitrary instances of MLAP we
need a more general deﬁnition of urgency, which takes into account the rate of increase of the
waiting cost in the future. To this end, each of our algorithms will use some urgency function
f : T →R ∪{+∞}, which also depends on the set of pending requests and the current time step,
and which assigns some time value to each node. The earlier this value, the more urgent the node is.
Formally, for MLAP-D, we deﬁne the function dt(v) for any time t as follows. For any node v,
dt(v) is the earliest deadline among all requests in Tv that are pending for the algorithm at time t;
if there is no pending request in Tv, we set dt(v) = +∞. We use dt as the urgency function at time
t in our algorithm for MLAP-D.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
Definition 1. Let f be an urgency function, A be a set of nodes in T and β ≥0 be a real number.
Then, Urgent(A,β,f) is the smallest set of nodes in A such that
1. for all u ∈Urgent(A,β,f), and v ∈A −Urgent(A,β,f) we have f(u) ≤f(v), and
2. either ℓ(Urgent(A,β,f)) ≥β or Urgent(A,β,f) = A.
Intuitively, Urgent(A,β,f) is the set of nodes obtained by choosing the nodes from A in order
of their increasing urgency value, until either their total weight exceeds β or we run out of nodes
from A. In case of ties in the values of f, there may be multiple choices for Urgent(A,β,f); we
choose among them arbitrarily.
3. Reduction to α-Decreasing Trees
One basic intuition that emerges from earlier works on trees of depth 2 (Buchbinder et al. 2008,
Brito et al. 2012, Bienkowski et al. 2014) is that the hardest case of the problem is when ℓq,
the weight of the quasi-root, is much larger than the weights of leaves. For arbitrary depth trees,
the hard case is when the weights of nodes quickly decrease with their depth. We show that this
is indeed the case, by deﬁning the notion of α-decreasing trees that captures this intuition and
showing that MLAP reduces to the special case of MLAP for such α-decreasing trees, increasing the
competitive ratio by a factor of at most Dα. The value of α used in our algorithms will be ﬁxed
later. This is a general result, not limited only to algorithms in our paper.
Definition 2. Fix α ≥1. A tree T is α-decreasing if for any node u diﬀerent from the root of T
and for any child v of u, it holds that ℓu ≥α · ℓv.
Note that the α-decreasing property is one of the conditions of α-HST (a hierarchically well-
separated tree with separation α, see, e.g., (Bartal 1996)). That is, any α-HST is also an α-
decreasing tree. However, for our purposes we do not require that the edge weight from any node
to its children is the same, which is required by α-HST.
Theorem 1. If there exists a c-competitive algorithm A for MLAP (resp. MLAP-D) on α-decreasing
trees (where c can be a function of D, the tree depth), then there exists a Dαc-competitive algo-
rithm B for MLAP (resp. MLAP-D) on arbitrary trees.
Proof.
Fix the underlying instance J = (T ,R), where T is a tree and R is a sequence of requests
in T . In our reduction, we convert T to an α-decreasing tree T ′ on the same set of nodes. We then
show that any service on T is also a service on T ′ of the same cost and, conversely, that any service
on T ′ can be converted to a slightly more expensive service on T .
We start by constructing an α-decreasing tree T ′ on the same set of nodes. For any node u ∈
T −{r}, the parent of u in T ′ will be the lowest (closest to u) ancestor w of u in T such that

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
ℓw ≥α·ℓu; if no such w exists, we take w = r. The length of an edge from u to its parent remains ℓu.
Note that T ′ may violate the quasi-root assumption, which does not change the validity of the
reduction, as we may use independent instances of the algorithm for each child of r in T ′. Since
in T ′ each node u is connected to one of its ancestors from T , it follows that T ′ is a tree rooted
at r with depth at most D. Obviously, T ′ is α-decreasing.
The construction implies that if a set of nodes X is a service subtree of T , then it is also a service
subtree for T ′ of the same cost. (However, note that the actual topology of the trees with node
set X in T and T ′ may be very diﬀerent. For example, if α = 5 and T is a path with costs (starting
from the leaf) 1,2,22,...,2D, then in T ′ the node of weight 2i is connected to the node of weight
2i+3, except for the last three nodes that are connected to r. Thus the resulting tree consists of three
paths ending at r with roughly the same number of nodes. In particular, X in T ′ may now contain
paths without any request.) Therefore, any schedule for J is also a schedule for J ′ = (T ′,R), which
gives us that opt(J ′) ≤opt(J ).
The algorithm B for T is deﬁned as follows: On a request sequence R, we simulate A for R in T ′,
and whenever A contains a service X, B issues the service X′ ⊇X, created from X as follows: Start
with X′ = X. Then, for each u ∈X −{r}, if w is the parent of u in T ′, then add to X′ all inner
nodes on the path from u to w in T . By the construction of T ′, for each u we add at most D −1
nodes, each of weight less than α · ℓu. It follows that ℓ(X′) ≤((D −1)α + 1)ℓ(X) ≤Dα · ℓ(X).
In total, the service cost of B is at most Dα times the service cost of A. Any request served by A
is served by B at the same time or earlier, thus the waiting cost of B is at most the waiting cost
of A (resp. for MLAP-D, B produces a valid schedule for J ). Since A is c-competitive, we obtain
cost(B,J ) ≤Dα · cost(A,J ′) ≤Dαc · opt(J ′) ≤Dαc · opt(J ),
and thus B is Dαc-competitive.
■
4. A Competitive Algorithm for MLAP-D
In this section we present our online algorithm for MLAP-D with competitive ratio at most D22D.
To this end, we will give an online Algorithm OnlTreeD that achieves competitive ratio cα =
(2+1/α)D−1 for α-decreasing trees. Together with the reduction given in the previous section, this
will imply the following result.
Theorem 2. There exists a D22D-competitive online algorithm for MLAP-D on trees of depth D.
Proof.
Applying Theorem 1 to Algorithm OnlTreeD, we obtain that there exists a Dαcα =
Dα(2 + 1/α)D−1-competitive algorithm for general trees. For D ≥2, choosing α = D/2 yields
a competitive ratio bounded by
1
2D22D−1 · (1 + 1/D)D ≤1
4D22D · e ≤D22D. For D = 1 there is
a trivial 1-competitive algorithm.
■

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
4.1. Intuition
Consider the optimal 2-competitive algorithm for MLAP-D for trees of depth 2 (Bienkowski et al.
2014). Assume that the tree is α-decreasing, for some large α. (Thus ℓq ≫ℓv, for each leaf v.)
Whenever a pending request reaches its deadline, this algorithm serves a subtree X consisting
of r,q and the set of leaves with the earliest deadlines and total weight of about ℓq. This is a natural
strategy: We have to pay at least ℓq to serve the expiring request, so including an additional
set of leaves of total weight ℓq can at most double our overall cost. At the same time, assuming
that no new requests arrive, serving this X can signiﬁcantly reduce the cost in the future, since
servicing these leaves individually is expensive: it would cost ℓv + ℓq per each leaf v, compared to
the incremental cost of ℓv to include v in X.
For α-decreasing trees with three levels (that is, for D = 3), we may try to iterate this idea.
When constructing a service tree X, we start by adding to X the set of most urgent children of q
whose total weight is roughly ℓq. Now, when choosing nodes of depth 3, we have two possibilities:
(1) for each v ∈X −{r,q} we can add to X its most urgent children of combined weight ℓv (note
that their total weight will add up to roughly ℓq, because of the α-decreasing property), or (2)
from the set of all children of the nodes in X −{r,q}, add to X the set of total weight roughly ℓq
consisting of (globally) most urgent children.
It is not hard to show that option (1) does not lead to a constant-competitive algorithm: The
counter-example involves an instance with one node w of depth 2 having many children with
requests with early deadlines and all other leaves having requests with very distant deadlines.
Assume that ℓq = α2, ℓw = α, and that each leaf has weight 1. The example forces the algorithm to
serve the children of w in small batches of size α with cost more than α2 per batch or α per each
child of w, while the optimum can serve all the requests in the children of w at once with cost O(1)
per request, giving a lower bound Ω(α) on the competitive ratio. (The requests at other nodes can
be ignored in the optimal solution, as we can keep repeating the above strategy in a manner similar
to the lower-bound technique presented, e.g., by Buchbinder et al. (2008) or by Bienkowski et al.
(2013).) A more intricate example shows that option (2) by itself is not suﬃcient to guarantee
constant competitiveness either.
The idea behind our algorithm, for trees of depth D = 3, is to do both (1) and (2) to obtain X.
This increases the cost of each service by a constant factor, but it protects the algorithm against
both bad instances. The extension of our algorithm to depths D > 3 carefully iterates the process
of constructing the service tree X, to ensure that for each node v ∈X and for each level i below v
we add to X suﬃciently many urgent descendants of v at that level.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
4.2. Algorithm OnlTreeD
At any time t when some request expires, that is when t = dt(q) for the quasi-root q, the algorithm
serves a subtree X constructed by ﬁrst initializing X = {r,q}, and then incrementally augmenting
X according to the following pseudo-code:
for each depth i = 2,...,D
Zi ←set of all children of nodes in Xi−1
for each v ∈X<i
U(v,i,t) ←Urgent(Zi
v,ℓv,dt)
X ←X ∪U(v,i,t)
In other words, at depth i, we restrict our attention to Zi, the children of all the nodes in Xi−1,
i.e., of the nodes that we have previously selected to X at level i −1. (We start with i = 2 and
X1 = {q}.) Then we iterate over all v ∈X<i and we add to X the set U(v,i,t). U(v,i,t) itself is
created by taking nodes from T i
v (descendants of v at depth i) whose parents are in X, one by one,
in the order of increasing deadlines, stopping when either their total weight exceeds ℓv or when we
run out of such nodes. Since T is α-decreasing, each added node has weight at most ℓv/α, and thus
the total weight of U(v,i,t) is at most ℓv + ℓv/α. Note that added sets do not need to be disjoint.
The constructed set X is a service tree, as we are adding to it only nodes that are children of
the nodes already in X.
Let ρ be the request triggering the service at time t, i.e., satisfying dρ = t. (By the assumption
about diﬀerent deadlines, ρ is unique.) Naturally, all the nodes u on the path from r to σρ have
dt(u) = t and qualify as the most urgent, thus the node σρ is included in X. Therefore every request
is served before its deadline.
4.3. Analysis
Intuitively, it should be clear that Algorithm OnlTreeD cannot have a better cost-to-optimum
ratio than ℓ(X)/ℓq: If all requests are in q, the optimum will serve only q, while our algorithm uses
a set X with many nodes that turn out to be useless. As we will show, via an iterative charging
argument, the ratio ℓ(X)/ℓq is actually achieved by the algorithm.
Recall that cα = (2 + 1/α)D−1. We now prove a bound on the cost of the service tree.
Lemma 1. Let X be the service tree produced by Algorithm OnlTreeD at time t. Then ℓ(X) ≤
cα · ℓq.
Proof.
We prove by induction that ℓ(X≤i) ≤(2 + 1/α)i−1ℓq for all i ≤D.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
The base case of i = 1 is trivial, as X≤1 = {r,q} and ℓr = 0. For i ≥2, Xi is the union of the
sets U(v,i,t) over all nodes v ∈X<i. Recall that by our construction, ℓ(U(v,i,t)) ≤ℓv + ℓv/α =
(1 + 1/α)ℓv. Therefore, by the inductive assumption, we get that
ℓ(X≤i) ≤(1 + (1 + 1/α)) · ℓ(X<i)
≤(2 + 1/α) · (2 + 1/α)i−2ℓq = (2 + 1/α)i−1ℓq ,
proving the induction step and completing the proof that ℓ(X) ≤cα · ℓq.
■
The competitive analysis uses a charging scheme. Fix some optimal schedule S∗. Consider a ser-
vice (X,t) of Algorithm OnlTreeD. We will identify in X a subset of “critically overdue” nodes
(to be deﬁned shortly) of total weight at least ℓq ≥ℓ(X)/cα, and we will show that for each such
critically overdue node v we can charge the portion ℓv of the service cost of X to an earlier service
in S∗that contains v. Further, each occurrence of v in the services of S∗will be charged at most
once in this way. This implies that the total cost of our algorithm is at most cα times the optimal
cost, giving us an upper bound of cα on the competitive ratio for α-decreasing trees.
In the proof, by nost
v we denote the time of the ﬁrst service in S∗that includes v and is strictly
after time t; we also let nost
v = +∞if no such service exists (nos stands for next optimal service).
For a service (X,t) of the algorithm, we say that a node v ∈X is overdue at time t if dt(v) < nost
v.
Servicing of such v is delayed in comparison to S∗, because S∗must have served v before or at
time t. Note also that r and q are overdue at time t, as dt(r) = dt(q) = t by the choice of the service
time. We deﬁne v ∈X to be critically overdue at time t if (i) v is overdue at t, and (ii) there is no
other service of the algorithm in the time interval (t,nost
v) in which v is overdue.
We are now ready to deﬁne the charging for a service (X,t). For each v ∈X that is critically
overdue, we charge its weight ℓv to the last service of v in S∗before or at time t. This charging is
well-deﬁned as, for each overdue v, there must exist a previous service of v in S∗. The charging is
obviously one-to-one because between any two services in S∗that involve v there may be at most
one service of the algorithm in which v is critically overdue. The following lemma shows that the
total charge from X is large enough.
Lemma 2. Let (X,t) be a service of Algorithm OnlTreeD and suppose that v ∈X is overdue at
time t. Then the total weight of critically overdue nodes in Xv at time t is at least ℓv.
Proof.
The proof is by induction on the depth of Tv, the induced subtree rooted at v.
The base case is when Tv has depth 0, that is when v is a leaf. We show that in this case
v must be critically overdue, which implies the conclusion of the lemma. Towards contradiction,
suppose that there is some other service at time t′ ∈(t,nost
v) in which v is overdue. Since v is a

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
r
q
w
σρ
X
Y
v
x
i
U(v,i,t)
Figure 3
Illustration of the proof of Lemma 2.
leaf, after the service at time t there are no pending requests in Tv = {v}. As v is overdue at time
t′, we have dt′(v) < nost′
v = nost
v and this implies that there is a request ρ with σρ = v such that
t < aρ ≤dρ < nost
v. But this is not possible, because S∗does not serve v in the time interval (t,nost
v).
Thus v is critically overdue and the base case holds.
Assume now that v is not a leaf, and that the lemma holds for all descendants of v. If v is
critically overdue, the conclusion of the lemma holds.
Thus we can now assume that v is not critically overdue. This means that there is a service
(Y,t′) of Algorithm OnlTreeD with t < t′ < nost
v which contains v and such that v is overdue
at t′. Thus nost
v = nost′
v .
Let ρ be the request with dρ = dt′(v), i.e., the most urgent request in Tv at time t′.
We claim that aρ ≤t, i.e., ρ arrived no later than at time t. Indeed, since v is overdue at time t′,
it follows that dρ < nost′
v = nost
v. The optimal schedule S∗cannot serve ρ after time t, as S∗has no
service from v in the interval (t,dρ]. Thus S∗must have served ρ before or at t, and hence aρ ≤t,
as claimed.
Now consider the path from σρ to v in Y . (See Figure 3.) As ρ is pending for the algorithm at
time t and ρ is not served by (X,t), it follows that σρ ̸∈X. Let w be the last node on this path in
Y −X. Then w is well-deﬁned and w ̸= v, as v ∈X. Let i be the depth of w. Note that the parent
of w is in X<i
v , so w ∈Zi in the algorithm when X is constructed.
The node σρ is in Tw and ρ is pending at t, thus we have dt(w) ≤dρ. Since w ∈Zi but w was
not added to X at time t, we have that ℓ(U(v,i,t)) ≥ℓv and each x ∈U(v,i,t) is at least as urgent
as w. This implies that such x satisﬁes
dt(x) ≤dt(w) ≤dρ < nost′
v = nost
v ≤nost
x,
and thus x is overdue at time t. By the inductive assumption, the total weight of critically overdue
nodes in each induced subtree Xx is at least ℓx. Adding these weights over all x ∈U(v,i,t), we

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
obtain that the total weight of critically overdue nodes in Xv is at least ℓ(U(v,i,t)) ≥ℓv, completing
the proof.
■
Now consider a service (X,t) of the algorithm. The quasi-root q is overdue at time t, so Lemmata 2
and 1 imply that the charge from (X,t) is at least ℓq ≥ℓ(X)/cα. Since each node in any service
in S∗is charged at most once, we conclude that Algorithm OnlTreeD is cα-competitive for any
α-decreasing tree T .
5. A Competitive Algorithm for MLAP
In this section, we show that there is an online algorithm for MLAP whose competitive ratio for
trees of depth D is O(D42D). As in Section 4, we will assume that the tree T in the instance is
α-decreasing and present a competitive algorithm for such trees, which will imply the existence of
a competitive algorithm for arbitrary trees by using Theorem 1 and choosing an appropriate value
of α.
5.1. Preliminaries and Notations
Recall that ωρ(t) denotes the waiting cost function of a request ρ. As explained in Section 2, we
assume that the waiting cost functions are continuous. (In Section 6, we discuss how to extend
our results to arbitrary waiting cost functions.) We will overload this notation, so that we can talk
about the waiting cost of a set of requests or a set of nodes. Speciﬁcally, for a set P of requests
and a set Z of nodes, let
ωP(Z,t) =
X
ρ∈P :σρ∈Z
ωρ(t).
Thus ωP(Z,t) is the total waiting cost of the requests from P that are issued in Z. We sometimes
omit P, in which case the notation refers to the set of all requests in the instance, that is ω(Z,t) =
ωR(Z,t). Similarly, we omit Z when Z contains all nodes, that is ωP(t) = ωP(T ,t).
Maturity time. In our algorithm for MLAP-D in Section 4, the times of services and the urgency
of nodes are both naturally determined by the deadlines. For MLAP with continuous waiting costs
there are no hard deadlines. Nevertheless, we can still introduce the notion of maturity time of
a node, which is, roughly speaking, the time when some subtree rooted at this node has its waiting
cost equal to its service cost; this subtree is then called mature. This maturity time will be our
urgency function, as discussed earlier in Section 2. We use the maturity time in two ways: ﬁrst, the
maturity times of the quasi-root determine the service times, and second, maturity times of other
nodes are used to prioritize them for inclusion in the service trees. We now proceed to deﬁne these
notions formally.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Consider some time t and any set P ⊆R of requests and a subtree Z of T (not necessarily rooted
at r). Z is called P-mature at time t if ωP(Z,t) ≥ℓ(Z). Let
µP(Z) = arg min
t
{ωP(Z,t) ≥ℓ(Z)}.
That is, µP(Z) is the earliest time τ at which Z is P-mature; if such τ does not exist, we set µP(Z) =
+∞. Since ωP(Z,0) = 0, ℓ(Z) ≥0, and ωP(Z,t) is a non-decreasing and continuous function of t,
µP(Z) is well-deﬁned.
In the following deﬁnition, a condition Z ⊑Tv denotes that a set of nodes Z is not only a subtree
of Tv, but is also itself rooted at v. Consider any node v and any set P ⊆R of requests. Let
MP(v) = min
Z⊑Tv µP(Z)
and
(1)
CP(v) =arg min
Z⊑Tv µP(Z).
(2)
MP(v) is called the P-maturity time of v and CP(v) is called the P-critical subtree rooted at v;
if there are more such trees, we choose one arbitrarily. From the above deﬁnitions, we have that
ωP(CP(v),MP(v)) = ℓ(CP(v)).
The following simple lemma guarantees that the maturity time of any node in the P-critical
subtree CP(v) is upper bounded by the maturity time of v.
Lemma 3. Let u ∈CP(v) and let Y = (CP(v))u be the induced subtree of CP(v) rooted at u. Then
MP(u) ≤µP(Y ) ≤MP(v).
Proof.
The ﬁrst inequality follows directly from the deﬁnition of MP(u). To show the second
inequality, we proceed by contradiction. Let t = MP(v). If the second inequality does not hold, then
u ̸= v and ωP(Y,t) < ℓ(Y ). Take Y ′ = CP(v) −Y , which is a tree rooted at v. Since ωP(CP(v),t) =
ℓ(CP(v)), we have that ωP(Y ′,t) = ωP(CP(v),t) −ωP(Y,t) > ℓ(CP(v)) −ℓ(Y ) = ℓ(Y ′). This in turn
implies that µP(Y ′) < t, which is a contradiction with the deﬁnition of t = MP(v).
■
We stress that the concepts of maturity times and critical subtrees are deﬁned above abstractly
with respect to arbitrary sets P of requests, and are independent of the online algorithm. Yet,
naturally, in our algorithm and its analysis, in most cases this P will represent the set of requests
pending for the algorithm at a given time. Thus, for any time t, we will also introduce simpliﬁed
notations M t(v) and Ct(v) to denote the time MP(v) and the P-critical subtree CP(v), where P is
the set of requests pending for the algorithm at time t; if it so happens that the algorithm schedules
a service at some time t, then this P represents the set of requests that are pending at time t
right before this service is executed. Note that in general it is possible that M t(v) < t. However,
our algorithm will maintain the invariant that for the quasi-root q we will have M t(q) ≥t at each
time t.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
5.2. Algorithm
We now describe our algorithm for α-decreasing trees. A service will occur at each maturity time of
the quasi-root q (with respect to the pending requests), that is at each time t for which t = M t(q).
At such a time, the algorithm chooses a service that contains the critical subtree C = Ct(q) of q
and an extra set E, whose service cost is not much more expensive than that of C. The extra set
is constructed similarly as in Algorithm OnlTreeD, where the urgency of nodes is now measured
by their maturity time. In other words, our urgency function is now f = M t (see Section 2.) As
before, this extra set will be a union of a system of sets U(v,i,t) for i = 2,...,D, and v ∈C<i ∪E<i,
except that now, for technical reasons, the sets U(v,i,t) will be mutually disjoint and also disjoint
from C.
Algorithm OnlTree. At any time t such that t = M t(q), serve the set X = C ∪E constructed
according to the following pseudo-code:
C ←Ct(q) ∪{r}
E ←∅
for each depth i = 2,...,D
Zi ←set of all nodes in T i −C whose parent is in C ∪E
for each v ∈(C ∪E)<i
U(v,i,t) ←Urgent(Zi
v,ℓv,M t)
E ←E ∪U(v,i,t)
Zi ←Zi −U(v,i,t)
At the end of the instance (when t = H, the time horizon), if there are any pending requests,
OnlTree issues the last service that contains all nodes v with a pending request in Tv.
Note that X = C ∪E is indeed a service tree, as it contains r,q and we are adding to it only
nodes that are children of the nodes already in X. The initial choice and further changes of Zi
imply that the sets U(v,i,t) are pairwise disjoint and disjoint from C — a fact that will be useful
in our analysis.
We also need the following fact.
Lemma 4. Suppose that Algorithm OnlTree issues a service at a time t, that is M t(q) = t. Let
P ′ denote the set of requests pending at time t and not served at time t. Then MP ′(q) > t.
Proof.
Consider any subtree Y of T rooted at q. It is suﬃcient to show that ωP ′(Y,t) < ℓ(Y ).
We claim that the following relations hold:
ω(Ct(q) ∪Y,t) ≥ω(Ct(q),t) + ωP ′(Y,t)
(3)
ω(Ct(q),t) = ℓ(Ct(q))
(4)

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
ω(Ct(q) ∪Y,t) ≤ℓ(Ct(q) ∪Y )
(5)
ℓ(Ct(q) ∪Y ) < ℓ(Ct(q)) + ℓ(Y )
(6)
Indeed, inequality (3) is true because each request pending at time t in Ct(q) ∪Y contributes to
at most one of the terms on the right-hand side: if it is in Ct(q) then it’s served at time t, so it
cannot be in P ′. Inequalities (4) and (5) follow from the assumption that M t(q) = t and from the
deﬁnition of Ct(q). (Observe that Ct(q)∪Y ⊑Tq, that is Ct(q)∪Y is also a candidate for a critical
set in (2).) Inequality (6) holds because Ct(q) and Y both contain q with ℓ(q) > 0.
Combining (3)-(6), we obtain
ℓ(Ct(q)) + ωP ′(Y,t) = ω(Ct(q),t) + ωP ′(Y,t)
≤ω(Ct(q) ∪Y,t)
≤ℓ(Ct(q) ∪Y ) < ℓ(Ct(q)) + ℓ(Y ),
and ωP ′(Y,t) < ℓ(Y ) follows.
■
Corollary 1. At any time t we have M t(q) ≥t.
Proof.
The statement holds trivially at the beginning, at time t = 0. In any time interval without
new requests released nor services, the inequality M t(q) ≥t is preserved by the deﬁnition of the
service times and continuity of waiting cost functions. Releasing a request ρ at a time aρ = t cannot
decrease M t(q) to below t, because the waiting cost function of ρ is identically 0 up to t, and thus
releasing ρ does not change the waiting costs at time t or before. Finally, Lemma 4 implies that
the inequality is also preserved when a service occurs.
■
Corollary 1 shows that the sequence of service times is non-decreasing and thus the deﬁnition of
the algorithm is sound. In fact Lemma 4 even shows that no two services can occur at the same
time.
5.3. Competitive Analysis
We now present the proof that there is a O(D42D)-competitive algorithm for MLAP for trees of
depth D. The overall argument is quite intricate, so we will start by summarizing its main steps:
• First, as explained earlier, we will assume that the tree T in the instance is α-decreasing.
For such T we will show that Algorithm OnlTree has competitive ratio O(D2cα), where cα =
(2 + 1/α)D−1. Our bound on the competitive ratio for arbitrary trees will then follow, by using
Theorem 1 and choosing an appropriate value of α (see Theorem 3).

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
• For α-decreasing trees, the bound of the competitive ratio of Algorithm OnlTree involves
four ingredients:
— We show (in Lemma 5) that the total cost of Algorithm OnlTree is at most twice its
service cost.
— Next, we show that the service cost of Algorithm OnlTree can be bounded (within a con-
stant factor) by the total cost of all critical subtrees Ct(q) of the service trees in its schedule.
— To facilitate the estimate of the adversary cost, we introduce the concept of a pseudo-
schedule denoted S. The pseudo-schedule S is a collection of pseudo-services, which include the
services from the original adversary schedule S∗. We show (in Lemma 7) that the adversary pseudo-
schedule has service cost not larger than D times the cost of S∗. Using the pseudo-schedule allows
us to ignore the waiting cost in the adversary’s schedule.
— With the above bounds established, it remains to show that the total cost of critical sub-
trees in the schedule of Algorithm OnlTree is within a constant factor of the service cost of
the adversary’s pseudo-schedule. This is accomplished through a charging scheme that charges
nodes (or, more precisely, their weights) from each critical subtree of Algorithm OnlTree to their
appearances in some earlier adversary pseudo-services.
Two auxiliary bounds. We now assume that T is α-decreasing and proceed with our proof,
according to the outline above.
The deﬁnition of the maturity time implies that the waiting cost of all the requests served is
at most the service cost ℓ(X), as otherwise X would be a good candidate for a critical subtree at
some earlier time. Denoting by S the schedule computed by Algorithm OnlTree, we thus obtain:
Lemma 5. cost(S) ≤2 · scost(S).
Using Lemma 5, we can restrict ourselves to bounding the service cost, losing at most a factor
of 2. We now bound the cost of a given service X; recall that cα = (2 + 1/α)D−1.
Lemma 6. Each service tree X = C ∪E constructed by the algorithm satisﬁes ℓ(X) ≤cα · ℓ(C).
Proof.
Since T is α-decreasing, the weight of each node that is a descendant of v is at most ℓv/α
and thus ℓ(U(v,i,t)) ≤(1 + 1/α)ℓv.
We now estimate ℓ(X). We claim and prove by induction for i = 1,...,D that
ℓ(X≤i) ≤(2 + 1/α)i−1ℓ(C≤i).
(7)
The base case for i = 1 is trivial, as X≤1 = C≤1 = {r,q}. For i ≥2, the set Xi consists of Ci and the
sets U(v,i,t), for v ∈X<i. Each of these sets U(v,i,t) has weight at most (1 + 1/α)ℓv. Therefore
ℓ(Xi) ≤(1 + 1/α)ℓ(X<i) + ℓ(Ci).
(8)

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Now, using (8) and the inductive assumption (7) for i −1, we get
ℓ(X≤i) = ℓ(X<i) + ℓ(Xi)
≤(2 + 1/α)ℓ(X<i) + ℓ(Ci)
≤(2 + 1/α)i−1ℓ(C<i) + ℓ(Ci) ≤(2 + 1/α)i−1ℓ(C≤i).
Taking i = D in (7), the lemma follows.
■
Waiting costs and pseudo-schedules. Our plan is to charge the cost of Algorithm OnlTree to
the optimal (or the adversary’s) cost. Let S∗be an optimal schedule. To simplify this charging, we
extend S∗by adding to it pseudo-services, where a pseudo-service from a node v is a partial service
of cost ℓv that consists only of the edge from v to its parent. We denote this modiﬁed schedule S
and call it a pseudo-schedule, reﬂecting the fact that its pseudo-services are not necessarily subtrees
of T rooted at r. Adding such pseudo-services will allow us to ignore the waiting costs in the
optimal schedule.
We now deﬁne more precisely how to obtain S from S∗. For each node v independently we deﬁne
the times when new pseudo-services of v occur in S. Intuitively, we introduce these pseudo-services
at intervals such that the waiting cost of the requests that arrive in Tv during these intervals adds
up to ℓv. The formal description of this process is given in the pseudo-code below, where we use
notation R(> t) for the set of requests ρ ∈R with aρ > t (i.e., requests issued after time t). Recall
that H denotes the time horizon.
t ←−∞
while ωR(>t)(Tv,H) ≥ℓv
let τ be the earliest time such that ωR(>t)(Tv,τ) = ℓv
add to S a pseudo-service of v at τ
t ←τ
We apply the above procedure to all the nodes v ∈T −{r} such that R contains a request in Tv.
The new pseudo-schedule S contains all the services of S∗(treated as sets of pseudo-services of all
served nodes) and the new pseudo-services added as above. The service cost of the pseudo-schedule,
scost(S), is deﬁned naturally as the total weight of the nodes in all its pseudo-services and we
bound it in the next lemma for D ≥2 (recall that for D = 1 a constant-competitive algorithm is
already known).
Lemma 7. For D ≥2 it holds scost(S) ≤D · cost(S∗).
Proof.
It is suﬃcient to show that the total service cost of the new pseudo-services added inside
the while loop is at most scost(S∗) + D · wcost(S∗): Adding scost(S∗) once more to account for the

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
service cost of the services of S∗that are included in S, and using our assumption that D ≥2, we
obtain scost(S) ≤2 · scost(S∗) + D · wcost(S∗) ≤D · cost(S∗), thus the lemma follows.
To prove the claim, consider some node v, and a pair of times t,τ from one iteration of the while
loop, when a new pseudo-service was added to S at time τ. This pseudo-service has cost ℓv. In S∗,
either there is a service in (t,τ] including v, or the total waiting cost of the requests within Tv
released in this interval is equal to ωR(>t)(Tv,τ) = ℓv. In the ﬁrst case, we charge the cost of ℓv of
this pseudo-service to any service of v in S∗in (t,τ]. Since we consider here only the new pseudo-
services, created by the above pseudo-code, this charging will be one-to-one. In the second case,
we charge ℓv to the total waiting cost of the requests in Tv released in the interval (t,τ]. For each
given v, the charges of the second type from pseudo-services at v go to disjoint sets of requests
in Tv, so each request in Tv will receive at most one charge from v. Therefore, for each request ρ,
its waiting cost in S∗will be charged at most D times, namely at most once from each node v on
the path from σρ to q. From the above argument, the total cost of the new pseudo-services is at
most scost(S∗) + D · wcost(S∗), as claimed.
■
Using the bound in Lemma 7 will allow us to use scost(S) as an estimate of the optimal cost in
our charging scheme, losing at most a factor of D in the competitive ratio.
Charging scheme. According to Lemma 5, to establish constant competitiveness it is suﬃcient
to bound only the service cost of Algorithm OnlTree. By Lemma 6 for any service tree X of the
algorithm we have ℓ(X) ≤cα · ℓ(C). Therefore, it is in fact suﬃcient to bound the total weight of
the critical sets in the algorithm’s services. Further, using Lemma 7, instead of using the optimal
cost in this bound, we can use the pseudo-service cost. Following this idea, we will show how we can
charge, at a constant rate, the cost of all critical sets C in the algorithm’s services to the adversary
pseudo-services.
The basic idea of our charging method is similar to that for MLAP-D. The argument in Section 4
can be interpreted as an iterative charging scheme, where we have a charge of ℓq that originates
from q, and this charge is gradually distributed and transferred down the service tree, through
overdue nodes, until it reaches critically overdue nodes that can be charged directly to adversary
services. For MLAP with general waiting costs, the charge of ℓ(C) will originate from the current
critical subtree C. Several complications arise when we attempt to distribute the charges to nodes
at deeper levels. First, due to gradual accumulation of waiting costs, it does not seem possible to
identify nodes in the same service tree that can be used as either intermediate or ﬁnal nodes in this
process. Instead, when deﬁning a charge from a node v, we will charge descendants of v in earlier
services of v. Speciﬁcally, the weight ℓv will be charged to the set U(v,i,t−) for some i > depth(v),
where t−is the time of the previous service of the algorithm that includes v. The nodes — or,

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
more precisely, services of these nodes — that can be used as intermediate nodes for transferring
charges will be called depth-timely. As before, we will argue that each charge will eventually reach
a node u in some earlier service that can be charged to some adversary pseudo-service directly.
Such service of u will be called u-local, where the name reﬂects the property that this service has
an adversary pseudo-service of u nearby (to which its weight ℓu will be charged).
We now formalize these notions. Let (X,t) be some service of Algorithm OnlTree that
includes v, that is v ∈X. By Prevt(v) we denote the time of the last service of v before t in the
schedule of the algorithm; if it does not exist, set Prevt(v) = −∞. By Nextt(v,i) we denote the
time of the ith service of v following t in the schedule of the algorithm; if it does not exist, set
Nextt(v,i) = +∞.
We say that the service of v at time t < H is i-timely, if M t(v) < Nextt(v,i); furthermore, if v is
depth(v)-timely, we will say simply that this service of v is depth-timely. We say that the service
of v at time t < H is v-local, if this is either the ﬁrst service of v by the algorithm, or if there is
an adversary pseudo-service of v in the interval (Prevt(v),Nextt(v,depth(v))].
Given an algorithm’s service (X,t), we now deﬁne the outgoing charges from X. For any v ∈
X −{r}, its outgoing charge is deﬁned as follows:
(C1) If t < H and the service of v at time t is both depth-timely and v-local, charge ℓv to the ﬁrst
adversary pseudo-service of v after time Prevt(v).
(C2) If t < H and the service of v at time t is depth-timely but not v-local, charge ℓv to the
algorithm’s service at time Prevt(v).
(C3) If t < H and the service of v at time t is not depth-timely, the outgoing charge is 0.
(C4) If t = H, we charge ℓv to the ﬁrst adversary pseudo-service of v.
We ﬁrst argue that the charging is well-deﬁned. To justify (C1) suppose that this service is
depth-timely and v-local. If (X,t) is the ﬁrst service of v then Prevt(v) = −∞and the charge goes
to the ﬁrst pseudo-service of v which exists as all the requests must be served. Otherwise there
is an adversary pseudo-service of v in the interval (Prevt(v),Nextt(v,depth(v))] and rule (C1) is
well-deﬁned. For (C2), note that if the service (X,t) of v is depth-timely but not v-local then there
must be an earlier service including v. (C3) is trivial. For (C4), note again that an adversary service
of v must exist, as all requests must be served.
The following lemma implies that all nodes in the critical subtree will have an outgoing charge,
as needed.
Lemma 8. Suppose there is a service at a time t < H. The service of each v ∈Ct(q) at time t is
1-timely, and thus also depth-timely.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
Proof.
From Lemma 3, each v ∈Ct(q) satisﬁes M t(v) ≤M t(q) = t < Nextt(q,1) ≤Nextt(v,1),
where the sharp inequality follows from Lemma 4.
■
The following lemma captures the key property of our charging scheme. For any depth-timely
service of v ∈X that is not v-local, it identiﬁes a subset U(v,i,t−) of the previous service (X−,t−)
including v that is suitable for receiving a charge from v. It is important that each such set is used
only once, has suﬃcient weight, and contains only depth-timely nodes. As we show later, these
properties imply that in this charging scheme the net charge (the diﬀerence between the outgoing
and incoming charge) from each service X is at least as large as the total weight of its critical
subtree.
As in the argument for MLAP-D, we need to ﬁnd an urgent node w ∈Xv which is not in X−and
has its parent in X−. There are two important issues caused by the fact that the urgency is given
by the maturity times instead of deadlines. The ﬁrst issue is that the maturity time can decrease
due to new request arrivals — to handle this, we argue that if the new requests had large waiting
costs, they would guarantee the existence of a pseudo-service of node v in the given time interval
and thus the algorithm’s service of v would be v-local. The second issue is that the maturity time
is not given by a single descendant but by adding the node contributions from the whole tree —
thus instead of searching for w on a single path, we need a more subtle, global argument to identify
such w.
Lemma 9. Assume that the service of v at time t < H is depth-timely and not v-local. Let i =
depth(v), and let (X−,t−) be the previous service of Algorithm OnlTree including v, that is t−=
Prevt(v). Then there exists j > i such that all the nodes in the set U(v,j,t−) from the construction
of X−in the algorithm are depth-timely and ℓ(U(v,j,t−)) ≥ℓv.
Proof.
Let t∗= M t(v) and let C′ = Ct(v) be the critical subtree of v at time t. Since the service
of v at time t is i-timely, we have t∗< Nextt(v,i). (It may be the case that t∗< t, but that does
not hamper our proof in any way.) Also, since the service of v at time t is not v-local, it is not the
ﬁrst service of v, thus t−and X−are deﬁned.
Let P −be the set of requests pending right after time t−(including those with arrival time t−
but not those served at time t−), and let P be the set of requests with arrival time in the interval
(t−,t]. The key observation is that the total waiting cost of all the requests in C′ that arrived
after t−satisﬁes
ωP(C′,t∗) < ℓv .
(9)
To see this, simply note that ωP(C′,t∗) ≥ℓv would imply that ωR(>t−)(Tv,t∗) ≥ℓv. This in turn
would imply the existence of a pseudo-service of v in the interval (t−,t∗] ⊆(Prevt(v),Nextt(v,i)],

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
r
q
w
C'
X-
v
B
C'w
Figure 4
Illustration of the proof of Lemma 9.
which would contradict the assumption that the service of v at time t is not v-local. (Note that if
t∗≤t−then ωP(C′,t∗) = 0 as t∗is before the arrival time of any request in P and the inequality
holds trivially.)
Since P −∪P contains all the requests pending at time t, the choice of t∗and C′ implies that
ωP −∪P(C′,t∗) = ℓ(C′).
(10)
P −does not contain any requests in C′ ∩X−, as those were served at time t−; therefore
ωP −(C′,t∗) = ωP −(C′ −X′,t∗). Letting B be the set of all nodes w ∈C′ −X−for which parent(w) ∈
X−, we have C′ −X′ = S
w∈B C′
w, where all sets C′
w, for w ∈B, are disjoint. (See Figure 4.) Also,
v ∈C′ ∩X−. Combining these observations, and using inequalities (9) and (10), we get
P
w∈B ωP −(C′
w,t∗) = ωP −(S
w∈B C′
w,t∗)
= ωP −(C′ −X′,t∗)
= ωP −(C′,t∗)
= ωP −∪P(C′,t∗) −ωP(C′,t∗)
> ℓ(C′) −ℓv
≥ℓ(C′) −ℓ(C′ ∩X−)
= ℓ(C′ −X−) = P
w∈B ℓ(C′
w).
It follows that there exists w ∈B such that
ωP −(C′
w,t∗) > ℓ(C′
w).
(11)
Equation (11) implies that M t−(w) ≤t∗, using also the fact that w was not served at t−, so P −
contains exactly all the requests used to deﬁne M t−(w). Let j = depth(w); note that j > i as w is

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
a descendant of v. Since w ̸∈X−but parent(w) ∈X−, and M t−(w) is ﬁnite, the deﬁnition of the
extra sets for X−implies that U(v,j,t−) has suﬃcient weight and all its nodes are more urgent
than w. More precisely, ℓ(U(v,j,t−)) ≥ℓv and any z ∈U(v,j,t−) has M t−(z) ≤M t−(w) ≤t∗.
It remains to show that every z ∈U(v,j,t−) is depth-timely at time t−. Indeed, since depth(z) =
j ≥i + 1 and any service containing z contains also v, we get
Nextt−(z,j) ≥Nextt−(z,i + 1) ≥Nextt−(v,i + 1) = Nextt(v,i) > t∗≥M t−(z),
where the last step uses the inequality t∗≥M t−(z) derived in the previous paragraph. Thus z is
depth-timely, as needed. The proof of the lemma is now complete.
■
Competitive analysis. We are now ready to complete our competitive analysis of MLAP.
Theorem 3. There exists an O(D42D)-competitive algorithm for MLAP on trees of depth D.
Proof.
We will show that Algorithm OnlTree’s competitive ratio for α-decreasing trees of
depth D ≥3 is at most 4D2cα, where cα = (2+1/α)D−1. By applying Theorem 1, this implies that
there is an online algorithm for arbitrary trees with ratio at most 4D3α(2+1/α)D−1. For α = D/2,
this ratio is bounded by 3D42D, implying the theorem (together with the fact that for D = 1,2,
constant-competitive algorithms are known).
Next, ﬁx an α-decreasing tree T and focus our attention on Algorithm OnlTree’s schedule S
and on the adversary pseudo-schedule S. Deﬁne the net charge from a service (X,t) in S to be
the diﬀerence between the outgoing and incoming charge of (X,t). Our goal is to show that each
pseudo-service in S is charged only a constant number of times and that the net charge from each
service (X,t) in S is at least ℓ(X)/cα.
Consider ﬁrst an adversary pseudo-service of v at a time τ. We argue that it is charged at most
(D +3)ℓv: If this is the ﬁrst pseudo-service of v, it may be charged once from both the ﬁrst service
of v by rule (C1) and from the last service of v at time t = H by rule (C4). In addition, by rule
(C1) it may be charged D times from the last D services of v before τ, and once from the ﬁrst
service at or after τ. All the charges are equal to ℓv.
Now consider a service (X,t) of Algorithm OnlTree. For t = H, all the nodes of X have an
outgoing charge by rule (C4) and there is no incoming charge. Thus the net charge from X is
ℓ(X) ≥ℓ(X)/cα.
For t < H, let X = C ∪E, where C is the critical subtree and E is the extra set. From Lemma 8,
all nodes in C are depth-timely, so they generate outgoing charge of at least ℓ(C) from X.
We now consider the remaining balance of charges associated with X, namely the outgoing
charges from E minus the total incoming charge to X. We claim that this quantity is non-negative.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Recall that E is a disjoint union of sets of the form U(w,k,t) and E is disjoint from C. If a future
service of a node v generates the charge of ℓv to X by rule (C2), it must be serviced at time
Nextt(v,1), so such a charge is unique for each v. Furthermore, Lemma 9 implies that one of the
extra sets U(v,j,t), for j > i, has ℓ(U(v,j,t)) ≥ℓv and consists of depth-timely nodes only. Thus
these nodes have outgoing charges adding up to at least ℓv; these charges go either to the adversary’s
pseudo-services or the algorithm’s services before time t. We have shown that the net charge from
each extra set U(w,k,t) is non-negative; therefore, the net charge from E is non-negative as well.
We conclude that the net charge from X is at least ℓ(C). Applying Lemma 6, we obtain that this
net charge is at least ℓ(X)/cα.
Summing over all the services (X,t) in S, we get a bound for the service cost of schedule S:
scost(S) ≤(D + 3)cα · scost(S). Applying Lemmata 5 and 7, we get
cost(S) ≤2 · scost(S)
≤2(D + 3)cα · scost(S)
≤2D(D + 3)cα · cost(S∗) ≤4D2cα · cost(S∗).
We have thus shown that Algorithm OnlTree’s competitive ratio for α-decreasing trees is at most
4D2cα, which, as explained earlier, is suﬃcient to complete the proof.
■
6. General Waiting Costs
Our model of MLAP assumes full continuity, namely that the time is continuous and that the
waiting costs are continuous functions of time, while in some earlier literature authors use the
discrete model. Thus, we still need to show that our algorithms can be applied in the discrete
model without increasing their competitive ratios. We also consider the model where some request
may remain unserved. We explain how our results can be extended to these models as well. We
will also show that our results can be extended to functions that are left-continuous, and that
MLAP-D can be represented as a special case of MLAP with left-continuous functions. While those
reductions seem intuitive, they do involve some pesky technical challenges, and they have not been
yet formally treated in the literature.
Extension to the discrete model. In the discrete model (see, e.g., (Buchbinder et al. 2008)),
requests arrive and services may happen only at integral points t = 1,...,H, where H is the
time horizon. The waiting cost functions ωρ are also speciﬁed only at integral points. (The model
in (Buchbinder et al. 2008) also allows waiting costs to be non-zero at the release time. However
we can assume that ωρ(aρ) = 0, since increasing the waiting cost function uniformly by an additive
constant can only decrease the competitive ratio.) We now show how to reduce the discrete time
model to the model where time and waiting costs are continuous.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
Theorem 4. Suppose that A is a c-competitive online algorithm for the model with continuous
time and continuous waiting cost functions. Then, there exists a c-competitive algorithm B for the
discrete time model.
Proof.
Algorithm B is constructed as follows. Let J = ⟨T ,R⟩be an instance given to B.
We extend each waiting cost function ωρ to non-integral times as follows: for each integral t =
aρ,...,H −1 we deﬁne ωρ(τ) for τ ∈(t,t+1) so that it continuously increases from ωρ(t) to ωρ(t+1)
(e.g., by linear interpolation); ωρ(τ) = 0 for all τ < aρ; and ωρ(τ) = ωρ(H) for all τ > H.
Algorithm B presents the instance J = ⟨T ,R⟩with these continuous waiting cost functions to A.
At each integral time t = 1,...,H −1, B simulates A on the whole interval [t,t + 1). If A makes
one or more services, B makes a single service at time t which is their union. This is possible, since
no request arrives in (t,t + 1). At time H, algorithm B issues the same service as A.
Overall, B produces a feasible schedule in the discrete time model. The cost of B does not exceed
the cost of A. On the other hand, any feasible (oﬄine) schedule S in the discrete time model is also
a feasible schedule in the continuous time model with the same cost. Thus B is c-competitive.
■
Unserved requests with bounded waiting costs. In our deﬁnition of MLAP we require that all
requests are eventually served. However, if the waiting cost of a request ρ is bounded, it is natural
to allow a possibility that ρ is not served in a schedule S; in that case ρ’s contribution to the waiting
cost of S is wcost(ρ,S) = limt→+∞ωρ(t). In this variant, there is no time horizon in the instance,
and the total cost of S is deﬁned as before, as the sum of its service and waiting costs.
Our algorithm OnlTree works in this model as well, with the competitive ratio increased at
most by one. The only modiﬁcation of the algorithm is that there is no ﬁnal service at the time
horizon. Instead we let the time proceed to inﬁnity, issuing services at the maturity times of q (the
quasi-root of T ).
Let S∗be the optimal schedule. Using the charging scheme described earlier in the paper, all
costs of OnlTree other than the waiting cost of unserved requests will be charged to S∗. To extend
the charging scheme to unserved requests, for each node v we consider the service times of v in S∗
and in OnlTree, and we deﬁne v to be one of three types:
Type 1: v is not serviced neither by S∗nor by OnlTree,
Type 2: the last service of v is by OnlTree (possibly tied with S∗),
Type 3: the last service of v is by S∗.
Nodes of Type 1 pay the same waiting cost in S∗and OnlTree’s schedule, so their contributions
can only decrease the competitive ratio and we can ignore them in the cost calculations. The same
argument applies to nodes of Type 2, because there OnlTree’s cost of unserved requests is not
larger than that of S∗. It thus remains to show how we can charge the waiting cost of nodes v of

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Type 3 to S∗. Let Y be the subtree of T rooted at r induced by nodes of Type 3 and let Q be the set
of requests in Y that are never served. OnlTree’s schedule satisﬁes limτ→∞wcostQ(τ) ≤ℓ(Y ), for
otherwise Y would become eventually mature and the requests in Q would be served by OnlTree.
On the other hand, ℓ(Y ) ≤scost(S∗), because all nodes in Y are served in S∗at least once, by the
deﬁnition of Type 3 nodes. So we can charge limτ→∞wcostQ(τ) to S∗, increasing the competitive
ratio by at most 1.
Extension to left-continuous waiting costs. We now argue that we can modify our algorithms to
handle left-continuous waiting cost functions, i.e., functions that satisfy limτ↗t ωρ(τ) = ωρ(t) for
each time t ≥0. Left-continuity enables an online algorithm to serve a request at the last time
when its waiting cost is at or below some given threshold.
Some form of left-continuity is also necessary for constant competitiveness. To see this, think
of a simple example of a tree of depth 1 and with ℓq = 1, and a sequence of requests in q with
release times approaching 1, and waiting cost functions deﬁned by ωρ(1) = K ≫1 and ωρ(t) = 0
for t < 1. If an online algorithm serves one such request before time 1, the adversary immediately
releases another. The sequence stops either after K requests or after the algorithm serves some
request at or after time 1, whichever comes ﬁrst. The optimal cost is at most ℓq = 1, while the
online algorithm pays at least K.
The basic (but not quite correct) idea of our argument for left-continuous waiting cost functions
is this: For any time point h where some waiting cost function has a discontinuity, we replace
point h by a “gap interval” [h,h + ϵ], for some ϵ > 0. The release times after time h and the
values of all waiting cost functions after h are shifted to the right by ϵ. In the interval [h,h + ϵ],
for each request ρ, its waiting cost function is ﬁlled in by any non-decreasing continuous curve
with value ν−at h and ν+ at h + ϵ, for ν−= ωρ(h) and ν+ = limτ↘h ωρ(τ). Thus the waiting cost
functions that are continuous at h are simply “stretched” in this gap interval, where their values
remain constant. This will convert the original instance J into an instance J ′ with continuous
waiting cost functions; then we can apply a reduction similar to the one for the discrete model,
with the behavior of an algorithm A on J ′ inside [h,h + ϵ] mimicked by the algorithm B on J
while staying at time h.
The above construction, however, has a ﬂaw: as B is online, for each newly arrived request ρ it
would need to know the future requests in order to correctly modify ρ’s waiting cost function (which
needs to be fully revealed at the arrival time). Thus, inevitably, B will need to be able to modify
waiting cost functions of earlier requests, but the current state of A may depend on these functions.
Such changes could make the computation of A meaningless. To avoid this problem, we will focus
only on algorithms A for continuous cost functions that we call stretch-invariant. Roughly, those
are algorithms whose computation is not aﬀected by the stretching operation described above.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
To formalize this, let I = {[hi,hi + εi] | i = 1,...,k} be a ﬁnite set of gap intervals, where all
times hi are distinct. (For now we can allow the εi’s to be any positive reals; their purpose will be
explained later.) Let shift(t,I) = t+P
i:hi<t εi denote the time t shifted right by inserting intervals I
on the time axis. We extend this operation to requests in a natural way: for any request ρ with
a continuous waiting cost function, shift(ρ,I) denotes the request modiﬁed by inserting I on the
time axis and ﬁlling in the values of ωρ in the inserted intervals by constant functions, as described
earlier. For a set of requests P ⊆R, the stretched set of requests shift(P,I) is the set consisting of
requests shift(ρ,I), for all ρ ∈P.
Consider an online algorithm A for MLAP with continuous waiting cost functions. We say that
A is stretch-invariant if for every instance J = ⟨T ,R⟩and any set of gap intervals I, the schedule
produced by A for the instance ⟨T ,shift(R,I)⟩is obtained from the schedule produced by A for J
by shifting it according to I, namely every service (X,t) is replaced by service (X,shift(t,I)).
Most natural algorithms for MLAP are stretch-invariant. In case of OnlTree, observe that its
behavior depends only on the maturity times MP(v) where P is the set of pending requests and
Mshift(P,I)(v) = shift(MP(v),I); in particular stretching does not change the order of the maturity
times. Using induction on the current time t, we observe OnlTree creates a service (X,t) in its
schedule for the request set R if and only if OnlTree creates a service (X,shift(t,I)) in its schedule
for the request set shift(R,I).
Theorem 5. Suppose that A is a c-competitive online algorithm for continuous waiting cost func-
tions that is stretch-invariant. Then, there exists a c-competitive algorithm B for left-continuous
waiting costs.
Proof.
Let J = ⟨T ,R⟩be an instance given to B. Algorithm B maintains the set of gap inter-
vals I, and a set of requests P presented to A; both sets are initially empty. Algorithm B at time t
simulates the computation of A at time shift(t,I).
If a new request ρ ∈R is released at time t = aρ, algorithm B obtains ρ′ from shift(ρ,I) by
replacing the discontinuities of ωρ by new gap intervals Iρ on which ωρ′ is deﬁned so that it
continuously increases. (If a gap interval already exists in I at the given point, it is used instead of
creating a new one, to maintain the starting points distinct.) We set aρ′ = shift(t,I), which is the
current time in A. We update I to I∪Iρ; this does not change the current time in A as all new gap
intervals start at or after t. We stretch the set of requests P by Iρ; this does not change the past
output of A, because A is stretch-invariant. (Note that the state of A at time t may change, but
this does not matter for the simulation.) Finally, we add the new request ρ′ to P.
If the current time t in B is at a start point of a gap interval, i.e., t = hi, algorithm B simulates
the computation of A on the whole shifted gap interval ⟨shift(hi,I),εi⟩. If A makes one or more
services in ⟨shift(hi,I),εi⟩, B makes a single service at time t which is their union.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
32
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
The cost of B for requests R does not exceed the cost of A for requests P, since the service
cost can only be smaller for B due to the merging of A’s services in gap intervals, and the waiting
cost of a request in B’s schedule is at most its waiting cost in A’s schedule by left-continuity. Any
adversary schedule S for R induces a schedule S′ for P with the same cost. Since A’s cost is at
most c · cost(S′), we obtain that B’s cost is at most c · cost(S); hence B is c-competitive.
In the discussion above we assumed that the instance has a ﬁnite number of discontinuities.
Arbitrary left-continuous waiting cost functions may have inﬁnitely many discontinuity points, but
the set of these points must be countable. The construction described above extends to arbitrary
left-continuous cost functions, as long as we choose the εi values so that their sum is ﬁnite.
■
Reduction of MLAP-D to MLAP. We now argue that MLAP-D can be expressed as a variant of
MLAP with left-continuous waiting cost functions. The idea is simple: a request ρ with deadline
dρ can be assigned a waiting cost function ωρ(t) that is 0 for times t ∈[0,dρ] and +∞for t > dρ –
except that we cannot really use +∞, so we need to replace it by some suﬃciently large number. If
σρ = v, we let ωρ(t) = ℓ∗
v, where ℓ∗
v is the sum of all weights on the path from v to r (the “distance”
from v to r). This will convert an instance J of MLAP-D into an instance J ′ of MLAP with
left-continuous waiting cost functions.
We claim that, without loss of generality, any online algorithm A for J ′ serves any request ρ
before or at time dρ. Otherwise, A would have to pay waiting cost of ℓ∗
v for ρ (where v = σρ), so
we can modify A to serve ρ at time dρ instead, without increasing its cost. We can then treat A as
an algorithm for J . A will meet all deadlines in J and its cost on J will be the same as its cost
on J ′, which means that its competitive ratio will also remain the same.
Note that algorithm OnlTree (or rather its extension to the left-continuous waiting costs, as
described above) does not need this modiﬁcation, as it already guarantees that when the waiting
cost of a request at v reaches ℓ∗
v, all the nodes on the path from v to r are mature and thus the
whole path is served.
Acknowledgments
Research partially supported by NSF grants CCF-1536026, CCF-1217314 and OISE-1157129, Polish
National Science Centre grants 2016/21/D/ST6/02402, 2016/22/E/ST6/00499 and 2015/18/E/ST6/00456,
project 17-09142S of GA ˇCR, GAUK project 634217, FMJH PGMO, ANR OATA, and RFSI.
References
Aggarwal A, Park JK (1993) Improved algorithms for economic lot sizing problems. Operations Research
41:549–571.
Albers S, Bals H (2005) Dynamic TCP acknowledgment: Penalizing long delays. SIAM Journal on Discrete
Mathematics 19(4):938–951.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
33
Arkin E, Joneja D, Roundy R (1989) Computational complexity of uncapacitated multi-echelon production
planning problems. Operations Research Letters 8(2):61–66.
Azar Y, Epstein A, Je˙z L, Vardi A (2016) Make-to-Order Integrated Scheduling and Distribution. Proc. 24th
ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 140–154.
Azar Y, Ganesh A, Ge R, Panigrahi D (2017) Online service with delay. Proc. 49th ACM Symp. on Theory
of Computing (STOC), 551–563.
Badrinath BR, Sudame P (2000) Gathercast: the design and implementation of a programmable aggregation
mechanism for the internet. Proc. 9thInternational Conference on Computer Communications and
Networks (ICCCN), 206–213.
Bartal Y (1996) Probabilistic approximations of metric spaces and its algorithmic applications. Proc. 37th
IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 184–193.
Becchetti L, Marchetti-Spaccamela A, Vitaletti A, Korteweg P, Skutella M, Stougie L (2009) Latency-
constrained aggregation in sensor networks. ACM Transactions on Algorithms 6(1):13:1–13:20.
Bienkowski M, B¨ohm M, Byrka J, Chrobak M, D¨urr C, Folwarczn´y L, Je˙z L, Sgall J, Thang NK, Vesel´y P
(2016) Online algorithms for multi-level aggregation. Proc. 24th European Symp. on Algorithms (ESA),
12:1–12:17.
Bienkowski M, Byrka J, Chrobak M, Dobbs NB, Nowicki T, Sviridenko M, Swirszcz G, Young NE (2015)
Approximation algorithms for the joint replenishment problem with deadlines. Journal of Scheduling
18(6):545–560.
Bienkowski M, Byrka J, Chrobak M, Je˙z L, Nogneng D, Sgall J (2014) Better approximation bounds for the
joint replenishment problem. Proc. 25th ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 42–54.
Bienkowski M, Byrka J, Chrobak M, Je˙z L, Sgall J, Stachowiak G (2013) Online control message aggregation
in chain networks. Proc. 13th Int. Workshop on Algorithms and Data Structures (WADS), 133–145.
Borodin A, El-Yaniv R (1998) Online Computation and Competitive Analysis (Cambridge University Press).
Bortnikov E, Cohen R (1998) Schemes for scheduling of control messages by hierarchical protocols. Proc.
17th IEEE Int. Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), 865–872.
Brito C, Koutsoupias E, Vaya S (2012) Competitive analysis of organization networks or multicast acknowl-
edgement: How much to wait? Algorithmica 64(4):584–605.
Buchbinder N, Feldman M, Naor JS, Talmon O (2017) O(depth)-competitive algorithm for online multi-level
aggregation. Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA’17), 1235–1244.
Buchbinder N, Kimbrel T, Levi R, Makarychev K, Sviridenko M (2008) Online make-to-order joint replenish-
ment model: Primal-dual competitive algorithms. Proc. 19th ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA), 952–961.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
34
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Buchbinder N, Naor JS (2009) The design of competitive online algorithms via a primal-dual approach.
Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science 3(2–3):93–263.
Crowston WB, Wagner MH (1973) Dynamic lot size models for multi-stage assembly systems. Management
Science 20(1):14–21.
Dooly DR, Goldman SA, Scott SD (2001) On-line analysis of the TCP acknowledgment delay problem.
Journal of the ACM 48(2):243–273.
Frederiksen JS, Larsen KS, Noga J, Uthaisombut P (2003) Dynamic TCP acknowledgment in the LogP
model. Journal of Algorithms 48(2):407–428.
Hu F, Cao X, May C (2005) Optimized scheduling for data aggregation in wireless sensor networks. Int.
Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing (ITCC), volume 2, 557–561.
Karlin AR, Kenyon C, Randall D (2003) Dynamic TCP acknowledgement and other stories about e/(e - 1).
Algorithmica 36(3):209–224.
Khanna S, Naor J, Raz D (2002) Control message aggregation in group communication protocols. Proc. 29th
Int. Colloq. on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 135–146.
Kimms A (1997) Multi-Level Lot Sizing and Scheduling: Methods for Capacitated, Dynamic, and Determin-
istic Models (Springer-Verlag).
Lambert DM, Cooper MC (2000) Issues in supply chain management. Industrial Marketing Management
29(1):65–83.
Levi R, Roundy R, Shmoys DB (2005) A constant approximation algorithm for the one-warehouse multi-
retailer problem. Proc. 16th ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 365–374.
Levi R, Roundy R, Shmoys DB (2006) Primal-dual algorithms for deterministic inventory problems. Math-
ematics of Operations Research 31(2):267–284.
Levi R, Roundy R, Shmoys DB, Sviridenko M (2008) A constant approximation algorithm for the one-
warehouse multiretailer problem. Management Science 54(4):763–776.
Levi R, Sviridenko M (2006) Improved approximation algorithm for the one-warehouse multi-retailer
problem. Proc. 9th Int. Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization
(APPROX), 188–199.
Nonner T, Souza A (2009) Approximating the joint replenishment problem with deadlines. Discrete Mathe-
matics, Algorithms and Applications 1(2):153–174.
Papadimitriou C (1996) Computational aspects of organization theory. Proc. 4th European Symp. on Algo-
rithms (ESA), 559–564.
Pedrosa LLC (2013) Private communication.
Seiden SS (2000) A guessing game and randomized online algorithms. Proc. 32nd ACM Symp. on Theory of
Computing (STOC), 592–601.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
35
Sgall J (1998) On-line scheduling. Online Algorithms: The State of the Art, 196–231 (Springer).
Vaya S (2012) Brief announcement: Delay or deliver dilemma in organization networks. Proc. 31st ACM
Symp. on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), 339–340.
Wagner H, Whitin T (1958) Dynamic version of the economic lot size model. Management Science 5:89–96.
Yuan W, Krishnamurthy SV, Tripathi SK (2003) Synchronization of multiple levels of data fusion in wireless
sensor networks. Proc. Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), 221–225.
Marcin Bienkowski obtained a PhD degree from the University of Paderborn, Germany, where he
worked in the Algorithms and the Complexity Theory group. He is currently an associate professor
and the head of the Combinatorial Optimization Group at the Computer Science Institute of the
University of Wroclaw, Poland. His research interests are focused on online and approximation
algorithms, especially for network problems.
Martin B¨ohm is a postdoc researcher at CSLog, Universit¨at Bremen, Germany. He obtained
his PhD at Charles University, Prague in 2018. His research focuses approximation and online
algorithms.
Jaroslaw Byrka is an associate professor in CS Institute, University of Wroclaw, where he is
a faculty since 2010. Since 2016 he is a vice dean of Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science. He obtained his PhD from TU Eindhoven in 2008. His research focuses on algorithmic
techniques in combinatorial optimization.
Marek Chrobak is a professor of computer science at University of California, Riverside, where
he has been faculty member since 1987. He received his PhD degree from Warsaw University in
1985. His research interests are in algorithms and theoretical computer science, with main focus
on online competitive algorithms and approximation algorithms for combinatorial optimization
problems.
Christoph D¨urr graduated in 1997 from the University Paris-South, in the area of quantum
computing. He is currently a senior researcher at the CNRS, aﬃliated to Sorbonne University, in
the Operation Research group of the lab LIP6. His research focuses on scheduling, more generally
on online algorithms and combinatorial optimization.
Luk´aˇs Folwarczn´y is a PhD student at Institute of Mathematics, Czech Academy of Sciences, and
Charles University, Prague. His research interests are in complexity theory and online algorithms.
 Lukasz Je˙z is an assistant professor in CS Institute, University of Wroclaw since 2016. He received
his PhD from University of Wroclaw in 2011. His research focuses on online algorithms.
Jiˇr´ı Sgall is a professor of computer science and a vice-dean at Faculty of Mathematics and
Physics, Charles University, Prague. He received his PhD from Carnegie Mellon University in 1994.

Bienkowski et al.: Online Algorithms for Multi-Level Aggregation
36
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
His current research focuses on online and approximation algorithms for scheduling and related
problems.
Nguyen Kim Thang obtained his PhD in 2009 from Ecole Polytechnique France. He is cur-
rently associate professor in Univ Evry, University Paris-Saclay. His main research is the design
and analysis of algorithms, especially the interaction between algorithms, game theory and online
optimization.
Pavel Vesel´y is a research fellow at University of Warwick. He obtained his PhD at Charles
University, Prague in 2018. His research interests are in algorithms, namely in online competitive
algorithms and streaming algorithms.