TITLE: The Analytics of Bed Shortages: Coherent Metric, Prediction, and Optimization
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2231
---

EUR Research Information Portal
The Analytics of Bed Shortages
Published in:
Operations Research
Publication status and date:
Published: 01/01/2023
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1287/opre.2021.2231
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Xie, J., Loke, G. G., Sim, M., & Lam, S. W. (2023). The Analytics of Bed Shortages: Coherent Metric, Prediction, and
Optimization. Operations Research, 71(1), 23-46. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2231
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

This article was downloaded by: [145.5.176.14] On: 02 May 2024, At: 02:44
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Operations Research
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
The Analytics of Bed Shortages: Coherent Metric,
Prediction, and Optimization
Jingui Xie, Gar Goei Loke, Melvyn Sim, Shao Wei Lam
To cite this article:
Jingui Xie, Gar Goei Loke, Melvyn Sim, Shao Wei Lam (2023) The Analytics of Bed Shortages: Coherent Metric, Prediction, and
Optimization. Operations Research 71(1):23-46. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2231
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-Terms-and-
Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2022, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations research (O.R.)
and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning opportunities for individual
professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use O.R. and analytics tools and methods to
transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

Methods
The Analytics of Bed Shortages: Coherent Metric, Prediction,
and Optimization
Jingui Xie,a Gar Goei Loke,b Melvyn Sim,c Shao Wei Lamd
aSchool of Management, Technical University of Munich, 74076 Heilbronn, Germany; bRotterdam School of Management, Erasmus
Universiteit Rotterdam, 3062 PA Rotterdam, Netherlands; cNUS Business School, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119245,
Singapore; dHealth Services Research Centre, Singapore Health Services, Singapore 169856, Singapore
Contact: jingui.xie@tum.de,
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4100-2339 (JX); loke@rsm.nl,
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1007-4575 (GGL);
dscsimm@nus.edu.sg,
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9798-2482 (MS); lam.shao.wei@singhealth.com.sg,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0898-5858 (SWL)
Received: March 7, 2019
Revised: January 4, 2021
Accepted: October 14, 2021
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
January 31, 2022
Area of Review: Optimization
https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2231
Copyright: © 2022 INFORMS
Abstract: Bed shortages in hospitals usually have a negative impact on patient satisfaction
and medical outcomes. In practice, healthcare managers often use bed occupancy rates
(BORs) as a metric to understand bed utilization, which is insufﬁcient in capturing the risk
of bed shortages. We propose the bed shortage index (BSI) to capture more facets of bed
shortage risk than traditional metrics such as the occupancy rate, the probability of short-
ages, and expected shortages. The BSI is based on the riskiness index by Aumann and Ser-
rano, and it is calibrated to coincide with BORs when the daily arrivals in the hospital unit
are Poisson distributed. Our metric can be tractably computed and does not require addi-
tional assumptions or approximations. As such, it can be consistently used across the de-
scriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytical approaches. We also propose optimization
models to plan for bed capacity via this metric. These models can be efﬁciently solved on a
large scale via a sequence of linear optimization problems. The ﬁrst maximizes total elec-
tive throughput while managing the metric under a speciﬁed threshold. The second deter-
mines the optimal scheduling policy by lexicographically minimizing the steady-state daily
BSI for a given number of scheduled admissions. We validate these models using real data
from a hospital and test them against data-driven simulations. We apply these models to
study the real-world problem of long stayers to predict the impact of transferring them to
community hospitals as a result of an aging population.
Funding: J. Xie was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [Grant
71921001]. This project was funded by Singapore Ministry of Education [Grant MOE2016-SSRTG-
059], SPIRE.
Keywords:
analytics • bed shortages • coherent metric • riskiness index • data-driven optimization • simulation
1. Introduction
Bed shortages can compromise the ability of hospitals
to achieve desirable patient outcomes and maintain
service quality. A variety of factors may contribute to
bed shortages. In particular, it can be driven by
changes in demand for beds, such as a rise in admis-
sions and longer lengths of stay (LOS). For example,
an aging population is one such major driving factor.
In the World Health Organization’s publication of
World Health Statistics 2016, 29 countries, in total ac-
counting for at least 650 million of the global popula-
tion, now have an average life expectancy of 80 years
and older. With better healthcare systems, the average
life expectancy would only be on an upward trend.
For Singapore in particular, the average life expec-
tancy for women has risen from 66 in 1960 to 84 years
and from 62 to 79 years for men (Haseltine 2013). Cor-
respondingly, the healthcare burden is expected to in-
crease in every aspect: manpower and cost of care-
givers, and of course, the risk of bed shortages in
hospitals. Fluctuations in the patterns of demand can
also lead to bed shortages. Increasingly, with urbani-
zation, there is a higher threat of demand surges. Inci-
dences of terrorism, pandemics, and natural disasters
now have a larger potential than ever to create mass
casualty events (Challen et al. 2007).
These trends and challenges have made it ever
more important to better manage beds and mitigate
the risk of shortages. The following might constitute a
suite of bed management problems:
1. How many beds does a hospital need to serve its
immediate population?
23
OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Vol. 71, No. 1, January–February 2023, pp. 23–46
ISSN 0030-364X (print), ISSN 1526-5463 (online)
https://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/opre
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

2. How much capacity does a hospital need to deal
effectively with demand surges?
3. How should a hospital system planner demarcate
the zones for ambulances?
4. How should transfer policies between hospitals of
different specializations be ﬁxed, especially the transfer
of patients out of an acute care hospital to one specializ-
ing in long-term care?
These are challenging questions. For example, in
2010, a new 550-bed hospital was opened in Singapore.
It, however, had little impact on easing bed shortages
across the nation-state.1 Utilization is also growing: the
average LOS of patients in Singapore’s public hospitals
has crept up from 7.8 days in 2010 to 8.2 days in 2013.2
The literature holds an abundance of approaches fo-
cusing on the matter of adaptive scheduling. From the
angle of healthcare planners, however, long-term bed
capacity planning is equally important. In this paper,
we are interested in models to jointly plan for capacity
and elective scheduling; we refer to these as “steady-
state” problems. To address problems like the four
previously mentioned ones, we hope to create a
decision-making framework that is general enough for
most capacity planning and scheduling problems and
yet speciﬁc enough to model each problem context.
In the literature, queueing theory and stochastic sim-
ulations (Cochran and Roche 2008, Lamiri et al. 2008)
are popularly used. The beneﬁt of the queueing para-
digm is that it relates traditional metrics, such as the
bed occupancy rates (BORs) to the probability of short-
ages and expected delays, from which planners can de-
cide on the capacity and their responses. The queueing
approach is also especially popular in studying the in-
patient ﬂow problem (Shi et al. 2016). For example, Dai
and Shi (2019) model hospital inpatient ﬂow as a
multiclass queueing system and formulate the overﬂow
decision problem as a discrete-time Markov decision
process. They study the tradeoff between overﬂow and
congestion using approximate dynamic programming.
Nonetheless, these models may not be adequate for
addressing the adaptive bed management problem. Crit-
ically, the full complexity associated with the LOS of pa-
tients can be hard to capture. Additionally, the queueing
paradigm may depart from the actual dynamics of pa-
tient admissions. Recent empirical studies show that
when beds are fully occupied, new arrivals are instead
treated in other nonprimary wards (Shi et al. 2016, Song
et al. 2019). This is termed patient overﬂow. Helm and
Van Oyen (2014) illustrate its extent; in their data,
around 17% patients were accommodated and treated in
overﬂow wards. They subsequently apply an inﬁnite ca-
pacity offered load model, which continues to render ser-
vice to patients using “temporary” beds instead of keep-
ing the blocked patients waiting. They argue that the
offered load model may be a better representation of re-
ality than a loss model or a traditional queueing model.
In our paper, we adopt the same assumptions on patient
dynamics but compare our results with a traditional
queueing model where capacity is ﬁxed and inﬂexible.
Stochastic and robust optimization models have
also emerged to address these problems (Meng et al.
2015, Qi 2017). Gupta and Denton (2008) provide an
excellent review of appointment scheduling systems
that are used by clinics and hospitals to schedule elec-
tive surgeries. We draw particular point of note to
Helm and Van Oyen (2014). They develop linearizing
approximations to stochastic metrics capturing patient
blocking and incorporate them into a mixed-integer
linear optimization problem (MILP) to solve the hos-
pital admission scheduling and control problem.
At present, models in the literature are unable to
achieve a high level of complexity. To obtain tractable sol-
utions, simplifying assumptions are made, often also ac-
companied by context-speciﬁc linearizations. This is espe-
cially apparent when traditional metrics of bed shortages
are adopted, such as the probability of shortages or ex-
pected shortage. For example, Helm and Van Oyen (2014)
assume that the number of elective patients in a hospital
unit on each day is deterministic to arrive at a tractable
problem. Meng et al. (2015) avert this issue in their formu-
lation by ignoring important statistical information such
as independence. These approaches fundamentally iden-
tify a gap in the literature: tractability assumptions and
linearizations are inescapable. Hence, models that scale to
address longer-term planning issues, although accurately
capturing the risks and dynamics at the local and ward-
level, remain elusive. In addition, the need to incorporate
increasingly proliferated predictive analyses (Lynn et al.
2007, Zhou et al. 2014) into an optimization model for ca-
pacity planning is growing. We hope to build a model
that has this ﬂexibility.
To do so, we ﬁrst seek a metric that captures the risk of
bed shortages and is amenable to optimization. This met-
ric can then be used in conjunction with other traditional
metrics in practice. In the paper, we describe a coherent
bed shortage metric and characterize its representation. In
particular, we propose the bed shortage index (BSI), built
on the riskiness index of Aumann and Serrano (2008).
The BSI, which can be considered as a risk-adjusted form
of the BOR, is a functional that maps the distribution of
bed shortages to a number between zero and one, with
zero equating to no risk of bed shortages and one corre-
sponding to high risks associated with overloading. We
show that if all arrivals are Poisson, the BSI coincides
with the BOR. If there is greater uncertainty, such as in
the arrival rates, then the BSI would capture the risk and
hence be larger than the BOR. Conversely, if all arrivals
are certain and scheduled, then the BSI is smaller than the
BOR, indicating lower risk of shortages.
The BSI possesses the following advantages:
1. It is easily interpreted by healthcare practitioners
and administrators. The BSI of a hospital unit is the
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
24
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

equivalent level of bed shortage risk experienced by a
referenced unit that is serving only Poisson arrivals,
with its BOR being the same as BSI (Theorem 2).
2. It has an exact closed-form reformulation (Theorem
4), thus circumventing the need for context-speciﬁc ap-
proximations, and/or tractability assumptions. It thus
can be ﬂexibly applied to different problem contexts,
while preserving its ﬁdelity to the actual dynamics of
patient ﬂows.
3. It captures higher-order statistical information
compared with other traditional metrics and hence is a
sharper articulation of the risks of bed shortages.
4. It can be decomposed at the level of patient seg-
mentations and hence is a valid tool for strategic-level
future capacity planning that incorporates predictive
analyses (Appendix C).
5. It relates to the traditional metrics of probability of
shortages and expected shortages (Proposition 2).
The contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows. First, our paper considers a general problem
of capacity planning and resource allocation in hospi-
tals. This departs from the usual approach in the liter-
ature, which is concerned largely with the problem of
adaptive bed management in the short term. In this
vein, our paper seeks not to solve a particular instance
of the bed management problem but to provide a
framework to a whole suite of them, ranging from ca-
pacity planning at the ward level, to contingency
planning for demand surges, to elective scheduling,
and to tandem planning between acute care and com-
munity hospitals. Indeed, we describe technically or
numerically how our model can be applied to all these
problems to illustrate the sheer generalizing quality of
our model. As such, the proposed approach needs to
be ﬂexible enough to model different contexts and yet
accurately model the inherent dynamics in the problem.
In this regard, we cannot understate the importance of
Theorem 4. The fact that exact reformulations of the
optimization problem are recovered means that our
framework does not need to concern itself with problem-
speciﬁc linearizations or approximations. To the limits of
our knowledge, we are unable to ﬁnd another model in
the literature that is as general or ﬂexible.
Second, to the best of our knowledge, our model is
the ﬁrst model that attempts to harmonize different
approaches of analytics, by drawing the connection
between the wealth of analyses generated at the pre-
dictive level and strategic-level decision making. We
believe this to be an increasingly important paradigm
in the age of analytics. Decisions on capacity planning
must take into consideration a variety of factors, in
particular, an accurate representation of the risk, an
understanding of how this risk shifts under changing
circumstances, and a means of synthesizing these
analyses to optimize strategically capacity-planning
decisions. This cannot be reasonably achieved with
present day bed management models. Our model can
handle this optimization easily, precisely because of
the ﬂexibility accorded by the result of Theorem 4.
1.1. Notation
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all variables are known
constants. Random or uncertain variables are accented
with the tilde, for example, ˜z ~ P. We use the conven-
tion, sup∅ −∞and inf∅ ∞, where ∅is the empty
set. We deﬁne x+¢max{0,x}. We say that a functional
ρ : Z →R mapping out of a set of random variables Z
deﬁned on probability space (Ω,Σ,P) is lower semicon-
tinuous if and only if the set {˜z | ρ(˜z) ≤a} is closed for
all a ∈R.
2. Coherent Metrics for Evaluating
Bed Shortages
Often, healthcare practitioners study shortages via the
proxy of BOR. This is deﬁned as the ratio of occupied
beds against the total number of beds in service. For
many years, the BOR has served practitioners as the
primary measure guiding bed capacity decisions, and
the common wisdom is to keep the BOR under 85%
(Green 2002). In Singapore, for example, BORs have
been ﬂuctuating above 85% for most public hospitals.
Researchers have also related BOR to various patient
outcomes. High BOR can lead to high risk of bed
shortages, which has been shown to result in pro-
longed LOS in emergency departments (ED) (Schull
et al. 2001, Forster et al. 2003) and increased risk of
hospital-acquired infections (Clements et al. 2008,
Kaier et al. 2012). The association between mortality
rates and high BOR has also been reported in recent
studies (Sprivulis et al. 2006, Madsen et al. 2014). A
high BOR has also been shown to have an impact on
providers’ satisfaction and morale (Virtanen et al.
2008). As a high BOR reduces the resilience of hospi-
tals in responding to uncertainties, balancing between
emergency and elective inpatient admissions is an
active problem for healthcare administrators (Meng
et al. 2015). In response, various strategies have been
proposed. On the demand side, scheduling elective
admissions while taking into account the predicted
volume of emergency admissions and discharges is a
common strategy (Meng et al. 2015, Shi et al. 2016),
whereas on the supply side, dynamic bed overﬂow
policies have also been considered (Teow et al. 2012,
Dai and Shi 2019).
Although the BOR may be easily understood by
practitioners and tractably computed, it is not an ade-
quate metric for articulating the risk of bed shortages
(see discussions in Green 2002). We also illustrate later
that using the BOR as a metric for optimization can
lead to suboptimal outcomes.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
25
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Often the BOR is also used in conjunction with
other metrics when planning for bed utilization, in-
cluding the probability of shortages (or delays), the
expected shortages (or overﬂows as in Kao and Tung
1981), and expected delays. Indirect measures, such as
the costs of shortages and holding (Esogbue and
Singh 1976), or one that incorporates economic efﬁ-
ciency explicitly (such as in Kuntz et al. 2007, where
the metric was illustrated within a hospital capacity
planning cycle), have been proposed.
Regardless, these metrics have some drawbacks.
Most critically, these measures may not be readily ame-
nable for optimization under uncertainty, for example,
the probability of shortages and expected shortages. In-
stead, further assumptions or approximations would
have to adopted (e.g., linearizing the Erlang loss for-
mula for expected shortage, as in Helm and Van Oyen
2014). Some of these assumptions, however, as dis-
cussed in the Introduction, may not be most natural in
capturing the dynamics of patient ﬂows.
It can also be difﬁcult to capture higher-order statis-
tical information with these metrics. This leads many
stochastic approaches to use only known distribu-
tional characteristics. We later illustrate the subopti-
mality of making decisions based on statistics with a
lower degree of ﬁdelity.
Apart from that, some of these metrics may not be
readily observable, for example, the cost of shortage
and holding. Decision making also predicates a risk
appetite that the administrator must articulate. This is
rarely explicit in the decision support frameworks us-
ing these metrics.
In practice, these metrics are seldom used in isola-
tion to make decisions regarding the bed capacity of
wards. Nonetheless, prioritizing a metric over another
comes down to a modeling choice, which can affect
the optimal policy in ways not necessarily known at
the onset. As such, it may not necessarily be reason-
able to expect the practitioner to decide on it a priori,
and hence there may be a natural deference to adopt
whichever metric has been the set norm.
We attempt to circumvent these problems. We de-
sire a metric that captures the risks of bed shortages
by incorporating higher-order statistical information,
without compromising its computational tractability.
It needs to embody the ease of interpretation so that
health practitioners and administrators could compre-
hend and specify its parameters, like the BOR. This
enables the metric to be seamlessly integrated through
the entire value stream of analytics, from descriptive
statistics to predictive analytics and into prescriptive
optimization models. We embark on this here.
2.1. Bed Shortages
Let T be the planning time horizon and T  {1,:::,T}.
To capture variations in bed shortages over the week,
we use T  7 in this paper, with days 1 to 7 correspond-
ing to Monday through Sunday. A planner who is in-
different to daily variations may let T  1 instead. On a
particular day t ∈T , let ˜nt be the random variable that
represents the demand for beds. This demand may be
the sum of new admissions and the possibility that each
present inpatient remains warded for an additional day.
Denote by κt the ward capacity on day t.
Definition 1 (Bed Shortage Position). We deﬁne the bed
shortage position on day t as the random variable ˜zt¢
˜nt −κt. Hence, ˜z+
t ¢max{0, ˜zt} denotes bed shortages.
There is often a difference in the patterns between
emergency and elective patients, as illustrated numeri-
cally later. We make this explicit. Deﬁne ¯T  {t ∈Z | t ≤
T} as the set of times up to T, including the past. For t ∈
¯T and s ≥0, deﬁne ˜xt,s as the number of elective patients
admitted on day t and who has remained in the ward at
the end of day t + s (i.e., the patient has spent at least s +
1 days in the ward). Similarly, deﬁne ˜yt,s as the number
of emergency patients who were admitted on day t and
remained in the ward at the end of day t + s. Let ηt be the
scheduled quota of elective patients on day t.
Uncertainty is assumed in the deﬁnition of ˜xt,s and
˜yt,s: emergency patients arrive randomly and both
elective and emergency patients have a random LOS
in the ward. Hence, for each s ≥0, denote by ps the
probability that a scheduled elective patient stays in
the hospital at least until the end of the (s + 1) th day
(i.e., the survival rate for s + 1 days). Although quotas
are usually ﬁlled in advance, patients may not turn up
or be warded for at least a day. In this case, 1 −p0
gives the no-show probability. Likewise, if λt denotes
the arrival rate of emergency patients on day t, then qs
is the probability that the emergency patient stays in
the hospital at least until the end of the (s + 1) th day.
Because by deﬁnition, every admitted emergency pa-
tient would stay for at least 1 day, we have q0  1. In
this paper, we assume the following.
Assumption 1 (Model of Uncertainties). We assume the
following about the uncertainties:
(a) The stochastic arrivals of all patients and their lengths
of stay are independent.
(b) Emergency arrivals follow a nonhomogeneous Poisson
process with random rates: ˜yt,0 ~ Pois(˜λt), where the log
moment-generating function of ˜λt is Λt(θ)¢logE[exp
(˜λtθ)]. If ˜λt  λt is a constant, then Λt(θ)  λtθ.
Assumption 1 not only includes the classical as-
sumption of a nonhomogeneous Poisson process with
known but time-varying rates but also extends to a
more general assumption of a doubly stochastic Pois-
son process where the arrival rates are random (Whitt
1999, Avramidis et al. 2004). This gives a better ﬁt
with essential Poisson and non-Poisson properties of
arrivals observed in recent empirical studies (Kim and
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
26
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Whitt 2014, Kim et al. 2015). Despite the generality of
Assumption 1, the actual dynamics could potentially
be even more complicated. For example, LOS may de-
pend on the number of people in the ward or delays
experienced by patients awaiting care. As such, the
two uncertainties may be correlated. KC and Ter-
wiesch (2009, 2012) and Anderson et al. (2011) ﬁnd
that a high BOR can result in shorter patient LOS be-
cause it incentivizes early discharges to accommodate
more critical patients. Chan et al. (2016) argue that
long delays may have adverse effects on patient out-
comes and can potentially lead to a longer LOS.
In our model, we do not wish to impose further as-
sumptions on LOS. For computation simplicity, we
deﬁne L as the maximum LOS so that ps  0 and qs  0
for all s ≥L. Under Assumption 1, we can show that
the number of patients at day t, ˜nt, is a summation of
elementary random variables.
Proposition 1. Under Assumption 1, the number of pa-
tients at day t, ˜nt, is a sum of Poisson binomial random varia-
bles for elective patients and Poisson random variables with
random rates for emergency arrivals. More speciﬁcally,
˜nt 

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
(˜xτ,s + ˜yτ,s),
where ˜xτ,s ~ Bin(ητ,ps) and ˜yτ,s ~ Pois(˜λτqs).
Proof. The proof is an easy consequence of Assump-
tion 1.
w
Remark 1. By including an index i as we do later in Sec-
tion 4, Proposition 1 and subsequent results including The-
orem 4 can be easily extended to multiple classes of patients,
for example, according to disease type and severity, patient
age and gender, or clinical pathway, and multiple wards.
2.2. Coherent Bed Shortage Metrics
To adequately take action on bed shortages, the plan-
ner would be interested in quantifying the risky bed
shortage positions by providing a value that relates to
the likelihood and severity of potential shortages. One
option is to consider the BOR, deﬁned as E[˜nt=κt].
Ostensibly, as the BOR approaches 100%, the bed
shortage risk would also be greater. One of the main
reasons for the popularity of BOR as a proxy to the
risk of bed shortages is its simplicity. Indeed, to evalu-
ate the BOR, we only require the expected daily de-
mand of beds, ˜nt. However, because the BOR ignores
pertinent distributional information of ˜nt, it is not an
effective proxy. Hence, we have to construct a new
metric for this purpose.
Let (Ω,Σ,P) be some probability space, where Ω is
countable. Let Z be the set of discrete random varia-
bles on this probability space. We seek a metric β :
Z →[0,1] quantifying the bed shortage risk of a ward
on a particular day, and behaves like the BOR, that is,
β(˜z) ∈[0,1], where β(˜z)  1 represents an undesirable
situation that the ward must avoid at all costs.
More speciﬁcally, we desire the following proper-
ties of β.
Definition 2 (Coherent Bed Shortage Metric). The func-
tional β : Z →[0,1] is a coherent bed shortage metric if
and only if β is lower semicontinuous and for all bed
shortage positions ˜z, ˜z1, ˜z2 ∈Z it satisﬁes:
(a) Monotonicity: If P[˜z1 ≤˜z2]  1, then β(˜z1) ≤β(˜z2):
(b) Risk-free: If P[˜z ≤0]  1, then β(˜z)  0.
(c) Overloading: If E[˜z] > 0, then β(˜z) ≥1.
(d)Quasiconvexity: For all λ ∈[0,1], β(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)
˜z2) ≤max{β(˜z1),β(˜z2)}.
Additionally, we require β to be tractable (it must
be possible to compute β and optimize over it efﬁ-
ciently) and interpretable (it should be understand-
able to healthcare practitioners and administrators).
These properties here are designed to behave akin to
how the usual BOR, probability of shortages, or ex-
pected shortages would. The monotonicity property en-
forces that if almost surely fewer bed shortages occur,
then indeed fewer beds should be occupied; that is, the
occupancy rate is lower. The risk-free property guaran-
tees that, if bed shortages will emerge under no circum-
stance, then in effect, there is no risk to beds being
occupied. This situation may occur if the ward is under-
used. Instead, if shortages will emerge in expectation,
then the ward is completely occupied with no spare ca-
pacity; that is, the coherent bed shortage metric hits
100% consistently, which indicates overloading. Hence,
in a well-managed ward, the coherent bed shortage
metric should be between zero and one. In economics,
quasiconvexity is synonymous with convex preference.
Informally, this is the belief that “averages are better
than the extremes,” which is associated with risk aver-
sion. This is often assumed in the context of rational de-
cision making (Andreoni and Miller 2002). From the
prescriptive perspective, this property induces a
preference against extreme bed shortages, which
may impact the mortality of the patients. For in-
stance, the probability of shortages, a metric that is
indifferent to the magnitudes of shortages, would
violate quasiconvexity.
Another important consideration for such a metric
is its tractability, that is, amenability to computation
and optimization. More formally, suppose the bed
shortage position, ˜z(w) is a functional of a decision
vector, w ∈Rn. Then the separation problem associ-
ated with the level set {w | β(˜z(w)) ≤ϵ} can be deter-
mined in polynomial time. In fact, as discussed earlier,
approaches in the literature using the traditional met-
rics remain fraught with tractability challenges. Ap-
proximation techniques such as those used in robust
optimization usually require the evaluation function
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
27
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

to be biafﬁne with respect to the decision variables and
uncertain parameters, which is generally not the case
when analyzing bed shortages. In particular, the endo-
geneity between the scheduling decisions (or the arriv-
als) and the length of stay of the patient is not biafﬁne
in the sense that how the former affects the uncertainty
in bed shortages cannot be represented as a biafﬁne
function with respect to the decision variables and un-
certain parameters. This makes it difﬁcult to properly
approximate or linearize the model while maintaining
some degree of ﬁdelity to this relationship. As we
have mentioned, Meng et al. (2015) avert this issue in
their formulation by forcing afﬁne dependency, and
Helm and Van Oyen (2014) assume that the number of
elective patients in a hospital unit on each day is deter-
ministic to arrive at a tractable problem.
More broadly, let u : R →R be a nondecreasing dis-
utility function. The expected disutility metric, E[u(˜z)],
has been ubiquitous for evaluating risky positions and
portfolio optimization. If u is increasing as well, then
u−1(E[u(˜z)]) is often known as the certainty equivalence
of ˜z under the disutility u (Hershey and Schoemaker
1985, Zeldes 1989). For example, logE[exp(·)] is a cer-
tainty equivalent operator.
The following representation theorem elucidates
how we may construct a coherent bed shoratge metric
using a convex expected disutility metric, a certainty
equivalence, or a convex risk measure (F¨ollmer and
Schied 2002, Ben-Tal and Teboulle 2007). We note that
Brown and Sim (2009) also provided a representation
of a class of satisﬁcing measure via a convex risk mea-
sure without the consideration of overloading. Our result
is also broader in the sense that the properties of the
functional μ in the representation theorem can be satis-
ﬁed by a convex expected disutility metric, a certainty
equivalence with convex disutility, or a law invariant
convex risk measure (Frittelli and Gianin 2005).
Theorem 1 (Representation). The functional β : Z →
[0,1] is a coherent bed shortage metric if and only if there
exists a riskiness evaluation functional ρ : Z →[0,∞] and
an increasing calibrating function Φ : [0,∞] →[0,1] with
Φ(0)  0 and Φ(∞)  1 such that
β(˜z)  Φ(ρ(˜z))
can be represented with
ρ(˜z)  inf α > 0 | μα(˜z) ≤0


(1)
for some family of functionals μα(˜z) : Z →R, α > 0, lower
semicontinuous in ˜z and α, nonincreasing in α, and satisfy-
ing the following properties.
For all ˜z, ˜z1, ˜z2 ∈Z,
(a) If P[˜z1 ≥˜z2]  1, then μα(˜z1) ≥μα(˜z2) for all α > 0.
(b) If E[˜z] > 0, then μα(˜z) > 0 for all α > 0.
(c) For all α > 0, μα(0)  0.
(d) For all α > 0 and for all λ ∈[0,1], μα(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)
˜z2) ≤max{μα(˜z1),μα(˜z1)}.
Proof. The proof is presented in Appendix A.
w
Theorem 1 reﬂects that the characterization of a co-
herent bed shortage metric is governed by the choice
of the riskiness evaluation functional, ρ(·), and the
calibrating function Φ(·). The riskiness evaluation
functional attempts to quantify how the risks of bed
shortages would emerge and has an impact on tracta-
bility. The calibrating function maps the riskiness
evaluation to [0,1]. With an appropriate choice, it
would facilitate the interpretability of the metric in a
sense similar to the BOR.
2.3. Riskiness Index of Aumann and Serrano (2008)
If each functional μα(·) in Theorem 1 is the certainty
equivalence of the exponential disutility with risk pa-
rameter α, then the corresponding riskiness evalua-
tion functional ρ(·) becomes the well-known riskiness
index of Aumann and Serrano (2008), which we for-
mally deﬁne as follows.
Definition 3 (Riskiness Index). The riskiness index of
Aumann and Serrano (2008), ρ : Z →[0,∞], is deﬁned
as
ρ(˜z)  inf α > 0 | μα(˜z) ≤0

,
where
μα(˜z)¢αlogE[exp(˜z=α)]:
(2)
The riskiness index has an economic interpretation of
being the reciprocal of the absolute risk aversion (ARA)
of an individual with constant ARA who is indifferent
to taking that gamble (Aumann and Serrano 2008).
It also relates to the other metrics previously men-
tioned, namely P[˜z > 0] and E[˜z+]. More speciﬁcally,
the riskiness index yields bounds on these metrics. In
the context of portfolio selection, Hall et al. (2015) pro-
vide the bound of P[˜z ≥ψ] as a function of the riski-
ness index for any level of violations, ψ > 0. Although
the bounds are not necessarily tight, they provide as-
surance that the riskiness index is adequate in quanti-
fying bed shortage risk.
Proposition 2. For all ψ ≥0, we have
P[˜z > ψ] ≤exp −ψ
ρ(˜z)


(3)
and
E[(˜z −ψ)+] ≤ρ(˜z)
e
exp −ψ
ρ(˜z)


:
(4)
Proof. The ﬁrst inequality is an application of the
Chernoff bound and is presented in Hall et al. (2015).
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
28
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

As for the second, we note that z+ ≤exp(z −1). By
writing z as z=α and multiplying by α, we obtain, for
all α > 0, z+ ≤α=e · exp z=α
(
). Hence,
E[(˜z −ψ)+] ≤ρ(˜z)
e
E exp ˜z −ψ
ρ(˜z)




≤ρ(˜z)
e
exp −ψ
ρ(˜z)


:
w
Proposition 2 guarantees that the probability of ever
larger shortages decreases exponentially. This de-
crease is controlled by the riskiness index. The lower
the risk, the faster the rate of decay of the probability,
that is, the rate at which shortages will emerge. Like-
wise, E[(˜z −ψ)+], the expected shortages beyond level
ψ > 0, is also bounded.
Incidentally, Hall et al. (2015) show that even in the
presence of afﬁne endogeneity, the approach of minimiz-
ing the riskiness index of Aumann and Serrano (2008)
can also lead to better performance compared with a
linearized sample average approximations (SAA) meth-
odology of minimizing probability of shortfall or ex-
pected shortfalls. A similar illustration is seen in Zhou
et al. (2021), who show that some aspects of this endoge-
neous relationship is forgone when using linearized
SAA, and in the process, performs suboptimally to mini-
mizing the riskiness index of Aumann and Serrano.
Given that the bed shortage problem is more complex,
and it is harder to linearize decision criteria based on
probability of shortages and expected shortages, we
expect the criterion that is consistent with minimizing
the riskiness index would lead to better performance.
Additionally, the conditional expected bed short-
ages
E[(˜z −ψ)+ | ˜z > ψ]  E[(˜z −ψ)+]=P[˜z > ψ]
turns
out to have a representation similar to the expression
the riskiness evaluation functional in Theorem 1.
Proposition 3. It holds that
E[(˜z −ψ)+ | ˜z > ψ]  inf {α > 0 | E[h((˜z −ψ)=α)]
≤E[h(0)]
 


1
},
where
h(x)¢ 1
if x ≤0,
x
otherwise:

Proof. Observe that
E[(˜z −ψ)+ | ˜z > ψ]
 E (˜z −ψ)+

=P[˜z > ψ]: Note that 0=0  0
 inf {α > 0 | E (˜z −ψ)+

=P[˜z > ψ] ≤α}
 inf {α > 0 | E (˜z −ψ)+

 ≤αP[˜z > ψ]}
 inf {α > 0 | E ((˜z −ψ)=α)+

 ≤P[(˜z −ψ)=α > 0]}
 inf {α > 0 | E ((˜z −ψ)=α)+

 −P[(˜z −ψ)=α > 0]
+1 ≤1}
 inf {α > 0 | E h((˜z −ψ)=α)

 ≤1}:
w
The function h(x) is locally continuous, convex, and
nondecreasing almost everywhere except at x  0. In
particular, although the exponential disutility function,
exp(x), is not the same as h(x), both are nonnegative
functions, and their values coincide at x  0.
2.4. Bed Shortage Index
Although the riskiness index of Aumann and Serrano
(2008) is well established in the economics community,
it does not have a natural interpretation in the context
of hospital bed shortages. For any appropriate choice
of calibrating function, Φ(·), the calibrated riskiness
index, Φ(ρ(˜z)) is a candidate for the coherent bed
shortage metric. The goal of this section is to choose an
appropriate calibrating function that yields a metric
interpretable to healthcare practitioners and adminis-
trators. For this purpose, we propose the bed shortage
index, or BSI for short, which is deﬁned as follows.
Definition 4 (BSI). The bed shortage index is the func-
tional, β : Z →[0,1],
β(˜z)  Φ(ρ(˜z)),
(5)
where the calibrating function is given by
Φ(r) 
1
r e1=r −1

,
and ρ(˜z) is the riskiness index of Aumann and Serrano
(2008).
Figure 1 illustrates how the riskiness index and
the BSI are related in a one-to-one manner. Although the
riskiness index gives a magnitude of the risk involved, the
BSI may be better understood in the sense of BORs. As
we subsequently show in Theorem 2, it is calibrated to
Figure 1. Calibrating Function Φ(·) Mapping Riskiness Index
ρ to BSI β
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
29
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

coincide with BOR when the daily arrivals in the hos-
pital unit are Poisson distributed. Hence, in layper-
son terms, the healthcare practitioner can interpret
the BSI of a ward as the equivalent level of bed short-
age risk experienced by a reference ward that is serv-
ing only Poisson arrivals, with its BOR being the
same as the BSI.
Theorem 2 (Interpretability). Assume E[˜zt] ≤0. If all the
arrivals in a hospital unit follow a Poisson process with
time-dependent rates λt, then the BSI and the BOR coincide
on each day.
Proof. By lower semicontinuity, we have
κt  μρ(˜zt)(˜nt)  ρ(˜zt)log E[exp (˜nt=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ, s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)log E[exp (˜yτ,s=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ, s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)λτqs(e1=ρ(˜zt) −1)
 ρ(˜zt)E[˜nt] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


:
Therefore, because κt > 0, β(˜zt)  E[˜nt=κt].
w
The key result illustrates that the BSI is in fact a
risk-adjusted form of the BOR. It demarcates the con-
ditions under which the BSI is larger or smaller than
BOR. We know that if all arrivals are Poisson, BSI
equals to BOR, which can be considered the bench-
mark case. If there is greater uncertainty, such as in
the rates of arrivals, then the BSI would capture the
risk and hence be larger than the BOR. Conversely, if
all arrivals are certain and scheduled, then the BSI is
smaller than the BOR, indicating less risk of bed
shortages.
Theorem 3 (Risk Awareness). Under Assumption 1, if
E[˜zt] ≤0, then BSI is a risk-adjusted form of the BOR.
Suppose ˜nB(t) is the number of elective patients on day t,
and ˜nP(t) is the number of emergency patients on day t.
Then for κt > 0, the BSI satisﬁes the following:
(a) For the elective patients only, the BSI is smaller than
BOR:
β(˜nB(t) −κt) < E[˜nB(t)=κt]:
(6)
(b) For the emergency patients only, the BSI is greater
than BOR:
β(˜nP(t) −κt) ≥E[˜nP(t)=κt]:
(7)
Proof. We ﬁrst consider the case when there are only
elective patients, that is, ˜zt  ˜nB(t) −κt. According to
Proposition 1, we know
˜nB(t) 

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
˜xτ,s,
where ˜xτ,s ~ Bin(ητ,ps). Let ρ be the riskiness index
corresponding to BSI β, then we have
ρ(˜zt)logE[exp(˜nB(t)=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)logE[exp(˜xτ,s=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)log 1 −ps + pse1=ρ(˜zt)

ητ


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜z)ητlog 1 + ps e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


 




≥0
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
<

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)ητps e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


: as log(1 + x) ≤x, ∀x ≥0
 ρ(˜zt)E[˜nB(t)] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


:
By lower semicontinuity of μα, we obtain that μρ(˜zt)
(˜zt)  0. Hence, κt  μρ(˜zt)(˜n) ≤ρ(˜zt)E[˜nB(t)] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1

,
or in other words, β(˜zt) ≤E[˜nB(t)=κt].
We then consider the case when there are only
emergency arrivals, that is, ˜zt  ˜nP(t) −κt. According
to Proposition 1, we know
˜nP(t) 

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
˜yτ,s,
where ˜yτ,s ~ Pois(˜λτqs). Then, we have
ρ(˜zt)logE[exp(˜nP(t)=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)logE[exp(˜yτ,s=ρ(˜zt))]


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)logE[exp(˜λτqs(e1=ρ(˜zt) −1)))]
≥

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
ρ(˜zt)E[˜λτqs] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


: Jensen′s inequality
 ρ(˜zt)E[˜nP(t)] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1


Therefore, by lower semicontinuity, κt  μρ(˜zt)(˜n) ≥
ρ(˜zt)E[˜nP(t)] e1=ρ(˜zt) −1

 or in other words, because
κt > 0, β(˜zt) ≥E[˜nP(t)=κt].
w
Table 1 compares the BSI to other metrics. As far as
we know, BSI is the only metric that fulﬁls all the de-
sired properties of a coherent bed shortage metric.
BOR, despite being interpretable and tractable, viola-
tes the risk-free property and hence does not capture
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
30
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

the various level of risks associated with bed short-
ages well. Although the probability of bed shortages
and expected shortages are interpretable, they are
computationally intractable and do not identify situa-
tions of overloading. The calibrated riskiness index
has most of the salient properties, but without the
appropriate calibrating function, it may not be easily
understood by healthcare practitioners.
It is worth mentioning that the BSI is not the only
class of proper bed shortage metric. The differentiating
consideration, however, is its tractability and interpret-
ability. In particular, the bed shortage position ˜z is a
composite random variable comprising a sum of in-
dependently distributed, but not necessarily identical,
random variables whose distributions endogenously
depend on the decision variables to be optimized.
Moreover, it is generally intractable to evaluate the dis-
tribution of such a random variable to arbitrary preci-
sion (Khachiyan 1989, Nemirovski and Shapiro 2006).
Hence, although we can replace μα(˜z) by the popular
conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) to yield a coherent bed
shortage metric by Theorem 1, we do not know how
we could formulate this as a tractable optimization
problem (Rockafellar and Uryasev 2000). In contrast,
the BSI incorporates higher-order statistical informa-
tion while providing a closed-form expression for μα(˜z)
in terms of its parameters. We see this later in Theorem
4. Henceforth, we adopt this metric for evaluating and
minimizing the risk associated with bed shortages.
3. Descriptive Analytics
In this section, we show how the BSI for a ward may
be computed and we subsequently compare it against
the BOR and other traditional metrics. Theorem 4 pro-
vides an exact closed-form solution for the BSI. To fa-
cilitate understanding, we focus on a single ward with
elective and emergency patients in the steady state.
However, the results can be easily extended to a ward
with multiple types of patients (see Appendix C.1 for
more discussions on patient segmentation) and even
in the transient state if Assumption 2 is relaxed.
3.1. Steady-State Formulation
To understand how capacity can be planned, we wish
to study bed shortages from a steady-state perspective.
To this end, we deﬁne what it means to be operating
in the steady-state context.
Assumption 2 (Steady State). Given a time window T,
we say that in the steady-state, the following variables are
periodic, that is, for, t,t′ ∈¯T such that t ≡t′(mod T), we
have,
1. Periodic quota: ηt  ηt′;
2. Periodic arrival rates: λt  λt′; and
3. Periodic capacity: κt  κt′.
As such, it sufﬁces to consider these variables, only
over the planning window T .
In the presence of elective admissions, it is difﬁcult
to efﬁciently compute expected shortages E[˜z+
t ] and
the probability of shortages P[˜zt > 0] at steady state.
We have to resort to simulations to do so, as in the
numerical illustration later. Instead, the BSI can be
efﬁciently computed. This is our key result: μ has a
closed-form expression.
Theorem 4 (Tractability). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for
t ∈T , μαt can be evaluated in closed-form as
μαt(˜zt) 

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)ηt−τ
+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αtΛt−τ(qτ+jT(e1=αt −1)) −κt,
(8)
where As(α)¢αlog(1 −ps + pse1=α). Because μαt(˜zt) is
nonincreasing in αt, the corresponding BSI, β(˜zt) can be
tractably evaluated by performing binary search on αt until
αt  α∗
t for which μα∗
t(˜zt)  0 and β(˜zt)  Φ(α∗
t).
Proof. For ﬁxed αt, because μαt is additive over inde-
pendently distributed random variables,
μαt(˜zt) 

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
μαt(˜xτ,s) +

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
μαt(˜yτ,s) −κt:
The ﬁrst sum may be evaluated as follows:

(τ, s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
αtlog (E[exp (˜xτ,s=αt)])


(τ, s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
αtητlog (1 −ps + pse1=αt),
(9)
Table 1. Various Bed Shortage Metrics and Their Properties
BOR
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
Calibrated
Riskiness index
BSI
Monotonicity





Risk-free





Overloading





Quasiconvexity





Tractability





Interpretability





Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
31
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 



(τ, s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
As(αt)ητ


τ≥0
ηt−τAτ(αt)


T−1
τ0
ηt−τ

∞
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)


T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)ηt−τ:
(10)
We used Proposition 1(a) for (9) in evaluating its mo-
ment generating function, and for (10), we grouped
terms using periodicity. This recovers the x term in (8).
We can repeat the procedure for the y term using the
moment generating function for ˜yt,s ~ Pois(˜λtqs) in (11):

(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
αtlog(E[exp(˜yτ,s=αt)])


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
αtlog(E[exp(˜λτqs(e1=αt −1))])


(τ,s) : τ + s  t
s ≥0
αtΛτ(qs(e1=αt −1))


T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αtΛt−τ(qτ+jT(e1=αt −1)):
w
(11)
The resultant form can be tractably computed, because
1. Given ﬁxed αt, Equation (8) is afﬁne in ηt and κt.
2. Equation (8) is nonincreasing in αt for ﬁxed ηt.
This is important. The ﬁrst observation allows us to
optimize the BSI using only linear constraints. Moreover,
the second observation implies that the minimum value
of αt for which μαt(˜zt) ≤0 occurs when it is tight. We see
its exact ramiﬁcations later.
In the following corollary, we provide explicit solu-
tions for three special cases based on Theorem 4. The
ﬁrst case is with known arrival rate, that is, ˜λt  λt.
The second case is a two-point distribution, ˜λt  λt+
˜dtΔ, where ˜dt is independently and identically distrib-
uted (i.i.d.). Bernoulli with probability ¯p. This repre-
sents the situation where there is the possibility of
demand surges of rate Δ on top of the ordinary arrival
rate λt. The surges occur with probability ¯p. For the third
case, we assume that ˜λt follows an exponential distribu-
tion with mean λt. Of course, explicit solutions for other
distributions could be derived in a similar way.
Corollary 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for t ∈T , μαt
can be reformulated as follows:
a. If ˜λt  λt, we have
μαt(˜zt) 

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)ηt−τ
+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αt e1=αt −1


λt−τqτ+jT −κt:
(12)
b. If ˜λt  λt + ˜dtΔ, ˜dt ~ B(¯p), we have
μαt(˜zt)

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)ηt−τ+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αt e1=αt −1

λt−τqτ+jT
+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αtlog(1−¯p+¯pexp((e1=αt −1)qτ+jTΔ))−κt:
(13)
c. If ˜λt ~ Exp(λt), we have
μαt(˜zt) 

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Aτ+jT(αt)ηt−τ +

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
−αtlog
(1 −(e1=αt −1)λt−τqτ+jT) −κt:
(14)
3.2. Numerical Example: Descriptive Metrics in
a Ward
We illustrate the application of BSI using a data
sample drawn from a ward in a general hospital. We
ﬁrst describe the data and the studied case. Using the
closed-form expression (8) in Theorem 4, we can cal-
culate the BSI under different arrival regimes. We pre-
sent three cases where the BSI is larger, equal, or
smaller than BOR, which illustrates that the BSI is in-
deed the risk-adjusted form of BOR. We then check
the validity of Assumptions 1 and 2 and estimate the
arrival rates of emergency patients using the data. To
give a more intuitive understanding of the BSI, we
simulate classical performance measures such as
probability of shortages and expected shortages. We
compare the simulated results with the BSI and ﬁnd
that they are consistent as risk measures. Finally, we
apply the BSI to study the impact of long stayers.
3.2.1. Data Description. There are 44 beds in the
ward, and we studied them over 210 days. Patients
were admitted from both the ED and from elective sur-
geries, with average LOS around 4.73 days. Figure 2(a)
shows the daily emergency admissions over the studied
period, and its weekly pattern supports our choice of
T  7. Figure 2(b) plots the survival rates of emergency
and elective patients, that is, the proportion of patients
who remain warded after s days, ps and qs. Although
most patients were discharged by the ﬁfth day, a small
but signiﬁcant proportion remain warded for more than
two weeks. Also, we notice a difference in survival rates
between patients admitted through the emergency and
elective routes; on average, the LOS of emergency pa-
tients of about 4.82 days is longer than that of elective pa-
tients at 4.24 days. Here and later, we assume that all
scheduled elective patients turn up and stay for at least a
day, that is, p0  1. As emergency patients are normally
admitted within the day of arrival, we use the daily
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
32
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

admissions to approximate the daily arrivals in the fol-
lowing analysis.
3.2.2. BSI Calculation. Under Assumptions 1 and 2,
and given the arrival process and the survival proba-
bilities of LOS, we can compute the BOR, E[˜nt=κ], and
the BSI using (5) and (8). To illustrate how the BSI cap-
tures the risk, we conduct a numerical analysis of
three wards (Ward S, Ward P, and Ward D) under dif-
ferent arrival regimes (Poisson with random or cons-
tant rate versus deterministic). Mean daily arrivals are
assumed at 10, 10, 8, 8, 9, 8, and 6 patients. Although it
was designed for these wards to have the same BOR,
their BSIs differ, as Figure 3 illustrates. When the arriv-
als are Poisson with constant rates, by Theorem 3, val-
ues for the BSI and the BOR should coincide. Under
this traditional assumption, BOR may be able to cap-
ture the risk and BSI. However, when there is uncer-
tainty in the rate of arrival, it will fail to do so. Indeed,
Ward S experiences greater risks of bed shortages than
Ward P, whereas Ward P experiences greater risks
than Ward D. This underscores how our proposed BSI
can extend the descriptive power of the popular BOR
as the proxy for quantifying bed shortage risks.
In practice, hospital managers usually use BOR to
evaluate the risk of bed shortages. Unfortunately, the
BOR is less sensitive to uncertainty. For instance, one
would expect to see higher risks of shortages in a
ward admitting only emergency patients than one
where arrivals are only from elective patients and
completely deterministic. Yet, they will surely have
the same BOR. The BSI captures this difference: wards
with the same BOR can have signiﬁcantly different
BSIs. Often, the BSI is associated with the number of
admissions in that day: the higher the admissions, the
higher the metric. However, this is not always the case
because of the confounding effect of the LOS of patients.
As Figure 3 illustrates, the second highest BSI falls on
Wednesdays. This is because the arrivals on Sundays
are lower, and therefore, despite the high arrivals on
Mondays, the wards are also comparatively emptier.
This relieves the pressure on shortages on Mondays.
3.2.3. Simulated Performance. Here, we ﬁrst ﬁt distri-
butions to our arrival data, calculate the BSI under the
ﬁtted distributions, and simulate the performance
accordingly. The quantile-quantile plot in Figure 4
supports the assumption to model daily emergency
arrivals via a Poisson distribution with a constant
rate. The null hypothesis that daily emergency admis-
sions follows a Poisson distribution is moreover not
rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level using a χ2 test.
Henceforth, we adopt the Poisson assumption with
constant rates in this analysis unless otherwise speci-
ﬁed. These rates are estimated at 7.66, 7.89, 6.49, 6.25,
7.09, 5.68, and 4.11 from Monday through Sunday. We
Figure 2. ED Admissions and Survival Rates of Emergency and Elective Patients
Notes. (a) ED admissions. (b) Survival rates.
Figure 3. Daily BSI Under Different Arrival Processes
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
33
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

notice that the arrival rates are higher on weekdays,
as is also observed by local physicians.
Given these estimated daily arrival rates, we simu-
late the Poisson arrival process for a length of 1 million
weeks, that is, 7 million days. For each patient, we also
simulate the LOS according to the empirical distri-
bution. The simulation warm-up period is the ﬁrst
100,000 weeks, which is not included in the results.
Table 2 shows the simulated probability of shortages
and expected shortages, illustrating the consistency of
the BSI with classical performance measures.
3.2.4. Impact of Long Stayers. Health systems across
the world have implemented the concept of step-down
care and transitional care. The motivation is that acute
or general hospitals may not be the best setting for pa-
tients requiring a lower level but longer-term care. Such
patients include those with chronic illnesses or whom
may be taking longer to recover from severe incidents.
More often than not, these patients are advanced in age.
Patients requiring less intensive care may divert treat-
ment resources from more pressing cases that acute
hospitals receive. Instead, nursing homes, physiothera-
pists, and other community care providers might be
better placed to provide for these needs, both in terms
of quality and frequency of care. In Singapore, commu-
nity hospitals, which cater to the provision of such care,
have sprung up of late. It is anticipated that these com-
munity hospitals will stand to gain from economies of
scale and operate on a lower budget than acute hos-
pitals. In particular, we seek to quantify the effect of a
policy that transfers “long-stayers” (here referred to as
patients with LOS exceeding a certain threshold L) to
community hospital and other facilities.
In this analysis, L is set at four weeks. Long-stayers
comprise only about 1% of our samples. Their longest
LOS is observed at 105 days (15 weeks). To examine
their impact, we progressively reduce the truncation
L, by allowing the maximal LOS to vary from 4 weeks
upward until it reaches 15 weeks. This would repre-
sent the effect of a transfer policy to move out patients
after L days.
Let us assume that there is just one elective admis-
sion per day, that is, seven within the week. Figure 5
illustrates what happens when the ward continues to
retain patients beyond the four-week mark. Although
accounting for only 1% of the patients, the presence of
long-stayers increases the BSI by around 4% daily.
This appears to support the hypothesis by practi-
tioners that long-stayers disproportionately affect the
level of bed shortages. Figure 6 shows the simulated
daily expected shortages and probabilty of shortages
within the week under different maximal LOS. These
results are consistent with Figure 5. We return to this
analysis later after introducing a model for optimizing
elective admissions in the steady state. At that point,
we examine their impact under optimal policy.
4. Prescriptive Analytics
Prescriptive analytics entails optimization techniques
to efﬁciently and effectively determine the best per-
forming solution over a criterion among possibly
Figure 4. Q-Q Plot
Table 2. Summary Statistics of Daily Bed Shortages Based
on Emergency Arrivals (Poisson Arrival)
λt
Analytical results
Simulated results
BOR
BSI
ρ(˜zt)
P[˜zt > 0]
E[˜z+
t ]
E[˜z+
t | ˜zt > 0]
Mon
7.660
0.664
0.664
1.300
0.004
0.010
2.475
Tue
7.887
0.700
0.700
1.484
0.010
0.026
2.687
Wed
6.491
0.695
0.695
1.457
0.009
0.023
2.679
Thu
6.245
0.686
0.686
1.404
0.007
0.018
2.608
Fri
7.093
0.697
0.697
1.467
0.009
0.025
2.684
Sat
5.679
0.675
0.675
1.351
0.005
0.014
2.534
Sun
4.113
0.623
0.623
1.133
0.001
0.003
2.270
Figure 5. Daily BSI Under Different Maximal LOS
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
34
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

astronomically large number of alternatives. Hence, it
is important for such a criterion to be amenable to
computation. As mentioned in our earlier illustration,
the probability of bed shortages and the expected
shortages are not easily computable up to arbitrary ac-
curacy, let alone used as the criterion to be optimized.
Instead, we use the BSI to examine how the risk of
bed shortages may be minimized.
In this spirit, let I represent some collection of
wards. Depending on the problem setting, I can rep-
resent different objects. If the administrator is looking
at optimizing the scheduling within a group of wards
with different classes of patients, then I can represent
wards grouped by each class of patients. If the admin-
istrator is studying the allocation of bed capacity
across different departments, then I represents the
different departments in the hospital. At the broadest
level, if a health planner is looking at the capacity of
hospitals within a region, then I can represent dif-
ferent hospitals. Each element in I (class of patients,
ward, department or hospital) is assumed to be
managed separately, with an overall administrator
that might decide on some operating parameters for
them.
In the most general sense, this administrator can
have three decision variables: elective admission
quota
h  (ηi
t)t∈T ,i∈I,
distribution of bed capacity
k  (κi
t)t∈T ,i∈I, and the rate of emergency arrivals
l  (λi
t)t∈T ,i∈I. At this point, it may seem counterintui-
tive for the arrival rate to be a decision variable, but
we see in Section 5.4 how this could be applied. In to-
tality, let w  (h,k,l) represent all the decision varia-
bles. Denote by W the feasible set for w. Usually, a
hospital administrator would consider only one or
two sets of decision variables, which could be done by
setting other decision variables as known parameters.
At the ward or hospital level, one may assume that
arrival rates l are ﬁxed and consider the following set
of constraints:
• Total capacity constraints

i∈Iκi
t ≤C, ∀t ∈T : To-
tal bed capacity must be bounded by the total beds in
the entire hospital, assumed to be constant over the
planning horizon.
• Resourcing constraints

t∈T

i∈Imi
tκi
t ≤R: These
constraints involve the other resources required in sup-
porting the operations of the wards, such as the stafﬁng
of physicians and care providers or the ﬁnancial costs
of medical equipment, and so on.
• Service continuity constraints: Each ward i needs
to achieve a minimal target of service continuity, in
terms of the usual scheduled rate of surgeries. Speciﬁ-
cally,

t∈T ηi
t ≥Si, ∀i ∈I.
High elective admissions are generally more proﬁt-
able for a hospital, but it would impact the capacity of
the hospital for emergency admissions. Moreover,
physicians are often attracted to a hospital with high
elective admissions, so that they have more opportu-
nities to hone their surgical skills. A private hospital
would generally desire to maximize the number of
elective admissions to maximize proﬁt and attract
good physicians as long as the risk of bed shortages is
acceptable. As we explained, the healthcare practi-
tioner can interpret the BSI as the risk of bed shortages
associated with a ward with the same BOR serving
only Poisson distributed emergency arrivals. When
maximizing the number of elective admissions, this
interpretation is useful for healthcare administrators
in specifying the desired level of bed shortage risk by
benchmarking against such a ward. In contrast, a pub-
lic hospital faces constraints on elective admission,
and the admission quota is determined by the govern-
ment (Meng et al. 2015). Hence, we present different
Figure 6. Daily Expected Shortages and Probability of Shortages Under Different Maximal LOS
Notes. (a) Expected shortages. (b) Probability of shortages.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
35
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

optimization models, which can be used in different
contexts.
4.1. Maximizing Throughput
Our ﬁrst model attempts to maximize throughput,
that is, total elective admissions, subject to the BSI re-
maining bounded below a certain threshold. In this
case, I represents a collection of wards. This turns out
to be a linear model.
At all times, the hospital should have a control over the
maximum risk of bed shortage that is permissible: the
planner sets a maximum acceptable BSI ϵi
t ∈[0,1] over
time period t and for different wards i. The dependence
on wards i can be explained as follows: Suppose some
particular i represents the intensive care unit stay; then, it
can be imagined that its allowed BSI ϵi
t would differ from
that of a normal ward where the consequences of bed
shortages are less perilous. This leads to the model:
max

i∈I
δi
t∈T
ηi
t
s:t:
β(˜zi
t(w)) ≤ϵi
t, ∀t ∈T , ∀i ∈I
w ∈W:
(15)
Here, δi can be a ﬂexible weight (such as expected
proﬁt per elective) for each ward i. In the simplest
case, δi  1. Theorem 4 grants us the reformulation.
Corollary 2. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the throughput
maximization model (15) has the following linear refor-
mulation:
max

i∈I
δi
t∈T
ηi
t
s:t:

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Ai
τ+jT(αi
t)ηi
t−τ
+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αi
tΛi
t−τ(qi
τ+jT(e1=αi
t −1)) ≤κi
t,
∀t ∈T , ∀i ∈I
(h, k, l) ∈W,
(16)
where αi
t ∈[0,∞] corresponds to ϵi
t  1=αi
t(e1=αi
t −1).
4.2. Minimizing Overall Risk
An alternative would be to minimize the BSIs,
(β(˜zi
t(w)))t∈T ,i∈I, subject to the operating context, for
example, a minimal number of elective patients that
must be scheduled. The core challenge is that this set
of BSIs is not a single objective function to be mini-
mized. In such a case, one often attempts optimizing a
composite measure. Two approaches are common in
the literature. The ﬁrst minimizes the sum of BSIs
across wards and time periods. However, this may
lead to an intractable nonlinear and nonconvex formu-
lation that we do not know how to optimize efﬁciently.
The signiﬁcance of summing the BSIs may also be
difﬁcult to interpret. Additionally, the risk may not be
distributed fairly across wards or across time periods:
the optimal solution may ﬁnd it justiﬁed to increase se-
verely the risk of a single ward in exchange for lower
risk levels in other wards. To address this, the second
approach is to minimize the worst-case BSI over all
time periods and wards. Such min-max fairness crite-
rion would typically lead to a more balanced allocation
of risks across wards and time periods.
Conceivably, even if the worst-case BSI were mini-
mized at a particular ward and time period, it may
well be possible to further reduce the risk in other
wards and time periods without compromising the
min-max fairness criterion. As an extension, we adopt
a lexicographic minimization (or “lex min” for short).
We detail in Appendix B its modeling and algorithmic
approaches. This paradigm leads to the general model:
lex min
(β(˜zi
t(w)))t∈T ,i∈I
s:t:
w ∈W:
(17)
Again, Theorem 4 grants us the privilege of the fol-
lowing reformulation.
Corollary 3. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the risk
minimization model (17) has the following equivalent
reformulation:
lex min a
s:t:

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
Ai
τ+jT(αi
t)ηi
t−τ
+

T−1
τ0

⌊L=T⌋
j0
αi
tΛi
t−τ(qi
τ+jT(e1=αi
t −1)) ≤κi
t,
∀t ∈T , ∀i ∈I
(h, k, l) ∈W, a > 0:
(18)
This model is ﬂexible. Capacity κi
t may depend on t.
This means that the hospital may adaptively move
beds across wards over the course of a week. Alterna-
tively, the model can be modiﬁed to include a ward
with “back-up capacity,” which houses patients over-
ﬂowing from other wards.
4.3. Numerical Examples
In this section, we illustrate how to apply the through-
put maximization model (16) and the risk minimiza-
tion model (18) through numerical examples when
emergency arrivals follow Poisson distributions with
known rates. We will show an example in Section 5.3
when emergency arrivals follow doubly stochastic
Poisson. By Corollary 2, the former reduces to a linear
optimization problem, whereas the latter is imple-
mented via Algorithm 1 in Appendix B. Using simula-
tions as described earlier, we study their performance,
such as the probabilities of different shortage levels
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
36
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

and expected shortages. We also use our models to ex-
amine the impact of long stayers numerically.
4.3.1. Maximizing Ward Throughput. In the case of
maximizing the number of elective admissions, we
dictate the level ϵ which the BSI has to be controlled
under, that is, β(˜zt) ≤ϵ for all days t ∈T . The term ϵ is
then varied. The optimal scheduling solution is shown
in Table 3. When the maximum BSI level ϵ is allowed
to increase from 0.75 to 0.95, the maximum allowed
number of elective admissions S correspondingly in-
creases from 2 to 17 per week. Also, admissions are
preferentially scheduled on weekends, when emer-
gency arrivals are lower. In this sense, the optimal
policy smooths admissions to equalize the risks across
days in anticipation of shortages over the week.
In Table 3, we also verify the performance of the op-
timal policy using simulations. The table illustrates
that when the maximum BSI level was allowed to in-
crease from 0.75 to 0.95, the average BOR rose from
0.73 to 0.94. The probability of bed shortages rose
from 0.02 to 0.30, and the expected number of bed
shortages surged from 0.06 to 1.37.
Recall that the BSI is interpreted as the equivalent
level of bed shortage risk experienced by a reference
ward with the same BOR serving only Poisson
arrivals. This would help healthcare practitioners and
administrators in specifying the desired threshold, ϵ.
For instance, it is a common wisdom is to keep the
BOR under 85% (Green 2002). Given an optimal
elective scheduling solution, its performance can be
evaluated on other traditional metrics such as the
probability of bed shortages via simulations, such as
in Table 3. From this, the ward manager may decide
on the conﬁguration that best ﬁts his purposes.
4.3.2. Minimizing Bed Shortage Risk. In this model,
we instead ﬁx S 

t∈T ηt, the number of elective pa-
tients that must be admitted per week. The model
then seeks an optimal policy scheduling these S elec-
tive patients, so that the BSIs over the week are mini-
mized. When elective throughput S is increased from
7 to 20, the optimal worst-case BSI rises from 0.80 to
0.99. Similar to the previous model, more patients are
admitted over the weekends. Figure 7 shows the risk
of shortages based on our simulations. From our anal-
ysis, the tradeoff for maximizing BOR can be harsh.
Increasing total elective throughput S from 7 to 20
raises the probability of bed shortages from 0.06 to
0.41 and expected shortages from 0.20 to 2.12. See
Tables D.1 and D.2 in Appendix D for more details.
Table 3. Optimal Elective Scheduling and Service Level Given Maximum BSI Level ϵ
ϵ
Optimal elective scheduling
Average BOR
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
S
Unconditional
Conditional
0.75
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
0.73
0.02
0.06
2.93
0.80
0
0
0
1
0
3
2
6
0.79
0.05
0.16
3.20
0.85
0
0
1
2
1
0
6
10
0.85
0.11
0.40
3.62
0.90
1
0
2
2
1
3
5
14
0.90
0.21
0.84
4.09
0.95
1
1
2
3
2
3
5
17
0.94
0.30
1.37
4.55
Figure 7. Simulated Probability of Bed Shortages and Expected Bed Shortages Under the BSI Minimization Model Given the
Weekly Elective Quota with or Without Long-Stayers
Notes. (a) Probability of shortages. (b) Expected shortages.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
37
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

This very short analysis identiﬁes a key piece of un-
derstanding: shortages are unavoidable, even under
optimal control. Instead of trying to increase bed ca-
pacity, it may be more effective to devise strategies to
pool together the risks across different wards to allevi-
ate these shortages. One such approach may be to cre-
ate an “overﬂow ward,” which houses patients who
could not be assigned a bed from any department.
4.3.3. Examining
the
Impact
of
Long-Stayers. We
studied earlier how the bed shortage risk changes
with the exclusion of long-stayers. Here, we examine
their effect on the optimal elective throughput. To
do so, we compare between two policies: one with
long-stayers and another where the long-stayers are
transferred to community hospitals after 28 days
(four weeks).
Using our proposed algorithm, we obtain the opti-
mal scheduling policy without long-stayers and its
daily BSI β(˜zt) for different levels of elective through-
put S. Similarly, we plot the simulated performance in
Figure 7, which seems to outperforms the case with
long stayers. We observe that this is because of the
lower daily BSI β(˜zt) under a policy where long-
stayers are transferred. See Tables D.3 and D.4 in Ap-
pendix D for more details.
We also take an alternative approach to study this
problem: How much capacity may be freed up for
new patients if we transferred all long-stayers to com-
munity hospitals at the four-week mark? To do so, we
use the throughput maximizing model (16) by varying
the desired risk level or BSI threshold ϵ. We plot in
Table 4, the maximum elective throughput S if there
were no long-stayers, for each ϵ. By comparing Tables
3 and 4, the capacity freed up by this transfer policy
works out to around two to three new patients while
preserving the same level of performance. This
amounts to at least a 15% increase in elective quota.
5. Discussions and Extensions
In this section, we compare our model against the tra-
ditional queueing model. We also compare the perfor-
mance of our model against a traditional optimization
approach based on the BOR. As Theorem 3 illustrates,
the BOR may overestimate or underestimate the risk
depending on the situation. We thus also provide a nu-
merical example showing that optimizing shortages
using the BOR may signiﬁcantly underestimate the
risk. Finally, we illustrate an extension of our model to
the matter of capacity planning across hospitals, where
the rate of emergency arrivals l is a decision variable.
5.1. Comparison with Queueing Models
Our model allows the admission of patients even
where there are bed shortages, which is in fact an
Table 4. Optimal Elective Scheduling and Service Level Without Long-Stayers Given BSI Threshold ϵ
ϵ
Optimal elective scheduling
Average BOR
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
S
Unconditional
Conditional
0.75
0
0
1
1
0
2
1
5
0.74
0.02
0.07
2.92
0.80
0
0
0
2
0
3
4
9
0.80
0.06
0.18
3.20
0.85
0
0
2
1
2
3
5
13
0.85
0.12
0.42
3.60
0.90
0
1
2
3
2
3
5
16
0.89
0.19
0.74
3.96
0.95
2
1
3
3
2
4
5
20
0.95
0.31
1.41
4.54
Table 5. Simulated Performance Measures of the Offered Load Model and Queueing Model
S
BOR
Offered load model
Queueing model
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
Probability of delays
Expected queue length
7
0.80
0.06
0.20
0.08
0.44
8
0.82
0.08
0.26
0.09
0.53
9
0.83
0.09
0.31
0.13
0.82
10
0.85
0.11
0.39
0.16
1.13
11
0.86
0.13
0.48
0.18
1.37
12
0.87
0.15
0.58
0.24
2.09
13
0.89
0.18
0.70
0.25
2.59
14
0.90
0.20
0.84
0.35
4.03
15
0.92
0.24
1.00
0.41
5.59
16
0.93
0.27
1.18
0.44
7.60
17
0.94
0.30
1.37
0.50
10.98
18
0.96
0.34
1.59
0.65
18.95
19
0.97
0.38
1.84
0.76
33.85
20
0.98
0.41
2.12
0.85
75.73
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
38
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

inﬁnite capacity offered load model. Instead, in a tradi-
tional queueing model, the capacity is ﬁxed and new
patients would wait in the queue in the absence of va-
cant beds. In this section, we compare the performance
of these two models using simulations and show that
the offered load model may be a better representation
of inpatient dynamics. For the offered load model, the
corresponding set of performance measures would be
the probability of bed shortages and expected short-
ages. For the queueing model, performance measures
are the probability of delay or expected queue length.
In Table 5, we varied the number of weekly elective
admissions S from 7 to 20. Under the same optimal
scheduling policy for elective patients (based on
Table D.1), we simulated the performance for both the
offered load model and the traditional queueing
model. Observe that the average queue length in the
queueing model is signiﬁcantly larger than the ex-
pected bed shortages in the offered load model. Al-
though this may be consistent with queueing theory,
queues of such lengths are rarely seen in practice. In-
deed, ﬂexible capacity is often created when the pre-
sent BOR is very high by adding temporary beds or
overﬂowing patients to other wards. This example il-
lustrates that our paradigm may be more applicable
than the queueing model when modeling the actual
dynamics among arrivals and ward congestion.
5.2. Comparison with Optimization Using BOR
We also compare our throughput-maximizing model
that restricts the BSI under some bound ϵ against a
traditional optimization model that caps the BOR un-
der ϵ′. The latter results in the following model:
max

t∈T
ηt
s:t:
E[˜nt(w)] ≤ϵ′κ,
∀t ∈T
w ∈W:
(19)
In this comparison, the capacity κ  44 is ﬁxed across
the planning horizon. When the bounds on the BOR
and BSI were both set at ϵ  ϵ′  0:85, we ﬁnd that
about 11.11% more elective patients could be admitted
from our throughput-maximizing model (16) com-
pared with the traditional BOR model (19). This makes
sense because the BSI is risk adjusted, and Theorem 3
guarantees that it is less than the BOR under the as-
sumption of traditional Poisson arrivals for emergency
patients and deterministic arrivals for elective patients.
(In Section 5.3, we show a circumstance where the BSI
is larger than BOR.) Hence, given the same restrictions,
the BSI admits more elective patients (Table 6). Table D.5
shows the results when we increase the capacity from 44
to 60 such that more elective patients could be admitted
given the same emergency arrival. We can see that the
average BOR under optimization using BSI is larger than
that under optimization using BOR (consistent with
Theorem 3). The managerial insight for practitioners is
that, when the proportion of elective patients is not
small, the manager can be more aggressive and set a
higher BOR target at 90% rather than 85%. Because elec-
tive admissions could be scheduled and contribute less
to bed shortages than emergency patients, they could be
used to smooth the arrival process and mitigate the risk
of bed shortages.
5.3. Numerical Study with Arrival Surges
We consider the case where there is a possible surge
in arrival. In recent times, the COVID-19 pandemic
has created immense stresses on the global healthcare
infrastructure. We posit that our methodology may be
able to provide some directions for future resilience
planning. Here, we will just perform a simple illustra-
tion. Let ¯p  0:05 be the probability of the surge and
Δ  10 be the surge arrival rate. This is the case in Cor-
ollary 2(b), where arrivals are modeled by the doubly
Table 6. Difference Between Optimization on BOR and BSI with Ward Capacity 44
ϵ
Optimal elective scheduling
Average BOR
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
S
Unconditional
Conditional
Optimization on BOR
0.75
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0.72
0.02
0.05
2.87
0.80
0
0
1
0
0
2
2
5
0.78
0.04
0.13
3.13
0.85
0
0
0
2
0
3
4
9
0.83
0.09
0.32
3.49
0.90
1
0
2
2
1
3
4
13
0.89
0.18
0.70
3.95
0.95
1
1
2
3
2
3
5
17
0.94
0.30
1.38
4.55
Optimization on BSI
0.75
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
2
0.73
0.02
0.06
2.93
0.80
0
0
0
1
0
3
2
6
0.79
0.05
0.16
3.20
0.85
0
0
1
2
1
0
6
10
0.85
0.11
0.40
3.62
0.90
1
0
2
2
1
3
5
14
0.90
0.21
0.84
4.09
0.95
1
1
2
3
2
3
5
17
0.94
0.30
1.37
4.55
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
39
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

stochastic Poisson process with rate ˜λt  λt+ ˜dtΔ, and
˜dt is i.i.d. Bernoulli with probability ¯p. Recall that λt is
the usual arrival rate. Under this circumstance, Theo-
rem 3 implies that the BSI is generally larger than
BOR; that is, it is more sensitive to the risk of surges
than BOR. When using BOR to plan the weekly elec-
tive admissions, it is akin to modeling arrivals as a
Poisson process with rate λt + ¯pΔ.
We compare the consequence of using the BOR
versus the BSI to optimize under such a situation.
Figure 8 shows the optimal number of weekly elective
admissions under different metrics. When using BOR
to plan, the weekly elective quota increases from 1 to
13 when the BOR threshold increases from 0.8 to 0.95.
However, when using BSI to plan, the weekly elective
quota is less than the quota using BOR, which is con-
sistent with our theoretical results. Figure 8 also
shows that probability of bed shortages is much lower
when planing with the BSI. If the manager is risk
averse, he will try to set a lower BOR threshold like
0.8 or 0.85 to avoid bed shortages, in which case, the
BSI would suggest avoiding admitting elective pa-
tients during the periods of surges. The managerial in-
sight gleaned from this numerical example is that,
whenever there is possible surge in arrivals or if arriv-
als are highly unpredictable (e.g., during potential
epidemic seasons), the manager should be more con-
servative and admit fewer elective patients by reserv-
ing more beds for these potential arrivals.
5.4. Extension to Capacity Planning at the
Regional Level: Ambulance Zoning
In some countries or localities, the total capacity of an
entire health system, comprising multiple healthcare
facilities with varying roles and specializations, is
planned as a whole (e.g., accountable care organizations
(ACOs); Pham et al. 2015). In Singapore, the network of
restructured and community hospitals is partitioned
into three regional health systems (RHSs), where some
manpower and resourcing decisions are made cen-
trally for each RHS. These decisions may include the
following:
• Zoning: How large should the service population of
each hospital be? Where do we draw the geographical
lines between the service catchment of each hospital?
• Capacity: How large should the capacity of each
hospital be to sufﬁciently service its locality?
We examine the problem of ambulance zoning with
respect to capacity planning, that is, to assign the pop-
ulation within each ACO (or RHS in Singapore) to the
hospitals, such that the risk of bed shortages in each
hospital is minimized.
We present how Model (18) could be applied in this
context. Let I denote the set of hospitals. We are not in-
terested in the differentiation of wards in each hospital;
we consider the hospitals as a whole. Each hospital has
a ﬁxed capacity κi
t  κi for all t ∈T . Let us assume that
for each individual in this population, on a particular
day, the risk of admission into ED is the same. Then the
expected number of emergency admissions to hospital i
on day t is given by λi
t and sums to the expected num-
ber of admissions across all hospitals, denoted Λ. In this
model, each hospital is allowed to have a different LOS
survival probability pi
t and qi
t, which could arise because
of different patient management practices.
Under this interpretation, l enters into the decision
variables w. The term W can be the feasible set im-
bued with the following constraints for Model (18):
• Population constraint:

i∈Iλi
t  Λ.
• Total capacity cost constraint: Capacity can only be as
large as it is cost effective,

i∈Imiκi ≤C, where mi is
the cost vector for each hospital.
Figure 8. Optimization on BOR vs. BSI with Burst Arrivals
Notes. (a) Elective admissions. (b) Probability of shortages.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
40
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

• Service continuity constraint: Serves a minimal num-
ber of elective patients,

t∈T ηi
t ≥Si, ∀i ∈I.
6. Conclusion
Beds are a critical resource in a hospital, and we can
apply our proposed analytics framework for their ef-
fective management, which could reduce costs and im-
prove the quality of care of patients. The generality of
our proposed framework will allow all analytics to be
housed under one system, thus further saving costs. In
the context of prescriptive analytics, our approach of
optimization via BSI leads to highly tractable and scal-
able linear optimization problems, which permits us to
effectively incorporate large sets of data with the preci-
sion of patients characterized by type and demo-
graphic, each with different arrivals and LOS proﬁles.
Although we have focused on steady-state models, the
framework can be extended to dynamic settings for
managing a collection of healthcare units where the
risks bed shortages are mitigated holistically across the
entire system, such as nascent works like Zhou et al.
(2020). Such works indicate the potential for risk-based
methods for managing healthcare resources.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Prof. John Birge, Prof. David Shmoys, the
associate editor, and other anonymous reviewers for valuable
comments and suggestions on improving the manuscript.
Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 1
Notice that, given a function Φ : [0,∞] →[0,1] as de-
scribed in the assumptions, β : Z →[0,1] is a risk-adjusted
BOR if and only if β(˜z)  Φ(ρ(˜z)), and ρ : Z →[0,∞] is lower
semicontinuous with the properties: For all ˜z, ˜z1, ˜z2 ∈Z,
(a) Monotonicity: If P[˜z1 ≤˜z2]  1, then ρ(˜z1) ≤ρ(˜z2):
(b) Risk-free: If P[˜z ≤0]  1, then ρ(˜z)  0.
(c) Overloading: If E[˜z] > 0, then ρ(˜z)  ∞.
(d) Quasiconvexity: For all λ ∈[0,1], ρ(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2)
≤max{ρ(˜z1),ρ(˜z2)}.
This is easily true, because all the properties of β simply
translate to ρ via the one-to-one function Φ.
We next show that if μα is as deﬁned, then ρ(˜z)  inf
α > 0 | μα(˜z) ≤0

 satisﬁes the previous properties. For this
section of the proof, denote by M(˜z)  {α > 0 | μα(˜z) ≤0}.
(a) If P[˜z1 ≤˜z2]  1, then for all α > 0, μα(˜z1) ≤μα(˜z2).
Thus, if α∗∈M(˜z2), then α∗∈M(˜z1), that is, M(˜z2) ⊆M(˜z1).
Thus, ρ(˜z1)  infM(˜z2) ≤infM(˜z2)  ρ(˜z2).
(b) From before, in particular, if ˜z2  0 is the zero random
variable, then μα(˜z1=α) ≤μα(0)  0, ∀α > 0; thus, M(˜z1)  R+
and therefore ρ(˜z1)  0.
(c) If E[˜z] > 0, then certainly ∀α > 0, μα(˜z) > 0. Hence,
M(˜z)  ∅and therefore ρ(˜z)  ∞.
(d) We ﬁrst show that if α ∈M(˜z1) ∩M(˜z2), then α ∈
M(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2). Indeed, if α ∈M(˜z1),M(˜z2), then μα(˜z1),
μα(˜z2) ≤0. By quasiconvexity of μα, we get that μα(λ˜z1+
(1 −λ)˜z2) ≤max{μα(˜z1),μα(˜z2)} ≤0. Thus, ρ(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2)
≤inf M(˜z1) ∩M(˜z2) ≤(∗) max{infM(˜z1), infM(˜z2)}  max{ρ
(˜z1),ρ(˜z2)}, where inequality (*) occurs because of lower
semicontinuity of μα.
The last detail we have to show is that ρ is lower semi-
continuous. For all subsequent proofs regarding continu-
ity, we use the fact that a set Z is closed if and only if for
every sequence ˜zn →˜z in the sup-norm topology in Z, its
limit ˜z ∈Z. In the case of lower semicontinuity, whenever
ρ(˜zn) ≤a, we have ρ(˜z) ≤a.
Fix
a ≥0.
Consider
a
sequence
˜zn →˜z
such
that
ρ(˜zn) ≤a, ∀n. We need to show that ρ(˜z) ≤a. Consider
two cases: First, suppose a > 0. Then, because ρ(˜zn) ≤a,
there must exist, for each n, a sequence a(n)
m ↘a such that
μa(n)
m (˜zn) ≤0, ∀m. By the fact that μα is lower semicontinu-
ous in α, μa(˜zn) ≤0, ∀n. However, now, as n →∞, by
lower semicontinuity of μα, we have that μa(˜z) ≤0. Hence,
ρ(˜z) ≤a taking inﬁmums.
In the second case, suppose that a  0. Because ρ is non-
negative by deﬁnition, ρ(˜zn)  0, and we strive to prove that
ρ(˜z)  0. However, ρ(˜zn)  0 implies that μα(˜zn) ≤0, ∀α > 0.
Hence, for each α > 0, as n →∞, by lower semicontinuity of
μα, μα(˜z) ≤0. However, this just means that ρ(˜z)  0.
Conversely, we want to show that if ρ(˜z) satisﬁes the
previous properties, then there exists some functional μα
as in Theorem 1 and ρ(˜z)  inf α > 0 | μα(˜z) ≤0

.
Let μα(˜z)  inf{v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α}, where ρ obeys the
previous properties. From this deﬁnition, clearly μα is non-
increasing in α. We ﬁrst prove that this choice of μα satis-
ﬁes its required properties. Let Rα(˜z)  {v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α}.
(a)
Suppose
P[˜z1 ≤˜z2]  1;
hence,
P[˜z1 −v ≤˜z2−
v]  1, ∀v ∈R. Thus, by monotonicity of ρ, ρ(˜z1 −v) ≤
ρ(˜z2 −v). Hence, if v ∈Rα(˜z2), then v ∈Rα(˜z1), or in other
words, μα(˜z1) ≤μα(˜z2).
(b) Let E[˜z] > 0. Fix α > 0. Then if v < E[˜z], then ρ(˜z −v) 
∞by overloading. Thus, v ∉Rα(˜z). This means that μα(˜z)
≥E[˜z] > 0.
(c) Consider Rα(0). Now ρ(−vα)  ∞for all v < 0 by over-
loading avoidance. Therefore, zero is a lower bound to Rα(0).
However, 0 ∈Rα(0) by satisﬁcing. Hence, μα(0)  0.
(d) Let v ∈Rα(˜z1) ∩Rα(˜z2). Hence, ρ(˜zi −v) ≤α, i  1, 2. By
quasiconvexity, ρ(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2 −v) ≤max{ρ(˜z1 −v),ρ(˜z2−
v)} ≤α. Hence, v ∈Rα(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2), which means that
μα(λ˜z1 + (1 −λ)˜z2) ≤infRα(˜z1) ∩Rα(˜z2) ≤(∗) max{infRα(˜z1),
infRα(˜z2)}  max {μα(˜z1),μα(˜z2)}. Again, the (*) inequality
holds by lower semicontinuity of ρ.
We now prove that ρ can indeed be constructed from
this μα. Let ρ′(˜z)  inf α′ > 0 | μα′(˜z) ≤0

. We show that
ρ′  ρ.
Consider
α > 0
such
that
μα(˜z) ≤0,
that
is,
inf{v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α} ≤0. Notice that ∀α ≥ρ(˜z); this is
satisﬁed because v  0 clearly lies in this set. Hence, ρ(˜z)
lies in the set of α’s such that inf{v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α} ≤0.
As such, ρ′(˜z) ≤ρ(˜z).
To prove equality, suppose that instead there exists
some ˜z where ρ′(˜z) < ρ(˜z), or in other words, there is
some α < ρ(˜z) such that inf{v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α} ≤0. Denote
by E, the set {v ∈R | ρ(˜z −v) ≤α}. We ﬁrst assert that zero
is a lower bound for E. Consider v ≤0. Then by monoto-
nicity of ρ, P[˜z ≤˜z −v]  1 implies that α < ρ(˜z) ≤ρ(˜z −v).
Thus, v ∉E, ∀v ≤0. Thus, zero is a lower bound for E.
However, by assumption, infE ≤0. Hence, infE  0 but
where 0 ∉E. Thus, there exists a sequence vn ↘0 such
that ρ(˜z −vn) ≤α. However, by lower semicontinuity of ρ,
˜z −vn →˜z as n →∞, so ρ(˜z) ≤α < ρ(˜z), which is a clear
contradiction.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
41
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Finally, it leaves to show that μα is lower semicontinuous
for every α > 0 and also in α. We do this only for the former
as the proof for the latter is identical. Fix α > 0. For each
v ∈R, take a sequence ˜zn →˜z such that μα(˜zn) ≤v. Now, for
each
n,
there
exists
a
sequence
v(n)
m →v
such
that
ρ(˜zn −v(n)
m ) ≤α. Using the lower semicontinuity of ρ, we
have that for each n, ˜zn −v(n)
m →˜z −v; hence, ρ(˜zn −v) ≤
α, ∀n. However, applying lower semicontinuity again on
˜zn −v →˜z −v, we have that ρ(˜z −v) ≤α. In particular, this
means that μα, being the inﬁmum, satisﬁes μα(˜z) ≤v.
Appendix B. Discussion on Lexicographic
Minimization
B.1. Justification of the lex min Model
Lexicographic minimization was most initially mooted in
the game theory context (such as Buck 1958), and methods
were soon developed to implement this (as in Waltz
1967). Deﬁne the lexicographic order on RN
+ as follows:
For u ∈RN
+, let (u(1),:::,u(N)) deﬁne the ordered statistic of
u, u(1) ≥::: ≥u(N). We say that u is strictly lexicographi-
cally dominated by v, denoted u

lexv, if ∃n such that
u(i)  v(i), ∀i ∈{1,:::,n −1} (possibly empty) and u(n) < v(n).
Furthermore, we say that u and v are lexicographically
equal, denoted ulexv, if u(i)  v(i), for i  1,:::,N. We say
that v lexicographically dominates u, written u⪯lexv if
u

lexv or ulexv. This now deﬁnes a partial order on RN
+.
We wish to perform a lex min on (β(˜zi
t(w)))t∈T ,i∈I. This
approach is desirable in the sense that it represents a
degree of “fairness” across different wards i and time pe-
riods t. More speciﬁcally, the optimal solution occurs
where the risk β(˜zi
t) is distributed according to how much
risk can be afforded to be borne by each time period t
and ward i. Given two feasible decisions w1 and w2, and
their
resultant
BSIs
b1  (β(˜zi
t(w1)))t∈T ,i∈I
and
b2 
(β(˜zi
t(w2)))t∈T , i ∈I, if b1⪯lexb2, then b1 is more desirable.
Indeed, suppose b1 and b2 differ ﬁrst at (¯t,¯i). Then, we
can afford to lower the metric at (¯t,¯i) for b2 without caus-
ing any ward that is currently better off than β(˜z
¯i
¯t(w2)),
worse than it after the change.
B.2 Algorithm for Solving Model (18)
Assuming that the system is stable; that is, there exists w ∈
W such that E[˜zi
t(w)] ≤0 for all (t,i) ∈T × I, then this lex min
model may be implemented as described in Algorithm B.1.
Algorithm B.1. Pseudo-Code for Lexicographic Mininim-
ization Model
Initialization: P ←∅, U ←{(t,i) ∈T × I}
Subproblem: Deﬁne subproblem with inputs γ ≥0
V(γ)¢
min
l
s:t: μγ(˜zi
t(w)) ≤l, ∀(t,i) ∈U
μα(˜zi
t(w)) ≤0,
∀(t,i,α) ∈P
w ∈W:
while U ≠∅do
Find γ∗for which V(γ∗)  0 and obtain solution w∗
R ←(t,i) ∈U | ρ(˜zi
t(w∗))  γ∗}

P ←P (t,i,γ∗) | (t,i) ∈R


U ←U −R
end while
Output: Solution w∗
We explain the algorithm here. Let ρ be the riskiness in-
dex corresponding to the BSI. The sets P and U represent
the sets of processed and unprocessed indices, respectively.
Observe that V(γ) is nondecreasing in γ ≥0 and if W is
polyhedral, its solution can be obtained by solving a lin-
ear optimization problem. Hence, using bisection search,
we can tractably determine γ∗such that V(γ∗)  0. More-
over, because l is minimized at zero, there must exist
some constraints for which ρ(˜z
ˆi
ˆt(w∗))  γ∗. This constraint
is the one that generates the next lexicographically largest
risk. Hence, we accept its index (ˆt,ˆi) into the processed in-
dices. In the next iteration, since μα is nondecreasing in α,
if this constraint is replaced with μγ∗(˜z
ˆi
ˆt(w)) ≤0, then the
resulting subproblem can only yield γ ≤γ∗.
Appendix C. Discussion on Predictive Analytics
We can incorporate the BSI into predictions about bed
shortages in the future because of, among other things, demo-
graphic drifts toward an aging population. By classifying
patients into age groups and estimating their corresponding
arrival and survival rates, we may predict how bed shortages
will shift. We could also apply the metric in counterfactual
analysis such as evaluating the impact of transferring long
staying patients from acute hospitals to community hospitals.
How it does so boils down to the two uncertainties that
shape bed shortages: the arrival and survival rate of patients.
The survival rate of patient is deﬁned broadly by the entry
event of the patient into the care (sub-)system, such as acute
care hospitals, until the departure event, which can be dis-
charge, step-down care, or death.
C.1. Patient Segmentation
Let G be some segmentation of the patients in the ward,
perhaps by demographics. To simplify the analysis, we
assume that the underlying proportion of each segment
g ∈G of elective (respectively, emergency) patients is φg
(respectively, θg) and is ﬁxed across all time periods.
From the predictive perspective, one can estimate the
survival rates pg
s and qg
s along these segmentations g ∈G.
These rates will then affect the eventual demand of beds
˜xt,s and ˜yt,s (see Proposition 1). Statistical techniques to
do so have been described in the extant literature and
have been illustrated to achieve a high level of predic-
tive accuracy over a wide spectrum of segmentation con-
structs (Lynn et al. 2007, Zhou et al. 2014). Our goal
here is not to discuss them. Instead, we wish to illustrate
how predictive analytics may be utilised within the cur-
rent
analysis
setup
to
address
present
and
future
problems.
For simplicity, we assume that the planner does not dis-
cern elective patients by specifying admission quotas for
each segment, though this can easily be modeled. Mathe-
matically, this is
˜xt,s 

ηt
j1
˜vj,˜gj,
where ˜vj,˜gj represents the Bernoulli distributed outcome of
whether patient j (from a random segment ˜gj) scheduled
for admission on day t stays at least to the end of day t +
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
42
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

s. Thus, P[˜vj,˜gj  1 | ˜gj  g]  pg
s, and P[˜gj  g]  φg. Because
˜vj,˜gj are independent and identically distributed,
P[˜vj,˜gj  1] 

g∈G
φgP[˜vj,˜gj  1 | ˜gj  g] 

g∈G
φgpg
s¢¯ps:
Hence, ˜xt,s is equivalent to a binomial distribution,
where the probability of success is the weighted sum of
the survival probabilities, that is, ˜xt,s ~ Bin(ηt, ¯ps).
The fact that we did not know the segment of each patient
is an important assumption here. This makes ˜gj a random
variable and enables the outcomes of each patient to be mod-
eled identically. Indeed, this is not equivalent to modeling
ηg
t  ηtφg and ˜xg
t,s ~ Bin(ηg
t ,pg
s), as

g∈G˜xg
t,s¿Bin(ηt, ¯ps) in gen-
eral because patients comprising ˜xg
t,s are not identical across
g ∈G.
By taking into account demographic drift, we can antici-
pate how future emergency arrival rate λt and segment
proportion θg might change. Observe that
˜yt,s 

g∈G
˜yg
t,s,
where ˜yg
t,s ~ Pois(λtθgqg
s) is the number of emergency pa-
tients from segment g who were admitted on day t and
has remained in the ward at the end of day t + s. Because
the sum of independently distributed Poisson random
variables is also a Poisson random variable, we have
˜yt,s ~ Pois(λt¯qs), where ¯qs 

g∈Gθgqg
s is the weighted sum
of survival probabilities.
C.2. Aging Population and Long-Stayers in Hospitals
We zoom in on the challenges of an aging population: G
would represent age groups here. Some implications of an
aging population on bed shortages are listed as follows:
• Total patient arrivals: Both total emergency arrivals and
elective quotas will see higher numbers. The frequency of
complex acute and chronic medical conditions can increase
with age. With a higher proportion of the population being
advanced in age, the total patient arrivals can be expected to
increase (Akushevich et al. 2013).
• LOS: Older patients tend to stay longer (Biber et al. 2013,
Rose et al. 2014) because of greater treatment complexity.
This lowers the relative treatment efﬁciency of older patients.
With a higher proportion of older patients among patient ar-
rivals, the average LOS can be expected to increase.
These effects have an exacerbating effect on bed short-
ages. In the ﬁrst instance, one can extrapolate the rate of
emergency arrivals from demographic drifts. The same
can be done for elective admissions, given other data on
patient referrals and treatment. As such, one can examine
how the BSI of wards would shift over time or examine
the capacity κt needed to keep the BSI at today’s level.
Table D.1. Optimal Elective Scheduling and Corresponding Daily BSI in One Week Under the Risk Minimization Model
When Given the Weekly Elective Quota S
S
Elective scheduling
Daily BSI
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
β(˜z1)
β(˜z2)
β(˜z3)
β(˜z4)
β(˜z5)
β(˜z6)
β(˜z7)
7
0
0
1
1
0
2
3
0.79
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.79
0.77
8
0
0
1
1
1
2
3
0.80
0.81
0.81
0.80
0.81
0.81
0.79
9
0
0
1
1
1
2
4
0.82
0.83
0.82
0.81
0.82
0.82
0.81
10
0
0
1
2
0
2
5
0.83
0.84
0.83
0.84
0.82
0.82
0.84
11
1
0
1
2
1
2
4
0.85
0.85
0.84
0.85
0.85
0.84
0.83
12
0
0
2
2
1
2
5
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.86
13
1
0
2
2
1
3
4
0.87
0.87
0.88
0.88
0.87
0.88
0.86
14
1
0
2
2
1
3
5
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.88
0.89
0.89
15
1
0
2
2
2
3
5
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.91
0.91
0.91
16
1
1
2
2
2
3
5
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.92
17
1
1
2
3
2
3
5
0.92
0.93
0.93
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.93
18
2
1
2
3
2
3
5
0.95
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.94
0.94
19
2
1
3
3
2
3
5
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.95
20
2
1
3
3
2
3
6
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.96
0.99
Appendix D. Additional Tables
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
43
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Table D.4. Simulated Performance Under the Risk Minimization Model When Given S Without Long-Stayers
S
Probability of shortage levels

t∈T
1
TP[˜zt ≥ψ]
Average BOR
Expected shortages
ψ  1
ψ  2
ψ  3
ψ  4
ψ  5
ψ  6
ψ  7
ψ  8
ψ  9
Unconditional
Conditional
7
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.77
0.11
3.05
8
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.79
0.14
3.12
9
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.80
0.18
3.20
10
0.07
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.81
0.22
3.29
11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.83
0.27
3.39
12
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.84
0.34
3.48
13
0.12
0.09
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.85
0.41
3.59
14
0.14
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.87
0.51
3.70
15
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.88
0.62
3.83
16
0.19
0.15
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.89
0.74
3.96
17
0.21
0.17
0.13
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.91
0.87
4.09
18
0.24
0.20
0.15
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.92
1.04
4.24
19
0.28
0.23
0.18
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.93
1.22
4.39
20
0.31
0.26
0.21
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.95
1.41
4.54
21
0.35
0.29
0.23
0.19
0.15
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.96
1.63
4.72
Table D.2. Simulated Performance Under the Risk Minimization Model When Given the Weekly Elective Quota S
S
Probability of shortage levels

t∈T
1
TP[˜zt ≥ψ]
Average BOR
Expected shortages
ψ  1
ψ  2
ψ  3
ψ  4
ψ  5
ψ  6
ψ  7
ψ  8
ψ  9
Unconditional
Conditional
7
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.80
0.20
3.28
8
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.82
0.26
3.39
9
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.83
0.31
3.47
10
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.85
0.39
3.59
11
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.86
0.48
3.70
12
0.15
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.87
0.58
3.82
13
0.18
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.89
0.70
3.95
14
0.20
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.90
0.84
4.08
15
0.24
0.19
0.15
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.92
1.00
4.23
16
0.27
0.22
0.17
0.14
0.11
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.93
1.18
4.40
17
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.94
1.37
4.55
18
0.34
0.28
0.23
0.18
0.15
0.11
0.09
0.06
0.05
0.96
1.59
4.72
19
0.37
0.32
0.26
0.21
0.17
0.13
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.97
1.84
4.91
20
0.41
0.35
0.30
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.07
0.98
2.12
5.11
Table D.3. Optimal Elective Scheduling and Daily BSI Under the Risk Minimization Model Without Long-Stayers Given S
S
Elective scheduling
Daily BSI
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
β(˜z1)
β(˜z2)
β(˜z3)
β(˜z4)
β(˜z5)
β(˜z6)
β(˜z7)
7
0
0
1
1
0
2
3
0.75
0.77
0.77
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.74
8
0
0
1
1
1
2
3
0.76
0.78
0.78
0.77
0.78
0.78
0.75
9
0
0
1
1
1
2
4
0.78
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.79
0.78
0.78
10
0
0
1
2
0
3
4
0.79
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.80
0.79
11
0
0
1
2
1
2
5
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.80
0.82
12
1
0
1
2
1
3
4
0.83
0.83
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.83
0.82
13
1
0
2
2
1
3
4
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.83
14
1
0
2
2
1
3
5
0.86
0.85
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.85
0.85
15
1
0
2
2
2
3
5
0.87
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.87
0.87
0.87
16
1
1
2
2
2
3
5
0.88
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.88
0.88
0.88
17
1
1
2
3
2
3
5
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.90
0.90
0.89
0.89
18
2
1
2
3
2
3
5
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.91
0.91
0.90
0.90
19
2
1
2
3
2
4
5
0.93
0.93
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.93
0.92
20
2
1
3
3
2
4
5
0.94
0.93
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.95
0.93
21
2
2
3
3
2
4
5
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.94
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
44
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Endnotes
1 Khalik S. Public hospitals ‘borrowing’ ward space, The Straits
Times, 30 Aug 2011. Article retrieved from https://www.ttsh.com.
sg/about-us/newsroom/news/article.aspx?id=2422.
2 Parliamentary query raised to the Minister of Health, 20 Jan 2014.
Reply
retrieved
from
https://www.moh.gov.sg/content/moh_
web/home/pressRoom/Parliamentary_QA/2014/bed-crunch.
html.
References
Akushevich I, Kravchenko J, Ukraintseva S, Arbeev K, Yashin A (2013)
Time trends of incidence of age-associated diseases in the us elderly
population: Medicare-based analysis. Age Ageing 42(4):494–500.
Anderson D, Price C, Golden B, Jank W, Wasil E (2011) Examining
the discharge practices of surgeons at a large medical center.
Health Care Management Sci. 14(4):338–347.
Andreoni J, Miller J (2002) Giving according to garp: An experimen-
tal test of the consistency of preferences for altruism. Econometr-
ica 70(2):737–753.
Aumann RJ, Serrano R (2008) An economic index of riskiness.
J. Political Econom. 116(5):810–836.
Avramidis AN, Deslauriers A, L’Ecuyer P (2004) Modeling daily ar-
rivals to a telephone call center. Management Sci. 50(7):896–908.
Ben-Tal A, Teboulle M (2007) An old-new concept of convex risk
measures: The optimized certainty equivalent. Math. Finance 17(3):
449–476.
Biber R, Bail H, Sieber C, Weis P, Christ M, Singler K (2013) Correla-
tion between age, emergency department length of stay and
hospital admission rate in emergency department patients aged
≥70 years. Gerontology 59(1):17–22.
Brown DB, Sim M (2009) Satisﬁcing measures for analysis of risky
positions. Management Sci. 55(1):71–84.
Buck R (1958) Preferred optimal strategies. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 9(2):
312–314.
Challen K, Bentley A, Bright J, Walter D (2007) Clinical review:
Mass casualty triage—Pandemic inﬂuenza and critical care.
Critical Care 11(2):212.
Chan CW, Farias VF, Escobar GJ (2016) The impact of delays on ser-
vice times in the intensive care unit. Management Sci. 63(7):
2049–2072.
Clements A, Halton K, Graves N, Pettitt A, Morton A, Looke D,
Whitby M (2008) Overcrowding and understafﬁng in modern
health-care systems: Key determinants in meticillin-resistant
staphylococcus aureus transmission. Lancet Infectious Diseases 8(7):
427–434.
Cochran JK, Roche K (2008) A queuing-based decision support
methodology
to
estimate hospital
inpatient bed demand.
J. Oper. Res. Soc. 59(11):1471–1482.
Dai J, Shi P (2019) Inpatient overﬂow: An approximate dynamic
programming approach. Manufacturing Service Oper. Manage-
ment 21(4):894–911.
Esogbue AO, Singh AJ (1976) A stochastic model for an optimal pri-
ority bed distribution problem in a hospital ward. Oper. Res. 24(5):
884–898.
F¨ollmer H, Schied A (2002) Convex measures of risk and trading
constraints. Finance Stochastics 6(4):429–447.
Forster AJ, Stiell I, Wells G, Lee AJ, van Walraven C (2003) The ef-
fect of hospital occupancy on emergency department length of
stay and patient disposition. Acad. Emergency Medicine 10(2):
127–133.
Frittelli M, Gianin ER (2005) Law invariant convex risk measures.
Advances in Mathematical Economics (Springer, Berlin), 33–46.
Green LV (2002) How many hospital beds? INQUIRY: J. Healthcare
Organ., Provision, Financing 39(4):400–412.
Gupta D, Denton B (2008) Appointment scheduling in healthcare:
Challenges and opportunities. IIE Trans. 40(9):800–819.
Hall NG, Long DZ, Qi J, Sim M (2015) Managing underperformance
risk in project portfolio selection. Oper. Res. 63(3):660–675.
Haseltine WA (2013) Affordable Excellence: The Singapore Healthcare
Story (Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC).
Helm JE, Van Oyen MP (2014) Design and optimization methods
for elective hospital admissions. Oper. Res. 62(6):1265–1282.
Hershey JC, Schoemaker PJ (1985) Probability vs. certainty equiva-
lence methods in utility measurement: Are they equivalent?
Management Sci. 31(10):1213–1231.
Kaier K, Mutters NT, Frank U (2012) Bed occupancy rates and
hospital-acquired infections: Should beds be kept empty? Clini-
cal Microbiology Infection 18(10):941–945.
Kao EPC, Tung GG (1981) Bed allocation in a public healthcare de-
livery system. Management Sci. 27(5):507–520.
KC DS, Terwiesch C (2009) Impact of workload on service time and
patient safety: An econometric analysis of hospital operations.
Management Sci. 55(9):1486–1498.
KC DS, Terwiesch C (2012) An econometric analysis of patient ﬂows
in the cardiac intensive care unit. Manufacturing Service Oper.
Management 14(1):50–65.
Khachiyan L (1989) The problem of calculating the volume of a poly-
hedron is enumerably hard. Russian Math. Surveys 44(3):199–200.
Kim S-H, Whitt W (2014) Are call center and hospital arrivals well
modeled by nonhomogeneous Poisson processes? Manufactur-
ing Service Oper. Management 16(3):464–480.
Table D.5. Difference Between Optimization on BOR and BSI with Ward Capacity 60
ϵ
Optimal elective scheduling
Average BOR
Probability of shortages
Expected shortages
η1
η2
η3
η4
η5
η6
η7
S
Unconditional
Conditional
Optimization on BOR
0.75
2
2
3
2
3
4
6
22
0.74
0.01
0.02
2.79
0.80
4
2
4
4
3
5
5
27
0.79
0.02
0.07
3.14
0.85
3
3
5
5
4
4
8
32
0.84
0.07
0.24
3.57
0.90
5
3
5
6
5
6
7
37
0.90
0.15
0.62
4.12
0.95
5
5
5
6
6
7
8
42
0.95
0.28
1.36
4.83
Optimization on BSI
0.75
2
2
3
4
3
5
7
26
0.78
0.02
0.06
3.06
0.80
3
1
4
5
4
5
8
30
0.82
0.05
0.16
3.40
0.85
4
3
5
5
4
6
8
35
0.87
0.11
0.43
3.87
0.90
5
4
6
6
5
6
7
39
0.92
0.20
0.87
4.39
0.95
5
4
6
7
4
8
9
43
0.96
0.31
1.58
5.01
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
45
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Kim S-H, Vel P, Whitt W, Cha WC (2015) Poisson and non-Poisson
properties in appointment-generated arrival processes: The case
of an endocrinology clinic. Oper. Res. Lett. 43(3):247–253.
Kuntz L, Scholtes S, Vera A (2007) Incorporating efﬁciency in
hospital-capacity planning in Germany. Eur. J. Health Econom.
8(3):213–223.
Lamiri M, Xie X, Dolgui A, Grimaud F (2008) A stochastic model
for operating room planning with elective and emergency de-
mand for surgery. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 185(3):1026–1037.
Lynn J, Straube BM, Bell KM, Jencks SF, Kambic RT (2007) Using
population segmentation to provide better healthcare for all:
The “Bridges to Health” model. Milbank Quart. 85(2):185–208,
discussion 209–212.
Madsen F, Ladelund S, Linneberg A (2014) High levels of bed occu-
pancy associated with increased inpatient and thirty-day hospi-
tal mortality in Denmark. Health Affairs 33(7):1236–1244.
Meng F, Qi J, Zhang M, Ang J, Chu S, Sim M (2015) A robust opti-
mization model for managing elective admission in a public
hospital. Oper. Res. 63(6):1452–1467.
Nemirovski A, Shapiro A (2006) Convex approximations of chance
constrained programs. SIAM J. Optim. 17(4):969–996.
Pham HH, Pilotte J, Rajkumar R, Richter E, Cavanaugh S, Conway
PH (2015) Medicare’s vision for delivery-system reform: The
role of ACOs. New England J. Medicine 373(11):987–990.
Qi J (2017) Mitigating delays and unfairness in appointment sys-
tems. Management Sci. 63(2):566–583.
Rockafellar RT, Uryasev S (2000) Optimization of conditional value-
at-risk. J. Risk 2:21–42.
Rose M, Pan H, Levinson MR, Staples M (2014) Can frailty predict
complicated care needs and length of stay? Internal Medicine J.
44(8):800–805.
Schull MJ, Szalai JP, Schwartz B, Redelmeier DA (2001) Emergency
department overcrowding following systematic hospital re-
structuring: Trends at twenty hospitals over ten years. Acad.
Emergency Medicine 8(11):1037–1043.
Shi P, Chou MC, Dai JG, Ding D, Sim J (2016) Models and insights
for hospital inpatient operations: Time-dependent ed boarding
time. Management Sci. 62(1):1–28.
Song H, Tucker A, Graue R, Moravick S, Yang J (2019) Capacity pooling
in hospitals: The hidden consequences of off-service placement.
Management Sci. 66(9):3825–3842.
Sprivulis PC, Da Silva JA, Jacobs IG, Frazer AR, Jelinek GA (2006)
The association between hospital overcrowding and mortality
among patients admitted via Western Australian emergency
departments. Medicine J. Australia 184(5):208–212.
Teow KL, El-Darzi E, Foo C, Jin X, Sim J (2012) Intelligent analysis
of acute bed overﬂow in a tertiary hospital in Singapore. J. Med-
ical Systems 36(3):1873–1882.
Virtanen M, Pentti J, Vahtera J, Ferrie JE, Stansfeld SA, Helenius H,
Elovainio M, et al (2008) Overcrowding in hospital wards as a
predictor of antidepressant treatment among hospital staff.
Amer. J. Psychiatry 165(11):1482–1486.
Waltz F (1967) An engineering approach: Hierarchical optimization
criteria. IEEE Trans. Automated Control 12(2):179–180.
Whitt W (1999) Dynamic stafﬁng in a telephone call center
aiming to immediately answer all calls. Oper. Res. Lett. 24(5):
205–212.
Zeldes SP (1989) Optimal consumption with stochastic income:
Deviations from certainty equivalence. Quart. J. Econom. 104(2):
275–298.
Zhou M, Sim M, Lam SWS (2020) Advance admission scheduling
via resource satisﬁcing. Preprint, submitted June 12, 2019;
revised January 2, 2020, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
3394845.
Zhou YY, Wong W, Li H (2014) Improving care for older adults: A
model to segment the senior population. Permmanente J. 18(3):
18–21.
Zhou M, Loke GG, Bandi C, Liau ZQG, Wang W (2021) Intraday
scheduling with patient re-entries and variability in behaviours.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management, ePub ahead of print
March 10, https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2020.0959.
Jingui Xie is an associate professor in the School of Man-
agement, Technical University of Munich. His research inter-
ests include business analytics, optimization with prediction,
queueing theory, and healthcare management.
Gar Goei Loke is an assistant professor in the Depart-
ment of Technology and Operations Management, Rotter-
dam
School
of Management, Erasmus
University. His
research interests include optimization under uncertainty
and its application in queueing settings and its incorporation
in machine learning techniques.
Melvyn Sim is a professor in the Department of Analytics
& Operations, NUS Business School, National University of
Singapore. He has broad interests in prescriptive analytics,
particularly in decision making and optimization under un-
certainty, with applications in operations, transportation,
healthcare, and service systems.
Shao Wei Lam is the head of data science at the Sing-
Health Health Services Research Centre, assistant professor
at the Duke-NUS Medical School, and adjunct faculty with
the Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore Manage-
ment University.
Xie et al.: Analytics of Bed Shortages
46
Operations Research, 2023, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 23–46, © 2022 INFORMS
Downloaded from informs.org by [145.5.176.14] on 02 May 2024, at 02:44 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.