TITLE: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for Discrete Optimization via Simulation: Framework and Algorithms
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2018.1778
---

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Gaussian Markov Random Fields for Discrete
Optimization via Simulation:
Framework and Algorithms
Peter Salemi
The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 22102, psalemi@mitre.org
Eunhye Song
Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802,
eus358@psu.edu
Barry L. Nelson, Jeremy Staum
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208,
nelsonb@northwestern.edu, j-staum@northwestern.edu
We consider optimizing the expected value of some performance measure of a dynamic stochastic simulation
with a statistical guarantee for optimality when the decision variables are discrete, in particular integer-
ordered, the number of feasible solutions is large, and the model execution is too slow to simulate even a
substantial fraction of them. Our goal is to create algorithms that stop searching when they can provide
inference about the remaining optimality gap similar to the correct-selection guarantee of ranking and
selection when it simulates all solutions. Further, our algorithm remains competitive with ﬁxed-budget
algorithms that search eﬃciently but do not provide such inference. To accomplish this we learn and exploit
spatial relationships among the decision variables and objective function values using a Gaussian Markov
random ﬁeld (GMRF). Gaussian random ﬁelds on continuous domains are already used in deterministic and
stochastic optimization because they facilitate the computation of measures like expected improvement that
balance exploration and exploitation. We show that GMRFs are particularly well suited to the discrete-
decision-variable problem, both from a modeling and a computational perspective. Speciﬁcally, GMRFs
permit the deﬁnition of a sensible neighborhood structure, and they are deﬁned by their precision matrices
which can be constructed to be sparse. Using this framework we create both single and multiresolution
algorithms, prove the asymptotic convergence of both, and evaluate their ﬁnite-time performance empirically.
Key words : large-scale discrete optimization via simulation, inferential optimization, Gaussian Markov
Random Fields
History : First submitted on May 2016; revisions submitted on March 2017, July 2017, October 2017.
1

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
1. Introduction
Optimization plays a central role in operations research. For many practical stochastic optimization
problems the objective function cannot be evaluated exactly and instead must be estimated using
simulation. Such problems require optimization via simulation (OvS). OvS problems in which the
decision variables can only assume discrete values are called discrete optimization via simulation
(DOvS) problems, and they present particular challenges. In this paper, we focus on DOvS with
integer-ordered decision variables.
Due to its practical importance, DOvS has been an active area of research for many years.
Remarkable theoretical and practical success has been achieved using exhaustive search algorithms
known collectively as ranking and selection (R&S). R&S simulates all feasible solutions and termi-
nates with either a guaranteed probability of correct selection (frequentist) or posterior assessment
of the relative quality of the selected solution (Bayesian); see Kim (2013) and Frazier (2012),
respectively, for surveys. These guarantees are comforting because even when all feasible solutions
are simulated it is not possible to promise optimality in ﬁnite time except in very special cases.
When the number of feasible solutions is too large to exhaust, then many DOvS algorithms
employ adaptive random search (ARS). These algorithms attempt to leverage, in an informal way,
anticipated spatial structure such as “good feasible solutions tend to be clustered.” ARS algorithms
are usually proven to be either globally or locally convergent as the simulation eﬀort increases
without bound. See, for example, the survey in Nelson (2010).
In this paper we provide a DOvS framework to formally learn spatial relationships, to balance
exploration and exploitation, and to facilitate a stopping criterion that considers the uncertainty at
feasible solutions that have and have not been simulated for large-scale problems. Loosely speaking,
we want eﬃcient search with R&S-like conclusions when we stop. We will represent the objective-
function response surface as a Gaussian random ﬁeld (GRF), because GRFs support assessments of
the beneﬁt of expending simulation eﬀort in various ways, and statistical inference on the potential
of unseen solutions. GRF-based optimization methods were introduced for deterministic computer
experiments in Jones et al. (1998), followed by Huang et al. (2006) which considered computer
experiments with noisy output. Recently, Xie et al. (2016) and Quan et al. (2013) created GRF-
based optimization methods for DOvS. All of these methods use a GRF with a continuous domain
and then project the problem into the discrete setting. Unfortunately, the standard covariance
functions for continuous domains lead to a dense covariance matrix, and the inverse of this matrix is
used for ﬁtting the GRF and generating inference that guides the search. Therefore, methods based
on a continuous covariance function can encounter diﬃculties for large-scale problems with many
feasible solutions due to slow and ill-conditioned numerical computations, and (more importantly
for this paper) can give misleading inference upon stopping.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
A central contribution of this paper is creating a GRF that is appropriate for the DOvS problem.
Speciﬁcally, we model the objective function values at the feasible solutions as a realization of a
discrete Gaussian Markov random ﬁeld (GMRF) (Rue and Held 2005). The Markov structure of
GMRFs is intuitive for problems in operations research (Salemi et al. 2013). For example, if we are
interested in predicting the value of the objective function at a feasible solution, then the values
of the objective function at the feasible solutions in a neighborhood of it would often be suﬃcient;
other feasible solutions would provide little additional information. This type of structure can be
represented in a GMRF, and the neighborhood is user selected. Further, GMRFs can be deﬁned
on a lattice so the use of GMRFs in DOvS problems is more natural than using a GRF with a
continuous domain. Most importantly, the Markov structure lends itself to eﬃcient and numerically
stable calculations for large-scale problems. The dependence in a GMRF is deﬁned by its precision
matrix, which is the inverse of the covariance matrix. Using the Markov structure of GMRFs,
the precision matrix can be constructed to be sparse. Thus, we can use sparse-matrix methods to
calculate expressions that involve the precision matrix.
Although our GMRF framework facilitates the use of sparse-matrix methods that support algo-
rithms for large numbers of feasible solutions, there will nevertheless be a computational limit on
the size of problem we can handle directly. A second contribution of this paper is to extend the
GMRF approach to a multiresolution framework that can be used to solve DOvS problems with vast
numbers of solutions. The multiresolution framework exploits a region-level GMRF to learn about
the quality of disjoint regions of the solution space, and solution-level GMRFs to learn about the
quality of individual feasible solutions within each region.
A third contribution is to demonstrate that expected improvement (EI) combined with our frame-
work can provide eﬀective inference for terminating the search when the estimated optimality gap is
small enough. Jones et al. (1998) ﬁrst introduced EI for optimization problems with deterministic
computer experiments. In their setting the objective function can be observed without noise, so
their EI criterion does not incorporate the uncertainty in the output from a stochastic simula-
tion. We show how to correctly calculate EI for a GMRF+noise, which turns out to be similar
to Williams et al. (2000). To distinguish our result from EI for deterministic experiments, we call
it complete expected improvement (CEI); it is “complete” in the sense that it incorporates the
uncertainty in stochastic simulation by treating the value at the current sample-best solution as a
random variable, just like the values of the feasible solutions being considered to improve it.
The paper presents both a GMRF framework within which algorithms can be designed, and speciﬁc
solution-level and multiresolution DOvS algorithms. Both algorithms are shown to converge to a
globally optimal solution as simulation eﬀort increases under very mild conditions (essentially ﬁnite
variance). More importantly, however, these algorithms can self-terminate well short of inﬁnite

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
eﬀort with statistical assurance about the optimality gap; this inference, which depends on the
GMRF assumptions, is a central feature of our work.
In the next section we present the GMRF framework, which includes deﬁning GMRFs and
explaining how they can represent a DOvS problem. Section 3 details a speciﬁc solution-level DOvS
algorithm, including parameter estimation and sparse-matrix calculation techniques. For problems
with vast numbers of feasible solutions, we extend the framework to a multiresolution algorithm
in Section 4. Results of numerical experiments are found in Section 5.
2. A Framework for DOvS using GMRFs
A GMRF is a non-degenerate multivariate Gaussian random vector Y = (Y1,Y2,...,Yn)⊤that is
associated with an undirected and labeled graph G = (V,E), where V denotes the set of nodes and
E denotes the set of edges; see Rue and Held (2005). Each node in V is associated with a unique
element of Y. Two nodes in the graph are called neighbors if they are connected by an edge. If we
denote the mean vector and precision matrix of Y by µ and Q, respectively, then we can write the
probability density function of the GMRF as
f(y | µ,Q) = (2π)−n/2|Q|1/2 exp

−1
2(y −µ)⊤Q(y −µ)

,
where the positive-deﬁnite precision matrix Q is the inverse of the covariance matrix. The diagonal
entries of the precision matrix are the conditional precisions Prec(Yi | YV\{i}) = Qii, where YV\{i}
is the vector of values of the GMRF observed only at the nodes V \ {i}. The scalar precision
Qii is the reciprocal of the conditional variance. The oﬀ-diagonal elements are proportional to
conditional correlations; speciﬁcally Corr(Yi,Yj | YV\{i,j}) = −Qij/
p
QiiQjj, where YV\{i,j} is the
vector of values of the GMRF observed only at the nodes V \ {i,j}. The graph G determines the
non-zero pattern of the precision matrix Q, and vice versa, since for a GMRF Qij ̸= 0 if and only
if {i,j} ∈E. Thus, the precision matrix will be sparse if the set of edges is small, and vice versa.
GMRFs are “Markov” because they possess the local Markov property:
Yi ⊥YV\{i,N(i)} | YN(i)
for every
i ∈V,
where N(i) is the set of neighbors of node i in G; that is, N(i) = {j : {i,j} ∈E}.
To better understand the local Markov property, consider the left-hand graph G in Figure 1,
which represents a portion of a feasible region where the nodes correspond to solutions x⊤= (x1,x2)
with constraint x1 < x2. If we observe the values of the GMRF at x = (0,3), (1,4), (2,3) and (1,2),
then our prediction of the value of the GMRF at (1,3), conditional on that information, does not
depend on the GMRF at any other lattice point in the graph. The Markov property does not imply
that nodes far away from one another are independent, but rather that if we know the value of the

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
(0,4)
(0,3)
(0,2)
(0,1)
(1,2)
(1,3)
(1,4)
(2,4)
(2,3)
(3,4)
(0,4)
(0,3)
(0,2)
(0,1)
(1,2)
(1,3)
(1,4)
(2,4)
(2,3)
(3,4)
Figure 1
A portion of two graphs G = (V,E) corresponding to a subset of the integer lattice Z2 with the constraint
x1 < x2 and illustrating the neighborhoods N(x) (left) and N +(x) (right).
GMRF at nodes close by, then we can ignore nodes farther away conditional on those values. To
completely specify a GMRF we only need to specify the mean µ and the precision matrix Q, whose
non-zero pattern is associated with the structure of the graph G. A problem-appropriate GRF is
important since our stopping inference will be with respect to it.
2.1. A Precision Matrix for DOvS
In a DOvS problem with integer-ordered decision variables, the feasible region X is a ﬁnite subset of
the d-dimensional integer lattice Zd. Thus, the straightforward construction of the graph G = (V,E)
starts with deﬁning the nodes of the graph V to be X. To ﬁnish the construction of G, we must
specify the neighborhood structure for any given node/solution.
Two sensible neighborhoods for a solution x ∈X are N(x) = {x′ ∈X : ||x −x′||2 = 1}, which has
up to 2d neighbors in d dimensions, and N +(x) = {x′ ∈X : ||x−x′||∞= 1}, which has up to 3d −1
neighbors in d dimensions. Both are illustrated in Figure 1 for d = 2.
Since we are particularly interested in DOvS problems with large feasible regions, and because
(roughly speaking) the more sparse Q is the larger the DOvS problems we can solve, our algorithm
will use the neighborhood structure N(x). For this neighborhood the fraction of non-zero entries
in the precision matrix Q is bounded above by (2d+1)/|X|, which is very small for large problems.
Although we assume this speciﬁc neighborhood for eﬃcient computations, our GMRF framework
allows any neighborhood structure and our convergence proofs do not depend on it.
Deﬁning the graph G, and thus the non-zero pattern of the precision matrix, does not specify
the values of the non-zero entries of Q. A standard approach is to have the entries of Q given by a
function p(x,x′;θ), where θ is a vector of parameters; i.e., Qij ≜p(xi,xj;θ). For the neighborhood
N(x), we propose θ = (θ0,θ1,θ2,...,θd)⊤and
p(x,x′;θ) =



θ0,
if x = x′
−θ0θj, if |x −x′| = ej
0,
otherwise
(1)

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
for x,x′ ∈Zd, where ej is the jth standard basis vector. Recall that Qii is the conditional precision
of solution i, and −Qij/
p
QiiQjj is the conditional correlation between solutions i and j. Thus, θ0
is the conditional precision of each solution, and θj is the conditional correlation between solutions
that diﬀer by 1 in the jth coordinate direction. That the conditional correlations can depend on
the coordinate direction is important to allow for response surfaces that change more rapidly in
one direction as compared to another.
Since the conditional precisions must be positive, it follows that θ0 > 0. We also want neighbors
to have non-negative conditional correlations, so we restrict the values of θ1,θ2,...,θd to be non-
negative as well. Furthermore, we need θj ≤1 for j = 1,2,...,d, since the conditional correlations
must be less than one. Lastly, Q should be positive-deﬁnite. Exploiting these restrictions, we
calculate the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters; see EC.2 in the e-companion to
this paper. With this parameterization and these restrictions, Q is a non-singular M-matrix so
its inverse is nonnegative, i.e., [Q−1]ij ≥0 for all i and j. In other words, there are no negative
unconditional correlations among nodes in the GMRF, which is a property that makes sense in
many DOvS problems.
In summary, this parameterization is compact (d+1 parameters), captures key features we expect
in DOvS problems, and all but θ0 are upper and lower bounded which facilitates estimation. Notice
that even though we construct the precision matrix Q(θ) to be sparse, the covariance matrix it
implies, Q(θ)−1, will typically be dense, as it should be.
2.2. A GMRF Representation of DOvS
We consider the DOvS problem, minimize y(x) ≜E[Y (x)] subject to x ∈X, where X is a ﬁnite
subset of the d-dimensional integer lattice Zd and n ≜|X|. The distribution of the random variable
Y (x), as a function of the feasible solution x is unknown. However, the expectation y(x) ≜E[Y (x)]
can be estimated via stochastic simulation. Formally, we are able to observe
Yj(x) = y(x) + ϵj(x)
(2)
for any feasible solution x on replication j = 1,2,..., where {ϵj(x)} are i.i.d. with mean 0 and ﬁnite
variance that may depend on x. Below we will also assume that the ϵj(x) are normally distributed.
While we assume the ability to make replications in this paper, a single-run steady-state simulation
setting could be accommodated with, say, batch means playing the role of Yj(x).
Let y denote the vector of objective function values
 y(x1),y(x2),...,y(xn)
⊤. Of course y is
unknown, so we model it as a realization of the GMRF
Y ≜
 Y(x1),Y(x2),...,Y(xn)
⊤∼N(µ,Q(θ)−1)
(3)

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
with mean vector µ and precision matrix Q(θ), as deﬁned above.
Similar to virtually all methods for optimization based on GRFs, the essence of our approach is
to use the conditional distribution of the GMRF after having simulated some feasible solutions as
the guidance and inference engine for our search. Throughout the paper we use the term “design
point” to refer to a feasible solution x that has been simulated for any number of replications, and
we use the terms “point” and “feasible solution” interchangeably. Therefore, we are interested in
the conditional distribution of the GMRF given simulation output at the design points.
Let Ξ2 ⊆X denote the current set of design points and partition X into the two disjoint sets Ξ2
and Ξ1 = X \ Ξ2. Thus, Ξ2 is the set of feasible solutions that have been simulated, and Ξ1 is the
set of feasible solutions that have not. For simplicity, we use “1” as a subscript to denote quantities
associated with the set Ξ1 and “2” as a subscript to denote quantities associated with the set Ξ2.
For instance, n1 = |Ξ1| and n2 = |Ξ2| are the numbers of solutions in each set.
Using these disjoint sets, we can partition the vectors y,Y,µ, and the precision matrix Q(θ),
and rewrite expression (3) as
Y1
Y2

∼N
 µ1
µ2

,

Q11(θ) Q12(θ)
Q12(θ)⊤Q22(θ)
−1!
.
Let ¯Y2 be the vector of sample means of the simulation output at the design points. Consistent
with the output model (2), we represent ¯Y2 as a realization of the GMRF Yϵ
2 = Y2 + ϵ, with Y2
and ϵ independent, and ϵ ∼N(⃗0n2×1,Q−1
ϵ ), where Qϵ is the intrinsic precision matrix of the noise
inherent to the stochastic simulation output ¯Y2. When we simulate design points independently,
Qϵ is a diagonal matrix, whereas when we simulate with common random numbers (CRN), Qϵ is a
dense matrix. The values in Qϵ also depend on how many replications have been averaged, which
need not be the same at all design points. In EC.1 we prove the following:
Theorem 1. The conditional distribution of Y given Yϵ
2 = ¯Y2 is
N
 µ1
µ2

+ ¯Q(θ)−1

⃗0n1×1
Qϵ(¯Y2 −µ2)

, ¯Q(θ)−1
!
,
(4)
where
¯Q(θ) ≜

Q11(θ) Q12(θ)
Q12(θ)⊤Q22(θ)

+
0n1×n1 0n1×n2
0⊤
n1×n2
Qϵ

is the conditional precision matrix, and 0ni×nj is the ni × nj matrix of zeros.
Remark: The sparsity of ¯Q(θ) is inherited from the sparsity of Q(θ) and Qϵ. Furthermore, as will
be discussed in Section 3.2, we can avoid direct inversion of ¯Q(θ) using sparse-matrix methods.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
2.3. Indiﬀerence-Zone R&S and Expected Improvement
Our goal is to create a framework for DOvS algorithms that are self-stopping with inference similar
in spirit to that of indiﬀerence-zone (IZ) R&S but only simulating a small fraction of the feasible
solutions. This is clearly impossible without a useful model of the unknown objective function,
and we propose a GMRF—with appropriate neighborhood structure and parameterization—that
is observed with noise.
Let x⋆denote the unknown best of the n feasible solutions, which we assume for simplicity
of exposition is unique: x⋆= argminxy(x). Let ˜x be the selected solution by whatever method.
Two standard objectives in IZ R&S are attaining a desired probability of correct selection (PCS)
Pr
˜x = x⋆minx̸=x⋆y(x) −y(x⋆) ≥δ
 
≥1 −α, and attaining a desired probability of a good selec-
tion (PGS) Pr{y(˜x) −y(x⋆) ≤δ} ≥1−α. Both statements refer to properties of the R&S procedure
averaged over the stochastic (intrinsic) simulation noise. Our approach is more akin to PGS than
PCS in that we make no assumption about the gap between the best and next-best feasible solu-
tion, but we do require the user to provide a smallest practically signiﬁcant diﬀerence δ measured
in the same units as the response y(x).
Using our notation, the standard deﬁnition of “EI” for a feasible solution x is
EIt(x) = E

max{0,Y(˜xt) −Y(x)}|¯Yt
2

(5)
where we have appended a superscript t to indicate quantities available at the end of the tth iteration
of an algorithm. In the original EI criterion for deterministic computer experiments of Jones et al.
(1998), Y(˜xt) = y(˜xt), the true value of the best solution simulated through iteration t (which is
unambigously known); and the only uncertainty in Y(x) is due to the conditional distribution of
the GRF Y(x). Clearly this is inappropriate when the output is from a stochastic simulation, so
there have been attempts to account for noise, most prominently MNEI (Quan et al. 2013) and
Augmented EI (Huang et al. 2006). However, these attempts are incomplete in the sense that do
not average over all sources of uncertainty.
To distinguish it from these other versions, we use the term complete expected improvement (CEI)
for the mathematically correct evaluation of (5) under our GMRF+noise model. CEI averages over
both the full conditional joint distribution of the GMRF Y(x), and the simulation noise, given
the observed simulation outputs up through the current iteration. It is, in this sense, “complete,”
but it is still EI. Because we intend to use EI for stopping inference it is important to evaluate it
correctly. See EC.8 for further analysis of how CEI is diﬀerent from deterministic EI.
Given the simulation output ¯Yt
2, the conditional joint distribution of Y(˜xt) and Y(x) is bivariate
normal with parameters from the rows and columns of Equation (4) corresponding to ˜xt and x.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
Denote the conditional means by M t(˜xt) and M t(x), the conditional variances by V t(˜xt) and
V t(x), and the conditional correlation by ρt(˜xt,x). Let
V t(˜xt,x) ≜V t(˜xt) + V t(x) −2ρt(˜xt,x)
p
V t(˜xt)V t(x)
be the conditional variance of the diﬀerence Y(˜xt) −Y(x). Then the CEI of solution x, CEI(x), is
CEIt(x) = (M t(˜xt) −M t(x))Φ
 
M t(˜xt) −M t(x)
p
V t(˜xt,x)
!
+
p
V t(˜xt,x) φ
 
M t(˜xt) −M t(x)
p
V t(˜xt,x)
!
,
(6)
where φ and Φ are the density and cumulative distribution function, respectively, of a standard
normal random variable. We used the expression for EI in Jones et al. (1998) to derive (6) by
noting that conditional on ¯Yt
2 the diﬀerence Y(˜xt)−Y(x) is a Gaussian random variable with mean
M t(˜xt) −M t(x) and variance V t(˜xt,x).
We propose stopping when
max
x̸=˜xt CEIt(x) ≤δ
(7)
where ˜xt is the sample best solution (smallest sample mean) through iteration t, and simulating the
feasible solution with the largest CEI(x) when it is not. This stopping criterion has been suggested
in other EI-based methods, such as Huang et al. (2006). Here is why we adopt it:
• We chose this deﬁnition of ˜xt because it is the solution we would actually select if we stopped;
˜xt = minx M t(x) is another viable choice, but we consider ˜xt = minx ¯Y (x) more reliable in
that our GMRF, like any GRF, is a useful model, but ¯Y (x) is a direct estimator free of the
estimated parameters of GMRF.
• PCS/PGS provide guarantees averaged over the stochastic simulation noise; CEIt(x) goes
further by averaging over the remaining uncertainty about the values of y(x), both simulated
and not simulated, as represented by the conditional distribution of the GMRF. Both relate
to the optimality gap between the selected and best solution. Thus, EI is a logical extension
when not all n solutions have been simulated, as they are in R&S.
• Since EI evaluates improvement of each solution x, we take the maximum of EIs to decide
whether to stop. One can choose to stop when improvement from the smallest possible response
value given by the GMRF is less than δ, i.e, E[max{0,Y(˜xt)−minx∈X Y(x)}|¯Yt
2] ≤δ. However,
this criterion can be overly conservative for large X.
While EI is consistent with IZ R&S, other measures could be employed. For instance, the knowl-
edge gradient (KG) chooses the next solution to simulate by looking forward to the impact on the
estimated value of the optimal solution via the predictive distribution obtained from allocating one

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
or more observations to x. In our notation, assuming a ﬁxed number of replications per iteration,
and formulated so that the KG is positive like EI,
KGt(x) = min
x′ E

Y(x′)
Yt
2

−E

min
x′ Y(x′)
Yt
2, xt+1 = x

.
(8)
In words, EI estimates the optimality gap given the current data, while KG seeks the steepest descent
direction to improve the optimal solution in the next iteration. One could stop a search when all
of the KG’s are small implying that little additional improvement is possible, i.e., maxx KG(x) ≤ϵ
for some small ϵ. However, it is not appropriate to choose ϵ = δ as the improvement from a single
iteration is small, although the optimality gap of the current optimal solution is bigger than δ.
KG-based stopping is more natural when there is a cost to continued simulation and one wants to
know if it is worth the eﬀort.
3. A Solution-Level Algorithm
In this section we present an instance of our framework, the Gaussian Markov improvement algo-
rithm (GMIA). We refer to it as a “solution-level algorithm” because the nodes of the GMRF
correspond to individual feasible solutions x, and we employ the neighborhood structure N(x)
described in Section 2.1. An outline is given in Section 3.1. We then describe eﬃciently calculating
the conditional distribution (4) using sparse matrix techniques in Section 3.2. GMIA represents
speciﬁc choices that we have made and found eﬀective, but additional enhancements, other neigh-
borhood structures, and ﬁne-tuning using known properties of a speciﬁc problem, are certainly
possible. Even using sparse matrix techniques, |X| can be so large that direct application of GMIA
is computationally impossible. To address such cases we describe a multiresolution algorithm in
Section 4 that exploits a region-level GMRF as well as solution-level GMRFs; to the best of our
knowledge this is the ﬁrst such algorithm.
3.1. GMIA Outline
GMIA utilizes CEI to search for solutions to simulate, and to stop when it drops below a speciﬁed
threshold δ.
GMIA
0. Generate a set of ks design points. Simulate r replications for each design point and use
the simulation output to calculate the maximum likelihood estimates (MLEs) for the GMRF
parameters using the method in EC.2.
1. Let ˜x, the current sample-best solution, be the design point with the smallest sample mean.
2. Calculate the CEI with respect to ˜x, deﬁned in Section 2.3, for each candidate feasible solution.
If maxx̸=˜x CEI(x) ≤δ, then go to Step 5. Otherwise, go to Step 3.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
3. Simulate r replications at both ˜x and the candidate feasible solution x∗
CEI that maximizes the
CEI over the set of all candidate feasible solutions.
4. Update the simulation output at ˜x with the new replications. If x∗
CEI is a design point then
update the simulation output at x∗
CEI and go to Step 1. If x∗
CEI is not a design point, then add
x∗
CEI to the set of design points, add the simulation output obtained at x∗
CEI to the collection
of simulation output, and go to Step 1.
5. Return ˜x as the estimated optimal solution.
The inputs to the algorithm are the initial number of design points ks, the number of replications
to be allocated each time a solution is simulated r (which can be adaptive provided r > 0), and
the smallest practically important optimality gap δ.
3.2. Calculating the Conditional Distribution and CEI
Substituting the plug-in estimate bQϵ for the intrinsic precision matrix, and the MLEs bθ and bβ0
for the parameters of the GMRF (see EC.2), into the conditional distribution (4), we obtain the
estimated conditional distribution
N
 
bβ01n×1 + ¯Q(bθ)−1

⃗0n1×1
bQϵ(¯Y2 −bβ01n2×1)

, ¯Q(bθ)−1
!
(9)
where
¯Q(bθ) ≜

Q11(bθ) Q12(bθ)
Q12(bθ)⊤Q22(bθ)

+
0n1×n1 0n1×n2
0⊤
n1×n2
bQϵ

.
In this conditional distribution, we ignore the variability that is added from estimating the mean
β0, so the conditional covariance matrix is still ¯Q(bθ)−1.
The computationally expensive calculation required to compute the conditional distribution is
inversion of the matrix ¯Q(bθ). Inverting a dense n × n matrix is, in general, O(n3). However, our
matrix is sparse, and with our proposed neighborhood structure the fraction of non-zero elements
is bounded above by (2d + 1)/n. To compute all n −1 CEI’s we only need the n diagonal elements
of ¯Q−1(bθ), and the n −1 oﬀ-diagonal elements of one column. Methods for computing selected
elements of diagonal-dominant sparse matrices can be used to get the diagonal elements and very
few others. Most such methods are based on the pioneering paper by Takahashi et al. (1973),
with more recent variations and applications found in Erisman and Tinney (1975), Niessner and
Reichert (1983) and Vanhatalo and Vehtari (2012), and implemented in packages such as PARDISO
(http://www.pardiso-project.org/). The one column we need can be obtained by a direct back-
solve. Further, using sparse-matrix format the storage required to retain ¯Q is linear in the (small)
number of non-zero elements. In EC.7 we provide some additional insight into how our speciﬁc
neighborhood structure can be exploited. For our proof-of-concept GMIA and MR-GMIA (below)
we used the general-purpose sparse matrix methods in Matlab, but custom code can fully exploit
the techniques described above.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3.3. Asymptotic Convergence of GMIA
GMIA exploits the GMRF framework to terminate when the expected improvement from additional
searching is small. Under very mild conditions GMIA, without any stopping condition, converges
with probability 1 to a globally optimal solution. This result does not depend in any way on the
validity of the GMRF framework, but only on the following assumptions: (A) y(x) > −∞for all
x ∈X; (B) 0 < Var[Y (x)] < +∞for all x ∈X; and (C) the initial estimated precision matrix Q(bθ)
is positive deﬁnite and is not updated thereafter. In EC.3 we prove the following theorem:
Theorem 2. The GMIA algorithm without a stopping condition simulates each solution x ∈X
inﬁnitely often with probability 1 as the number of iterations goes to inﬁnity.
As a consequence of Theorem 2, the fact that the number of feasible solutions n is ﬁnite, and
that the estimated optimal solution is the simulated solution with the smallest sample mean, the
asymptotic convergence of GMIA follows by the strong law of large numbers.
Theorem 2 does not depend on our chosen neighborhood structure being “correct,” nor does it
depend on having “good” parameter estimates for the GMRF. In fact, the result will hold with
any neighborhood and GMRF parameterization that satisﬁes Assumption C. The eﬃciency of the
CEI computations, and the validity of the CEI inference, will be improved by good choices and
estimates, however. Further, we can relax Assumption C and allow bµ and bθ, and therefore Q(bθ),
to be updated a ﬁnite number of times.
4. The Multiresolution Framework and Algorithm
The core problem in DOvS is balancing exploration and exploitation. Gaussian-process-based opti-
mization obtains this balance by incorporating measures like EI to guide the search. Although a
local search can be used to ﬁnd a point that maximizes EI or KG locally (Xie et al. 2016), to fully
beneﬁt from this approach we a need to compute an EI or KG measure for every feasible solution
on every iteration. There will always be feasible regions X that are too large for this to be possible.
What constitutes “too large” depends on a number of implementation-speciﬁc and problem-speciﬁc
factors.
In this section we show that our GMRF framework lends itself to a powerful multiresolution
extension: We ﬁrst partition X into m disjoint regions P1,P2,...,Pm, where each region is a subset
of X that is connected in the graph G. Then we let the nodes of a region-level GMRF represent
a measure of the overall solution quality within each region, with a neighborhood structure again
deﬁned by proximity (i.e., adjacent regions). The region-level GMRF provides global guidance by
facilitating a CEI comparison among regions. As in the previous section, the quality of individual
solutions within a region Pj is represented by a solution-level GMRF, except that the GMRFs for
Pj and Pℓfor j ̸= ℓare assumed to be independent.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
(0,4)
(0,3)
(0,2)
(0,1)
(1,2)
(1,3)
(1,4)
(2,4)
(2,3)
(3,4)
(1,1)
(2,1)
(3,1)
(2,2)
(3,2)
(3,3)
[1,1]
[2,1]
[2,2]
[1,2]
Figure 2
Illustration of a region-level GMRF and four solution-level GMRFs in two dimensions.
In this framework the solutions across regions are connected by the region-level GMRF, rather
than by their neighboring individual solutions, and the solutions within a region are connected
by their solution-level GMRF. We want the regions to have a large number of feasible solutions,
to make the independence approximation reasonable, but not so many that we cannot eﬃciently
calculate the CEI for each individual solution within a region. Further, it is beneﬁcial (but not
required) that the regions be of similar shape and contain a similar number of feasible solutions.
Figure 2 shows a (very small) region-level and four solution-level GMRFs of a rectangular feasible
region for (x1,x2). Conceptually, we are not limited to just two resolutions: a GMRF for regions of
regions could also be deﬁned. Fortunately, region-level and solution-level GMRFs will be suﬃcient
for many problems of practical interest.
In the multiresolution framework the region-level GMRF describing the quality and spatial
structure of regions has its own mean and precision matrix, as described below. The solution-level
and the region-level GMRFs work together to balance exploration and exploitation, and terminate
when the joint CEIs fall below a threshold. The speciﬁc multiresolution algorithm described in this
section is a ﬁrst step toward realizing this general framework, and it is particularly well-suited to
low-dimension problems with vast number of solutions. In Section 5.3, we demonstrate a variation
that facilitates solving higher dimensional problems.
The response associated with the region Pℓis
z(Pℓ) = |Pℓ|−1 X
x∈Pℓ
y(x).
That is, the measure of region-level quality z(Pℓ) is the average of the objective-function values of
all solutions in Pℓ. Similar to the solution-level GMRF, we model z = (z(P1),z(P2),...,z(Pm))⊤as
a realization of a region-level GMRF Z ≜(Z(P1),Z(P2),...,Z(Pm))⊤∼N(η,T(τ)−1) with mean
vector η and precision matrix T(τ) as a function of parameters τ, which are analogous to µ,Q(θ),
and θ at the solution level. Similar to the solution-level GMRF, our main interest is to ﬁnd the
conditional distribution of Z given observations from design regions.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Let P = {P1,P2,...,Pm} denote the set of region-level “feasible solutions.” A “design region”
Pℓis any region for which at least one of its feasible solutions x has been simulated; that is, there
exists x ∈Pℓsuch that x ∈Ξ2. The set of design regions is denoted by Π2, and Π1 = P\Π2. We
can partition z,Z,η, and T(τ) using Π1 and Π2 as we did at the solution level. Within design
region Pℓ, let Ξ2(Pℓ) ⊆Pℓbe the set of feasible solutions in Pℓthat have been simulated, and
let Ξ1(Pℓ) = Pℓ\Ξ2(Pℓ). See EC.4 for a justiﬁcation and complete speciﬁcation of the region-level
GMRF.
For the solution-level GMRFs, we may choose to ﬁt a diﬀerent set of parameters for each region—
µℓand θℓfor Pℓ—or assume all regions share the same solution-level parameters µ and θ, which
substantially reduces the computation for parameter estimation. We employ the latter approach
in experiments.
In EC.4, we present a detailed version of MR-GMIA. On each iteration of the algorithm, we select
three regions in which to run simulations: (i) the design region Pmin that contains the solution with
the smallest sample mean among all simulated solutions in X, (ii) the design region ˜P that has the
smallest region-level estimator ¯Z(Pℓ) among Pℓ∈Π2 (see EC.4), and (iii) the region P⋆
CEI that has
the largest region-level CEI among all regions in P. Since it is possible that Pmin is the same as ˜P
or P⋆
CEI, we may only select two regions on some iterations. Notice that P⋆
CEI may be a region in
which no solution has yet been simulated, in which case we simulate ks initial design points from
P⋆
CEI. For Pmin and ˜P, and for P⋆
CEI if it already is a design region, we apply the same method as in
the solution-level GMIA algorithm: at each iteration, we simulate two solutions, the solution with
the smallest sample mean and the solution with the largest solution-level CEI in that region. The
algorithm stops when both largest region-level CEI and solution-level CEI fall below δ.
In EC.4 we prove the following theorem:
Theorem 3. The MR-GMIA algorithm in EC.4 without a stopping condition simulates each solu-
tion x ∈X inﬁnitely often with probability 1 as the number of iterations goes to inﬁnity.
Therefore, the MR-GMIA ﬁnds the global optimal solution with probability 1 as the simulation
budget increases. More generally, such global convergence result can be obtained for any MR-
GMIA that guarantees a “solution” in a GMRF at each resolution is simulated inﬁnitely often. In
Section 5.3, we deﬁne a three-resolution GMIA to solve a 15-dimensional problem whose global
convergence can be shown by a simple extension of the proof of Theorem 3.
5. Numerical Experiments
In this section we present three examples to demonstrate the performance of GMIA and MR-
GMIA. The main goals of this section are to show (i) GMIA combined with expected improvement

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
provides valid inference on the remaining optimality gap at termination while achieving good ﬁnite-
budget performance for a DOvS problem, and (ii) MR-GMIA can solve a large-scale DOvS problem
eﬃciently and eﬀectively. We also provide a proof-of-concept demonstration of applying MR-GMIA
to a ﬁfteen-dimensional problem by using a three-resolution GMRF model.
The ﬁrst example is an (s,S) inventory optimization problem that exhibits behavior like a
practical DOvS problem. We use this example to demonstrate (i) above by comparing performance
of GMIA and a continuous GRF-based procedure with Gaussian correlation function. We also
compare three sampling criteria, EI, CEI, and KG, combined with GMIA and with the continuous
GRF-based procedure. For EI and CEI, the stopping conditions EI/CEI≤δ were tested. Because
KG≤δ is interpreted diﬀerently from EI/CEI≤δ as discussed in Section 2.3, we did not test KG
as a stopping criterion. Instead, we examined the ﬁnite-budget performance of GMIA and GRF-
based procedures to compare EI, CEI, and KG for search guidance. We also apply the MR-GMIA
presented in EC.4 to the same (s,S) inventory problem to show its improvement in eﬃciency
compared to GMIA while still achieving the target optimality gap.
To achieve goal (ii) we tested the MR-GMIA on the second test problem with two diﬀerent
numbers of feasible solutions, 10,000 and 1,000,000, to examine the impact of the problem size
on the performance of the MR-GMIA. This problem is created by adding stochastic noise to the
two-dimensional Griewank function, a well-known test function for a global optimization problem
with many local minima, but evaluated only on a lattice to test the performance of MR-GMIA on
a diﬃcult DOvS problem.
Finally, we devise a three-resolution GMIA to demonstrate that we can add a higher resolution
to the two-resolution GMRF structure presented in EC.4 to solve a high-dimensional problem
with a large number of solutions. The response function for this test case is a ﬁfteen-dimensional
inverted Gaussian density function, which we converted to a DOvS problem in the same way as
the Griewank function, on an integer lattice with 415 = 1,073,741,824 solutions.
In all examples in this section, MLEs are computed only once at the beginning of each algorithm.
5.1. (s,S) Inventory Problem
The objective function for the (s,S) inventory problem suggested in Koenig and Law (1985) is the
expected average cost per period of the inventory system over 30 periods. We assume the demand
for inventory in each period is a sequence of i.i.d. Poisson random variables with a common mean of
25. To obtain a simple rectangular feasible region as in Figure 2, we chose our decision variables to
be s and S −s, where the feasible region is deﬁned by constraints, 1 ≤s ≤100 and 1 ≤S −s ≤100,
which leads to 10,000 feasible solutions. The optimal solution to this DOvS problem is s = 17 and
S −s = 36 with an expected average cost per period of $106.12 based on 1 million replications

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
of Monte Carlo simulation at each feasible solution. We assume the minimum diﬀerence in the
objective function that is worth detecting is δ = $1, which is used for the stopping criterion in the
algorithms.
If one simulation run of the inventory problem takes a long time, 10,000 feasible solutions can
be considered large. On the other hand, if each run takes a short time, then we may apply an
IZ R&S procedure that simulates all solutions in the feasible region. A main takeaway from this
example is that GMIA provides similar inference on the optimality gap as the IZ R&S procedure
by simulating many fewer feasible solutions when combined with EI or CEI.
5.1.1. Comparison of GMIA and Continuous GRF-based Algorithm
To compare
with GMIA, we constructed a continuous GRF-based procedure by changing the metamodel of the
response surface in GMIA from GMRF to continuous GRF with a Gaussian correlation function.
We used the Matlab fitrgp library to ﬁt the GRF regression. For both algorithms, we tested
EI, CEI, and KG for search guidance, which we computed for all 10,000 feasible solutions at
each iteration. To compute KG for the feasible solutions, we used the MatlabKG library provided
by Frazier (2009–2010), where the exact algorithm is presented in Frazier et al. (2009). Note that
we assume the cost of sampling a solution is constant for all solutions. For the stopping criterion, we
tested EI/CEI≤δ for both the GMIA and GRF-based procedures. Because KG≤δ has a diﬀerent
interpretation than EI/CEI≤δ, performance of KG as a stopping criterion was not tested. Instead,
we compared the ﬁnite-budget performances of GMIA + EI/CEI/KG and GRF + EI/CEI/KG.
Although we claim the strength of GMIA is its inference about the optimality gap at stopping,
good ﬁxed-budget performance of GMIA will reassure users.
For all six algorithms, ks = 20 initial design points in the feasible region were selected by Latin
hypercube sampling and r = 10 replications were simulated for each sampled design point. For
GMIA, the solution with the smallest sample mean among the simulated solutions was chosen as
the current best solution at each iteration when EI or CEI is used as a criterion. On the other
hand, the solution with the best conditional mean was selected as the current best when KG is
used to be consistent with the deﬁnition of KG. For the GRF-based procedure, a solution with the
best conditional mean was selected as the current best regardless of the sampling criterion.
We ﬁrst present the ﬁnite-budget performance comparisons. Figure 3 shows boxplots of optimal-
ity gaps from 400 runs of all six algorithms stopped after 100 iterations, where for each run the
same random number seed was used for all six algorithms. Below the boxplots, the sample means
and their standard errors of the optimality gap are presented. Notice that all algorithms based on
GMRF have lower medians and means than those based on the continuous GRF. When combined
with GMIA, EI, CEI, and KG show very similar performance. On the other hand, GMIA + CEI

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
GMIA+EI
GMIA+CEI
GMIA+KG
GRF+EI
GRF+CEI
GRF+KG
0
5
10
15
Optimality gap
1.124
0.081
1.090
0.078
1.257
0.092
1.341
0.075
2.627
0.412
2.034
0.100
Mean
Std. err.
Figure 3
Boxplots and the sample averages and their standard errors of the optimality gaps of six algorithms
applied to the (s,S) inventory problem stopped after 100 iterations. For each algorithm, 400 runs were
made. The whiskers of boxplots are extended to the observations within 1.5 times the inter-quartile
range. We omitted three observations (two with optimality gap 112.26 and one with 24.51) from the
boxplot of GRF + CEI for better scaling of other boxplots.
has statistically signiﬁcantly smaller average optimality gap than GRF + KG, which is a popular
current method to solve a DOvS problem. The performance of GRF + EI is comparable to GMIA’s,
whereas, GRF + CEI has the largest average optimality gap among all six algorithms and several
of its runs have high optimality gaps.
We also present the progress each algorithm made during the ﬁrst 100 iterations averaged over
400 runs in Figure 4. The trajectory of GMIA + EI is very similar to that of GMIA + CEI, and
therefore was omitted from Figure 4 for better comparisons to the other the algorithms. GRF-
based procedures exhibit faster convergence at the beginning but slow down substantially as the
algorithms progresses, especially for GRF + CEI and GRF + KG, whereas GMIA + CEI/KG
show more steady progress.
We observed a few runs of GMIA and the GRF-based procedure to see which solutions are
selected to sample at each iteration and discovered that GMIA tends to sample solutions closer
to the current optimal solution, whereas the GRF-based procedure tends to sample solutions far-
ther away from the current optimal. This diﬀerence in behaviors makes the GRF-based algorithm
converge faster initially as it explores the feasible solution space more broadly, but slow down as

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Iterations
Optimality gap
GMIA + CEI
GMIA + KG
GRF + CEI
GRF + EI
GRF + KG
Figure 4
The trajectory of optimality gap at each iteration of each algorithm included in Figure 3 (except for
GMIA + EI) averaged over 400 runs. GMIA + EI is omitted since it has a very similar trajectory as
GMIA + CEI.
the algorithm proceeds since it does not exploit the neighborhood containing the current optimal
solution as much. GMIA, on the other hand, makes slower progress at the beginning as it explores
less globally compared to the GRF-based procedure, however, it improves steadily by making local
improvements from the current optimal solution.
Now we move to examine whether GMIA and the GRF-base procedures make valid inference on
the remaining optimality gap at termination when EI and CEI are used as stopping criteria. From
the deﬁnition of EI (CEI), EI (CEI) ≤δ indicates that the expected optimality gap of the current
best solution is less than δ. For the benchmark, we applied the KN R&S procedure (Kim and Nelson
2001) to the same (s,S) inventory problem; it simulates all feasible solutions at the beginning and
sequentially eliminates solutions from contention. We adopted CRN for the KN procedure, set the
number of ﬁrst-stage replications of each feasible solution to n0 = 10, 1−α = 0.95 for the PCS and
δ = $1. Table 1 shows the average and maximum optimality gaps at termination from 50 runs of
all ﬁve procedures including KN. The average number of solutions that each algorithm visited as
well as the average number of replications spent until termination are also presented. All standard
errors are in the parentheses.
Notice that both average and maximum optimality gaps of GMIA + EI and GMIA + CEI are
less than the desired optimality gap δ = $1. Moreover, their average optimality gaps are statistically
indistinguishable from the optimality gap of KN, while spending about a half of the simulation

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
Table 1
Average and maximum of optimality gaps at termination of 50 runs of GMIA + EI/CEI,
GRF + EI/CEI, and KN given δ = $1. The average number of sampled solutions and the average number of
replications spent by each algorithm until termination are also presented. The standard errors are presented in
parentheses.
GMIA + EI GMIA + CEI GRF + EI GRF + CEI
KN
Average optimality gap
0.089
0.096
3.283
3.401
0.097
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.346)
(0.343)
(0.009)
Max optimality gap
0.271
0.348
8.545
8.545
0.271
Average number of
sampled solutions
2,775
2,750
20.9
20.3
10,000
(82)
(76)
(0.2)
(0.1)
-
Average number of
replications
55,314
54,854
218
207
108,111
(1,633)
(1,526)
(4)
(2)
(185)
budget KN spent and without simulating all feasible solutions. On the other hand, GRF + EI and
GRF + CEI stopped prematurely when the optimality gap is still much larger than δ after sampling
a few solutions. These results indicate that the GMRF metamodel lets GMIA correctly assess the
remaining optimality gap via EI/CEI, whereas the continuous GRF underestimates it. This shows
that a GMRF is a better model to represent the responses of the discrete feasible solutions of this
DOvS problem.
In Figure EC.1 of EC.5, we present heatmaps of the variance-covariance matrices of the under-
lying GMRF and the continuous GRF for this problem, which provides an intuitive explanation
for such a performance diﬀerence. Although the initial variance-covariance matrices of the two
Guassian processes are based on the MLEs computed from the same set of initial observations,
the continuous GRF has a much thicker diagonal band with high variances and covariances rel-
ative to GMRF. However, the continuous GRF’s variances and covariances decrease signiﬁcantly
after updating the distribution of the GRF conditional on the initial observations because the high
correlations among nearby solutions makes the variances and covariances of the solutions near the
initial design points greatly reduced. This causes the GRF to quickly decide that there is not much
variability left in the random ﬁeld resulting in small EI or CEI of solutions. On the other hand,
the Markovian assumption of GMRF combined with our choice of neighborhood structure makes
the precision matrix Q(θ) very sparse and as a result, the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the variance-
covariance matrix of the GMRF (inverse of Q(θ)) decay faster than the continuous GRF’s. Hence,
the variance-covariance matrix of GMRF updated conditional on the initial observations still has
higher variances and covariances compared to the continuous GRF, which helps us make better
inference on the remaining optimality gap.
Note that fitrgp ﬁts the parameters of GRF’s prior distribution using maximum likelihood
estimation. One may consider taking a fully Bayesian approach using hyperparameters, which will
increase uncertainty about the response surface and as a result, may delay the stopping decision for

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
the continuous GRF. Also recall that we used a Gaussian correlation function for the continuous
GRF, which models an inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable response surface. Thus, the modeled response surface
may be too smooth to represent a discrete surface. A Mat´ern correlation function can be an
alternative to a Gaussian correlation function as it lets one control the diﬀerentiability of the
surface. Nevertheless, it still models a continuous surface.
The results presented in this section show that GMIA combined with EI or CEI provides good
ﬁnite-budget performance and valid inference on the remaining optimality gap at termination when
EI or CEI is used as a stopping criterion. As the no free lunch theorem in Wolpert and Macready
(1997) proves, we may ﬁnd an instance of a DOvS problem on which the continuous GRF-based
procedure has better ﬁnite-budget performance than GMIA. However, the valid stopping decision
of GMIA is a valuable feature of GMIA independently from its ﬁnite-budget performance. Although
CEI is the expected improvement that correctly averages over all remaining sources of uncertainty,
the empirical performance of deterministic EI and CEI in this example were statistically indistin-
guishable.
5.1.2. Comparison of GMIA and MR-GMIA
We also ran the version of MR-GMIA
in EC.4 combined with CEI and EI on the same (s,S)-inventory problem with region-level neighbor-
hood structure as depicted in Figure 5b. We divided the same feasible region with 10,000 solutions
into 25 square regions including 400 feasible solutions numbered bottom to top starting from the
lower-left corner. The true optimal solution (17,36) is contained in region P2, while P3 has the
smallest region-level response.
We have two precision matrices: region-level precision matrix T(τ) and solution-level precision
matrix Q(θ). The former, in this example, is a 25 by 25 matrix and the latter is 400 × 400,
both much smaller than the 10,000 × 10,000 precision matrix used in the GMIA run. As Cholesky
decomposition of a sparse n × n matrix is O(n2), the smaller dimensions of the precision matrices
signiﬁcantly reduces the computation time involved in both MLE and CEI calculations.
We chose kr = 5 initial design regions by Latin hypercube sampling. To select the design points
within each region, we used the same Latin hypercube sample of size ks = 10 for all design regions;
for this reason some of the regions in Figure 5b show the same light grey pattern. From each
selected design point we simulated 10 replications and used the result to compute the MLEs. At
each iteration, region-level CEIs are calculated for all regions. The solution-level CEIs are calculated
for all solutions within the currently sampled region at the iteration if the region was simulated
previously. The algorithm stops if the largest region-level CEI and the largest solution-level CEIs
of the regions that are sampled at the current iteration drop below δ = $1.
Figure 5 compares the simulation replications allocated across the feasible solutions by GMIA
and MR-GMIA from one sample path of both algorithms when CEI is used as the sampling and

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
 
 
20
40
60
80
100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(a) GMIA
 
 
20
40
60
80
100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
(b) MR-GMIA: Regions are numbered 1–25 bottom to top
from the lower left corner.
Figure 5
Allocations of simulation replications at feasible solutions for the (s,S) inventory problem in base-10
log scale.
stopping criterion (CEI ≤$1). The large light grey area in Figure 5a indicates the solutions that
were sampled only once, i.e., one time allocation of 10 replications. Points with darker shades were
selected as the current sample best for one or more iterations and simulated repeatedly. The darkest
point (18,36) is the solution that GMIA chose as optimal on this run. Notice that the design points
are clustered with each other except for a few initial design points obtained from Latin hypercube
sampling. The algorithm did not simulate any solutions near the upper right and the lower left
corners of the feasible region where the objective function increases steeply. This indicates that the
estimated GMRF structure guides the algorithm to rule out inferior solutions. In EC.6, we present
the plots of the conditional means of the GMRF at diﬀerent iterations to show how the GMRF
updates its belief about the response surface as the algorithm proceeds.
Figure 5b shows that MR-GMIA allocated most of the simulation replications within P2,P3,P4,
and P7. The surrounding regions of these four regions were selected once or a few more times before
the algorithm stopped. After the initial sampling, MR-GMIA quickly ﬁnds the region that is likely
to contain the global optimal solution using the region-level CEI. Notice that P25 at the upper
right corner whose response z(P25) is the largest among all regions was simulated only once and
never selected again. Also, the neighboring regions of P25 were not simulated. This shows that the
region-level GMRF informed the algorithm correctly that the regions close to P25 are not likely
to contain the optimal solution. Compared to the simulation replication allocation of GMIA in
Figure 5a, the biggest diﬀerence is that MR-GMIA ﬁrst chooses regions to simulate then selects
the solutions within those regions; therefore, sampling solutions is restricted within the boundaries

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 2
Average and maximum of optimality gaps at termination of 50 runs of MR-GMIA + EI/CEI. The
average number of sampled solutions and the average number of replications spent by each algorithm until
termination are also presented. The standard errors are presented in parentheses.
MR-GMIA + EI MR-GMIA + CEI
Average optimality gap
0.505 (0.065)
0.321 (0.054)
Max optimality gap
1.886
2.218
Average number of sampled solutions
303 (36)
525 (73)
Average number of replications
6,071 (901)
13,214 (2,188)
of selected regions. This, in fact, helps MR-GMIA concentrate on the regions that are likely to
contain the global optimal solution.
Table 2 shows the average and maximum optimality gaps of 50 runs of MR-GMIA when EI and
CEI are used as stopping criteria. Compared to the performance of GMIA + EI/CEI in Table 1,
MR-GMIA + EI/CEI have larger average and maximum optimality gaps at termination, however,
their average optimiality gaps are less than δ, which means that MR-GMIA still achieves the target
optimality gap on average. Moreover, the average numbers of replications MR-GMIA + EI/CEI
spent are much lower than those of GMIA + EI/CEI (2,775/2,750) and KN (108,111) in Table 1.
Also, the average numbers of solutions that MR-GMIA + EI/CEI visited are also much lower
than that of GMIA + EI/CEI (55,314/54,854), which conﬁrms the behavior observed in Figure 5b;
MR-GMIA concentrates its eﬀort on the regions likely to contain the optimal. MR-GMIA sampled
a larger number of solutions and spent more replications when CEI is used as a stopping criterion
than EI. As a result, we have smaller average optimality gap for CEI.
Another advantage of MR-GMIA over GMIA is the matrix computation time. For the GMIA
runs of this problem, the Cholesky decomposition of the 10,000 × 10,000 precision matrix, the
additional multiplications to invert it, and computing the conditional mean of all feasible solutions,
took 13.61 (standard error = 0.23), 78.00 (0.92) and 6.9 × 10−5 (2 × 10−6) seconds, respectively.
For the MR-GMIA runs, the same calculation times for the region-level GMRF took 2.6 × 10−5
(2 × 10−6), 5.3 × 10−5 (3 × 10−6), and 1.2 × 10−4 (8 × 10−5) seconds, respectively, and those for the
solution-level GMRF took 2.4 × 10−3 (1 × 10−4), 9.0 × 10−3 (2 × 10−4), and 6.3 × 10−4 (3 × 10−5)
seconds, respectively. Even after considering that MR-GMIA performs the solution-level matrix
calculations for up to three regions at each iteration, the total time MR-GMIA spends on matrix
computation is far less than that of GMIA.
5.2. Griewank Function
The Griewank function (http://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano/griewank.html) has many local min-
ima, which makes it a challenging test function for optimization algorithms. Figure 6 shows the
two-dimensional Griewank function on the domain [−5,5] × [−5,5]. Within this domain the range

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 6
Two-dimensional Griewank function on [−5,5] × [−5,5].
of the function is [0,2.0044], and the global minimum is at (0,0). Notice that there are four local
minima near the four corners of the domain and their response values are 0.0086.
To create a DOvS problem, we take as feasible solutions the 100×100 lattice on [−5,5]×[−5,5]
where the response at each solution is given by the Griewank function in Figure 6. Normally
distributed simulation noise with mean 0 and variance σ2 is added to the response function to make
it stochastic. As depicted in Figure 7a, we divided the feasible solutions into 25 square regions, each
of which contains 400 solutions. To analyze the impact of δ on the performance of the algorithm,
we tested three values of δ: 0.005,0.01, and 0.02. We chose these values relative to 0.0086, the
diﬀerence between the responses at the local minima and the global minimum, so that we can
test the eﬀect of δ on the solution quality of the algorithm. We adjusted the standard error of the
sample mean at each design point when it is ﬁrst visited to be relative to δ. Given r = 16, the
number of replications at each solution, and δ, we tested three values of σ/√r: δ/2,δ, and 2δ. For
each run, we used Latin hypercube samples of kr = 5 and ks = 20 to select the initial design regions
and design points, respectively.
Figure 7a shows how simulation replications were allocated across the feasible region in one
sample path of MR-GMIA. Notice that all regions were visited at least once, unlike the (s,S)
inventory problem in Figure 5b. Compared to the (s,S) inventory problem, the response surface of
the Griewank function is harder to predict as the region-level response z(Pℓ) for all 25 regions do
not vary much. Therefore, the region-level CEI did not rule out any region before it was visited at
least once. However, once the regions were visited, the algorithm correctly found the regions that
either contain the global and local minima or are close to them and concentrated the simulation
eﬀort there. Notice that the algorithm simulated solutions in the ellipsoidal area that contains the
global optimal solution most frequently.
Table 3 presents the results of 50 runs of MR-GMIA with the chosen δ and σ values. For each
run of all nine cases of (δ,σ) in Table 3, common random numbers were adopted. Notice that our

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
 
 
20
40
60
80
100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
(a) 100 × 100 lattice.
 
 
200
400
600
800
1000
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(b) 1,000 × 1,000 lattice.
Figure 7
Allocations of simulation replications at feasible solutions of the Griewank function in Figure 6 in base-10
log scale.
algorithm returned the global optimal solution in all 50 runs of all settings except for (δ,σ) =
(0.02,0.08), and (0.02,0.16). Even in these two cases, the average response at the solution is within
δ from 0. As expected, both the number of simulated solutions and the number of replications
spent tend to increase as δ decreases and as σ increases. However, MR-GMIA is not very sensitive
to the choice of δ for smaller σ.
To test the impact of the number of feasible solutions on the performance of the algorithm,
we ran MR-GMIA with (δ,σ) = (0.005,0.01) but using a ﬁner lattice, as depicted in Figure 7b: a
1,000×1,000 grid instead of 100×100, which results in 1,000,000 feasible solutions. These solutions
are divided into 2,500 regions, each of which contains 400 feasible solutions. Figure 7b is a map of
replications spent in the feasible region in one run of MR-GMIA. Notice that the areas in white,
which indicate that they were never simulated, correspond to the peaks of the Griewank function
in Figure 6. Unlike in the 100 × 100 case, the region-level responses actually diﬀer in this case as
we have a ﬁner grid. The region-level CEI eﬀectively rules out the regions that are not likely to
contain the optimal solution using the region-level GMRF structure. Most of the simulation eﬀort
is concentrated in the regions near the global minimum and a local minimum in the lower-left
corner.
The average optimality gap of 50 runs of MR-GMIA applied to the 1,000 × 1,000 Griewank
problem is 0.0002 (standard error = 0.00004) and the maximum response was 0.0016, which is
smaller than δ = 0.005. The average number of simulated solutions is 24,696 (1307), which is only
2.5% of the 1 million feasible solutions. Compared to the 100 × 100 case, which simulated 19% of
the feasible solutions on average, we can conﬁrm that the algorithm works eﬃciently even if we have
a large number of feasible solutions. The average number of replications spent is 89,079 (2775),

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
Table 3
Results from 50 runs of MR-GMIA applied to the Griewank functions with diﬀerent δ and σ. Standard
errors are provided in parentheses.
δ
0.005
0.01
0.02
σ
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.04
0.08
0.04
0.08
0.16
Average response
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0002
0.0015
at optimal solution
(0.0001) (0.0006)
Max response
at optimal solution
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0025
0.0219
Average number
1,927
1,945
2065
1,945
2065
2444
2065
2509
2837
of simulated solutions
(26)
(25)
(27)
(25)
(27)
(29)
(27)
(28)
(81)
Average number
108,955 111,229 122,036 111,229 121,974 155,254 121,974
157,207
184,147
of replications
(2417)
(2377)
(2877)
(2377)
(2872)
(2742)
(2872)
(3007)
(6,634)
which is less than 8 times larger than that of the 100×100 case in Table 3. These results show the
multiresolution algorithm scales well as the number of feasible solutions increases.
5.3. Inverted Multivariate Normal Density Function
Lastly, we present a proof-of-concept study that applies MR-GMIA based on a three-resolution
GMRF model to solve a high-dimensional DOvS problem. The response function is the inverted
Gaussian density function suggested in Xu et al. (2010):
f(x1,x2,...,xd) = −β exp
(
−γ
d
X
j=1
jx2
j
)
, x⊤= (x1,x2,...,xd).
(10)
The function is minimized at x⊤= (0,0,...,0) and does not have any local minima. We chose β =
1000 and γ = 0.001, which makes the optimal objective function value −1000. Normally distributed
noise with mean 0 and variance 16 is added to the response function to make it stochastic. We
chose d = 15 and considered solutions within the integer lattice in [0,3]15 as the feasible solution
set containing 415 = 1,073,741,824 solutions within which the range of (10) is [−1000,−861.29].
In Section 5.2, we designed the regions of the MR-GMIA to have the same dimension as the
feasible solution space. However, in this example, the smallest hyper-rectangular region with the
same dimension has 215 = 32,768 solutions and a 32,768 × 32,768 solution-level precision matrix.
Even with the sparse-matrix method in Matlab, this is a large matrix. Another problem for such a
region is that all solutions within the region are corner solutions, and hence, we cannot fully take
advantage of the inference from their neighbors.
We overcome the ﬁrst issue by adding an additional resolution; instead of a two-resolution
GMRF we discussed in Section 4, we have a three-resolution GMRF consisting of super-region-
level, region-level, and solution-level GMRFs. A super-region-level “solution” represents a region
of regions just as a region-level “solution” represents a region of solutions. This extension reduces

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
the number of “solutions” within the GMRF at each level. Moreover, we reduced the dimension
of higher-level GMRFs by projection. For instance, a “solution” of the super-region-level GMRF
represents an average quality of regions of solutions whose ﬁrst ﬁve coordinates in [0,3]15 are
[1,0,1,3,1] and among these regions, a region represents solutions whose ﬁrst ten coordinates are
[1,0,1,3,1,1,0,0,0,2]. Therefore, we have 45 regions of regions in the super-region-level GMRF, 45
regions in each of 45 region-level GMRFs, and 45 solutions in each of 410 solution-level GMRFs.
There are two advantages of designing the GMRFs in this way. Firstly, it reduces the number of
corner solutions, and hence lets us better utilize inference from the neighboring solutions. Secondly,
we have more ﬂexibility in choosing the number of layers of GMRFs versus how many solutions to
include in each GMRF. For instance, we may decide to have ﬁve layers of GMRFs instead of three
and it is easier to design which “solutions” to include in each layer of GMRF by projection rather
than preserving all 15 dimensions in each layer.
We applied the MR-GMIA described above to this problem and observed 10,000 iterations of
200 sample paths. For the initial design, 5 solutions per region, 5 regions per super-region, and 5
super-regions were sampled. In total, 125 solutions are sampled initially, which is only 1.16×10−6%
of the feasible solutions. Each time a solution is selected we simulated r = 4 replications and CEI
was used as the sampling guidance. Similar to the two-resolution GMIA in EC.4, we selected
three super-regions at each iteration; the super-region with the smallest super-region-level mean,
the super-region that contains the current optimal solution, and the super-region with the largest
super-region-level CEI. In each selected super-region, two regions were sampled; the region with the
largest region-level mean and the region with the largest region-level CEI. Similarly, two solutions
were sampled in each selected region.
The average optimality gap of 200 runs after 10,000 iterations is 1.27 (standard error = 0.12), and
the average number of solutions that the algorithm visited is 73,344 (1,046), which is only 0.0068%
of the feasible solution space. We also tested the stopping condition of CEI ≤δ for δ = 1 and let the
algorithm stop either when all super-region-level, region-level, and solution-level CEIs fall below
δ or after 10,000 iterations. Among the 200 runs, 58 runs stopped by the stopping criterion and
their average optimality gap is 1.23 (0.24), which shows good performance.
This experiment explores a diﬀerent way to construct multi-resolution GMRFs to solve a high-
dimensional problems. There are various design questions including, but not limited to the number
of resolutions to use and which projection function to deﬁne “solutions” in each level of GMRF.
We defer the answers to these questions to future research, but the potential is clear.
Acknowledgments
This article is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
CMMI-0900354. We would also like to thank H˚avard Rue, the Area Editor, Associate Editor

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
and two conscientious referees for feedback that improved the paper. Portions of this work were
previously published in Salemi et al. (2014).
Author Biographies
Peter Salemi is a Modeling and Simulation Engineer/Data Scientist in the Operations Research
Department at The MITRE Corporation. His research interests are simulation optimization and
simulation metamodeling. He received his Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering and Management Sci-
ences from Northwestern University, his M.S. in Operations Research from the University of Cali-
fornia, Berkeley, and his B.S. in Mathematics and Finance from the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst.
Eunhye Song is the Harold and Inge Marcus Early Career Assistant Professor in the Depart-
ment of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering at Penn State University. Her research area is
simulation analysis methodology with emphasis on large-scale optimization via simulation, sim-
ulation uncertainty quantiﬁcation and optimization via simulation under input model risk. Her
website is www.eunhyesong.info.
Barry L. Nelson is the Walter P. Murphy Professor of the Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences at Northwestern University and a Distinguished Visiting Scholar at
Lancaster University in England. His research focus is on the design and analysis of computer
simulation experiments on models of discrete-event, stochastic systems, including methodology for
simulation optimization, quantifying and reducing model risk, variance reduction, output analysis,
metamodeling and multivariate input modeling. He has published numerous papers and three
books, including Foundations and Methods of Stochastic Simulation: A First Course (Springer,
2013). Nelson is a Fellow of INFORMS and IIE. Further information can be found at www.iems.
northwestern.edu/~nelsonb/.
Jeremy Staum is a former Associate Professor of Industrial Engineering and Management
Sciences at Northwestern University. His research interests include simulation metamodeling, opti-
mization via simulation, and risk management. His website is users.iems.northwestern.edu/
staum.
References
Amemiya T (1985) Advanced Econometrics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Ankenman B, Nelson BL, Staum J (2010) Stochastic kriging for simulation metamodeling. Operations
Research 58(2):371–382.
Benassi R, Bect J, Vazquez E (2011) Robust gaussian process-based global optimization using a fully bayesian
expected improvement criterion. Learning and Intelligent Optimization, 176–190 (Springer).

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Chen K (2005) Matrix Preconditioning Techniques and Applications (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press).
Chen Y, Davis TA, Hager WW (2008) Algorithm 887: CHOLMOD, supernodal sparse cholesky factorization
and update/downdate. ACM TOMS 35(3):1–14.
Cochran W (1977) Sampling Techniques (New York: Wiley).
Diggle PJ, Menezes R, Su T (2010) Geostatistical inference under preferential sampling. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series C 59(2):191–232.
Erisman A, Tinney W (1975) On computing certain elements of the inverse of a sparse matrix. Communi-
cations of the ACM 18(3):177–179.
Frazier P (2012) Tutorial: Optimization via simulation with Bayesian statistics and dynamic programming.
Laroque C, Himmelspach J, Pasupathy R, Rose O, Uhrmacher AM, eds., Proceedings of the 2012
Winter Simulation Conference, 1–16 (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE).
Frazier P, Powell W, Dayanik S (2009) The knowledge-gradient policy for correlated normal beliefs.
INFORMS Journal on Computing 21(4):599–613.
Frazier PI (2009–2010) URL https://people.orie.cornell.edu/pfrazier/src.html.
Huang D, Allen TT, Notz WI, Zeng N (2006) Global optimization of stochastic black-box systems via
sequential kriging metamodels. Journal of Global Optimization 34(3):441–466.
Jalali H, Van Nieuwenhuyse I, Picheny V (2015) Comparison of Kriging-based methods for simulation opti-
mization with heterogeneous noise. Technical report, KU Leuven.
Jones DR, Schonlau M, Welch WJ (1998) Eﬃcient global optimization of expensive black-box functions.
Journal of Global Optimization 13(4):455–492.
Kim S (2013) Statistical ranking and selection. Encyclopedia of Operations Research and Management Sci-
ence, 1459–1469 (New York: Springer).
Kim S, Nelson BL (2001) A fully sequential procedure for indiﬀerence-zone selection in simulation. ACM
TOMACS 11(3):251–273.
Koenig LW, Law AM (1985) A procedure for selecting a subset of size m containing the l best of k independent
normal populations, with applications to simulation. Communications in Statistics B14(3):719–734.
Miller KS (1981) On the inverse of the sum of matrices. Mathematics Magazine 54(2):67–72.
Nelson BL (2010) Optimization via simulation over discrete decision variables. TutORials in Operations
Research 7:193–207.
Niessner H, Reichert K (1983) On computing the inverse of a sparse matrix. International journal for
numerical methods in engineering 19(10):1513–1526.
Quan N, Yin J, Ng SH, Lee LH (2013) Simulation optimization via kriging: A sequential search using expected
improvement with computing budget constraints. IIE Transactions 45(7):763–780.

Salemi, Song, Nelson and Staum: Gaussian Markov Random Fields for DOvS
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
Rue H, Held L (2005) Gaussian Markov Random Fields: Theory and Applications (New York: Chapman and
Hall/CRC).
Saad Y (2003) Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems (Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM)), second edition.
Salemi P, Nelson BL, Staum J (2014) Discrete optimization via simulation using Gaussian Markov random
ﬁelds. Tolk A, Diallo SY, I O Ryzhov LY, Buckley S, Miller JA, eds., Proceedings of the 2014 Winter
Simulation Conference, 3809–3820 (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE).
Salemi P, Staum J, Nelson BL (2013) Generalized integrated Brownian ﬁelds for simulation metamodeling.
Pasupathy R, Kim SH, Tolk A, Hill R, Kuhl ME, eds., Proceedings of the 2013 Winter Simulation
Conference, 543–554 (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE).
Santner TJ, Williams BJ, Notz W (2003) The Design and Analysis of Computer Experiments (New York:
Springer).
Sasena MJ, Papalambros P, Goovaerts P (2002) Exploration of metamodeling sampling criteria for con-
strained global optimization. Engineering optimization 34(3):263–278.
S´obester A, Leary SJ, Keane AJ (2005) On the design of optimization strategies based on global response
surface approximation models. Journal of Global Optimization 33(1):31–59.
Takahashi K, Fagan J, Chin MS (1973) Formation of a sparse bus impedance matrix and its application to
short ciruit study. 8th PICA Conference Proceedings, 16–29 (IEEE Power Engineering Society).
Vanhatalo J, Vehtari A (2012) Modelling local and global phenomena with sparse gaussian processes. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1206.3290 .
Williams BJ, Santner TJ, Notz WI (2000) Sequential design of computer experiments to minimize integrated
response functions. Statistica Sinica 10:1133–1152.
Wolpert DH, Macready WG (1997) No free lunch theorems for optimization. Trans. Evol. Comp 1(1):67–82,
ISSN 1089-778X.
Xie J, Frazier PI, Chick SE (2016) Bayesian optimization via simulation with pairwise sampling and corre-
lated prior beliefs. Operations Research 64(2):542–559.
Xu J, Nelson BL, Hong LJ (2010) Industrial strength COMPASS: A comprehensive algorithm and software
for optimization via simulation. ACM TOMACS 20(1):3:1–3:29.