TITLE: Information Disclosure and Pricing Policies for Sales of Network Goods
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2019.1950
---

TSpace Research Repository 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
Information Disclosure and Pricing Policies 
for Sales of Network Goods 
Ming Hu, Zizhuo Wang & Yinbo Feng 
Version Post-print or accepted manuscript. 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M., Wang, Z., & Feng, Y. (2020). Information disclosure and 
pricing policies for sales of network goods. Operations Research, 68(4), 
1162-1177. 
Copyright / License Copyright © 2020, INFORMS 
DOI https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2019.1950 
Publisher’s Statement This is an accepted manuscript of an article published by INFORMS 
in Operations Research. 
How to cite TSpace items 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 

Information Disclosure and Pricing Policies for Sales of
Network Goods
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Zizhuo Wang
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA
Institute for Data and Decision Analytics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China, zwang@umn.edu
Yinbo Feng
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of
Finance and Economics, Shanghai 200433, China, feng.yinbo@mail.shufe.edu.cn
We study a two-period model in which a ﬁrm faces the problem of deciding whether to commit to sales volume
disclosure under market size uncertainty, when selling a network good to forward-looking customers who
time their purchases. If the ﬁrst-period sales volume is disclosed, the second-period customers will base their
purchase decisions on this information. If the sales volume is not disclosed, all customers will make purchase
decisions based on their estimate of market size. We identify two countervailing e↵ects of sales disclosure:
(i) a pro-disclosure “Matthew” e↵ect: the beneﬁt of a realized large market size tends to outweigh the loss
of a realized small one; and (ii) an anti-disclosure saturation e↵ect: for a suﬃciently large market, customers
would make a purchase anyway even without knowing the realized market size, but might be discouraged
if observing a realized small one. With exogenous prices, we show that committing to sales disclosure is a
dominating (resp., dominated) policy when the expected network beneﬁt is relatively weak (resp., strong).
We also examine three endogenous pricing scenarios. First, under state-independent pricing, committing to
sales disclosure is optimal if the customer valuation distribution has a high probability of reaching very high
values (i.e., heavy tail). Second, if a ﬁrm can credibly preannounce a contingent pricing policy, committing
to sales disclosure is always optimal. Finally, under contingent pricing without commitment, we show that
committing to sales disclosure is optimal when delaying the purchase decision to the second period does not
reduce the value much.
Key words : information disclosure; pricing; sales information; network e↵ects
1.
Introduction
A network e↵ect (also called network externality) is the way that the value of a unit of goods or
services (collectively referred to as “goods”) increases with the number of units sold (Economides
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

2
1996. A good with network e↵ects is called a network good. In the presence of network e↵ects, the
utility of a good for a (forward-looking) customer depends on the number of other customers who
will eventually purchase it. At the time customers make their own individual purchase decisions,
they may be uncertain about how many other potential buyers are out there and what those
buyers’ purchase decisions might be; hence, they have to cope with uncertainty about the network
beneﬁt they can obtain from the purchase. As a result, the market size information inﬂuences each
individual customer’s expectation of the network beneﬁt, and hence their purchase decisions.
In selling network goods, reporting sales information is one of the best ways for a ﬁrm to show
not only how many users they have now but also how large the potential market is. Firms often
commit to a sales information release policy when selling network goods. For example, regardless
of the investors’ strong desire and pressure for more transparency, Amazon and Apple, which
sell tablet devices, have each adopted a di↵erent implicit information policy and have developed
distinct “reputations” for releasing information on the sales of their tablets. With Amazon, “even
a number as basic, and presumably impressive, as how many Kindle e-readers the company sells is
never released” (Streitfeld and Haughney 2013). With Apple, iPhone and iPad sales numbers are
always released, even if they are disappointing (Elmer-DeWitt 2012).
Sales information voluntarily disclosed by a ﬁrm could be a boon for customers by allowing
them to make better informed purchase decisions. However, it is not clear whether a commitment
to revealing sales information would always beneﬁt a ﬁrm that sells network goods under market
uncertainty. On the one hand, it could be beneﬁcial if the market reaction is enthusiastic, in which
case more customers may be drawn to make a purchase. On the other hand, it could be detrimental
if interest is scant, in which case customers may be discouraged.
In this paper, we study the sales information release policy for selling network goods, subject to
market size uncertainty. Our model tends to be better at capturing new emerging network goods,
such as fast-turnover gadgets and mobile games. The sales horizon of these goods is relatively
short, sometimes only days, and usually no more than a year. Moreover, demand uncertainty is a
crucial element in selling these goods because of the fast-changing market conditions, and it is the
key feature that di↵erentiates this paper from the prior art on network goods. In these markets,
because of the fast turnover, there could be many repeated interactions between the seller and
consumers. As a result, the seller is likely to develop and sustain a “reputation” about information
disclosure, or may simply commit to an information policy.
To investigate the impact of revealing sales information on a monopolistic ﬁrm’s proﬁtability,
we consider a two-period model where there is a cohort of customers of random size arriving at
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

3
the market in the ﬁrst period. All customers are forward looking, that is, they can decide to buy
the good in the ﬁrst period or to delay their purchase decisions to the second period. A customer
valuation has two additive components, a stand-alone valuation and a network beneﬁt that depends
on the total sales over the two periods. Instead of studying the general mechanism design problem,
which covers the entire policy space, we compare two simple and practically motivated information
release policies: sales disclosure vs. sales nondisclosure. In the sales nondisclosure setting, the ﬁrm
commits to not disclosing early sales information and all customers have to base their purchase
decisions on their prior knowledge of the market size. In the sales disclosure setting — with early
sales information from the ﬁrst period disclosed — the customers who delayed their decisions to
the second period can learn the realized market size and then make informed purchase decisions.
We identify two opposing e↵ects of sales disclosure. One is a pro-disclosure “Matthew” e↵ect.
This is a term coined by Robert K. Merton to describe how eminent scientists will often get more
credit than a comparatively unknown researcher, even if their work is similar, with the visibility
of the scientists as an implicit driver of the e↵ect (Merton 1968). In our context, this e↵ect refers
to the phenomenon, which is intrinsically driven by the positive network externalities, that the
beneﬁt of a disclosed large market size potentially outweighs the loss associated with a small one.
As a new customer enters the market, existing customers will increase their expectation of the
ultimate network size, which determines their expected utility of buying the good. As a result,
the new customer is more willing to buy the good. In anticipation of that, other customers will
further increase their utility of buying the good. Thus, with some assumptions (Assumption 1)
on the distribution of stand-alone valuations and the form of the network beneﬁt function (i.e.,
how the network beneﬁt depends on the total sales), the equilibrium adoption rate is more than
linearly increasing with the market size. Therefore, the beneﬁt of a realized large market size tends
to outweigh the loss of a realized small market size. The other e↵ect is an anti-disclosure saturation
e↵ect. That is, for a suﬃciently large expected network beneﬁt due to a suﬃciently large expected
market size, customers would buy the good even without knowing the exact market size, but might
be discouraged by seeing a small realized market size.
The trade-o↵between these two e↵ects drives the ﬁrm’s sales information disclosure policy.
When the price of the good is exogenously given, we show that if the expected network beneﬁt is
suﬃciently strong relative to the exogenous prices, the saturation e↵ect dominates the Matthew
e↵ect and it is better to maintain sales nondisclosure. On the other hand, if the network beneﬁt
is suﬃciently weak, the Matthew e↵ect dominates the saturation e↵ect and committing to sales
disclosure is better. These results lend some support to the practices in the competitive online
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

4
games industry. For example, Blizzard’s World of Warcraft, after developing a strong customer
base, announced that it would not report the subscription numbers for all of its future releases
(Tassi 2015). However, numerous niche online game developers, with small market potential, tend
to have their subscription numbers continuously reported by third-party sales watchdogs such as
addictinggames.com.
We then study the situation where the ﬁrm can decide on the all-or-nothing information disclo-
sure policy together with endogenized prices. We examine three endogenous pricing policies, from
static to more contingent ones, all of which are seen in the literature:
(a) state-independent pricing, that is, the ﬁrm decides on and announces a ﬁrst-period price and
credibly commits to a second-period price at the beginning of the ﬁrst period (see, e.g., Nagle
1984);
(b) contingent preannounced pricing, that is, the ﬁrm determines its ﬁrst-period price and credibly
commits to a second-period price scheme at the beginning of the ﬁrst period; in this case, the
second-period price scheme is a function of the observed sales volume of the ﬁrst period (see,
e.g., Elmaghraby et al. 2008, Aviv and Pazgal 2008 and Correa et al. 2016);
(c) contingent pricing without commitment (also known as dynamic pricing), that is, the ﬁrm
determines prices at the beginning of each period contingent on the state it faces in order to
maximize the remaining proﬁts(see, e.g., Bitran and Caldentey 2003).
We obtain the following set of results. First, under a state-independent pricing policy, we show
that the optimal information release policy depends on the distribution of customer valuations,
the market size distribution, and the network beneﬁt structure. Speciﬁcally, committing to sales
disclosure dominates committing to sales nondisclosure if the customer valuation distribution has
a suﬃciently high probability of reaching very high values (i.e., heavy tail), relative to the expected
network beneﬁt at its full strength. On the other hand, committing to sales nondisclosure becomes
optimal if the customer valuation is capped by the expected network beneﬁt (which can be inter-
preted as the valuation distribution having a relatively light tail) and the market size distribution
has a relatively low probability of reaching very high values (i.e., light tail).
Second, we consider a contingent preannounced pricing scheme. With preannounced pricing
ﬂexibility, if the ﬁrst-period market interest is enthusiastic, then the ﬁrm can proﬁt from the
expected strong network beneﬁt by setting a high second-period price, and if the ﬁrst-period market
interest is lukewarm, then the ﬁrm can set a low second-period price to stimulate demand. The
latter not only improves the expected network beneﬁt but also reduces the risk that the ultimate
network beneﬁt will be disappointing for ﬁrst-period customers, thereby driving more customers to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

5
buy the good in the ﬁrst period. We show that, under contingent preannounced pricing, committing
to sales disclosure always dominates committing to sales nondisclosure. Contingent pricing serves
as a defense against the double-edged sword of information disclosure, because it can unleash the
beneﬁts of information dissemination while minimizing its negative impacts.
Last, we consider contingent pricing without commitment. We show that, given the same mar-
ket conditions at the beginning of the second period, the expected second-period proﬁt under
sales disclosure always dominates that under sales nondisclosure. However, the ﬁrst-period demand
under sales disclosure may not be higher than that under sales nondisclosure, implying that the
ﬁrst-period proﬁt under sales disclosure is not always higher than that under sales nondisclosure.
Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that committing to sales disclosure is better than committing to nondisclo-
sure when delaying the purchase decision to the second period does not reduce the value much, i.e.,
the discount factor is suﬃciently large. In this case, most customers choose to delay their decisions
to the second period, for which committing to sales disclosure results in a higher proﬁt level than
committing to nondisclosure.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The remainder of Section 1 reviews the relevant
literature. In Section 2, we present the model formulation. Section 3 focuses on a preliminary one-
shot model and studies market size disclosure mechanisms. Section 4 presents a two-period model
and investigates sales information disclosure mechanisms in relation to customers’ intertemporal
purchase behavior and a variety of pricing schemes. Section 5 concludes the paper and points out
future research directions. All of the proofs are relegated to the online appendix.
Literature Review
As the title of our paper indicates, there are at least two related bodies of literature, one on infor-
mation disclosure and the other on pricing of network goods. The former has been studied in a
variety of sender-receiver games in the economics literature, including auctions (e.g., Milgrom and
Weber 1982, Bergemann and Pesendorfer 2007, Mezzetti et al. 2008 and Board 2009), price dis-
crimination (e.g., Ottaviani and Prat 2001), labor market matching (e.g., Ostrovsky and Schwarz
2010), and other general settings (e.g., Lizzeri 1999, Rayo and Segal 2010, Kamenica and Gentzkow
2011, Ely 2017 and Bergemann et al. 2018). These papers consider settings in which a sender can
commit to an information disclosure rule that determines the distribution of signals observed by
receivers, and receivers choose actions depending on the signals they observe, which in turn a↵ect
the sender’s utility. A basic question, therefore, is which information disclosure rule maximizes the
sender’s expected utility. Our work builds on this stream of literature by studying the information
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

6
disclosure problem in the speciﬁc setting of selling network goods. There are at least three distinc-
tions. First, a key feature of our setting is that the state to be revealed by the sender (seller) is
the number of receivers (buyers). This number a↵ects receivers’ actions considerably due to the
network e↵ect and, hence, inﬂuences the sender’s choice of information disclosure policy. Second,
in the literature an optimal information disclosure policy often involves information distortion.
However, in our setting it could be illegal for the ﬁrm to manipulate the sales numbers. As a result,
we focus on two truthful information disclosure policies, i.e., full disclosure and no disclosure (see
Section 5 for more complicated information disclosure policies). Third, while the previous stud-
ies focus mainly on the design of information disclosure, we also study the interaction between
information and pricing policies in selling network goods to forward-looking customers.
Moreover, our work is related to a large body of existing literature dealing with pricing in the
presence of network e↵ects (see, e.g., Dhebar and Oren 1986, Xie and Sirbu 1995, Bensaid and
Lesne 1996, Cabral et al. 1999, Arthur et al. 2009, Akhlaghpour et al. 2010, Anari et al. 2010,
Cabral 2011 and Radner et al. 2014). This stream of literature considers general network beneﬁt
functions of a global nature, i.e., the network beneﬁt of a customer depends on the behavior of
all customers. More recently, there is a growing body of research on pricing over networks with
local network e↵ects (see, e.g., Candogan et al. 2012, Campbell 2013, Bloch and Qu´erou 2013
and Fainmesser and Galeotti 2015). These models capture the network e↵ect by modeling social
interactions among neighbors in a network. Our work di↵ers from the papers mentioned above
as we consider market size uncertainty. The market size in the presence of network e↵ects can
inﬂuence customers’ purchase decisions. Under market size uncertainty, our work focuses on the
market size information disclosure policy in conjunction with pricing policies.
There are papers in the operations literature that address information disclosure questions similar
to ours. For example, in a group-buying setting where more sign-ups result in a deal being unlocked,
Hu et al. (2013) study a two-period game where cohorts of customers arrive at a deal and make
sign-up decisions sequentially. They show that it is always more beneﬁcial for the ﬁrm to disclose
to second-period arrivals the number of sign-ups accumulated in the ﬁrst period than not to do so.
In contrast, our work demonstrates that sales volume disclosure may not always be more beneﬁcial
under a general form of positive network externality. In a service system, Hu et al. (2017) study the
optimal information disclosure policy about queue length. In this setting, when there are negative
network externalities, it may not be optimal to always reveal or hide the real-time congestion
information; instead, a randomized information disclosure policy may be optimal. Over a social
network, Zhou and Chen (2015, 2016) consider a contribution game with local positive network
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

7
e↵ects. The authors show that without market size uncertainty, it is always beneﬁcial for players
to move sequentially by revealing ﬁrst-period players’ actions to second-period players. Again, in
contrast, we show that when there is market size uncertainty, it is not always better to reveal
ﬁrst-period customers’ purchase decisions.
2.
Model Formulation
We consider a monopolistic ﬁrm selling a network good. Without loss of generality, we assume
that the good has zero marginal cost. At the beginning of the sales horizon, there comes a cohort
of potential customers with a random size M. Each customer is interested in buying at most one
unit of good. We assume any single customer is negligible in terms of the total market size. The
distribution of M is public information, but its exact realization is not known ex ante to the ﬁrm
as well as to the customers.
For customers, this network good exhibits positive externalities, i.e., a customer’s willingness to
pay for the good depends positively on the total sales volume. To model such network externalities,
we assume that a customer’s willingness to pay consists of her own valuation and a social utility.
Speciﬁcally, we write the customer’s willingness to pay as: u = v +s(d). The ﬁrst term v represents
the stand-alone valuation, which is the customer’s intrinsic valuation of the good. We allow for
customer heterogeneity in the intrinsic valuation. More precisely, we assume that v is realized from
a random variable V with a cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) G(·) and probability density
function (p.d.f.) g(·). The second term s(d) represents the network beneﬁt, where d is the network
size of the good at the end of the sales horizon. (In this paper, we consider a homogeneous network
beneﬁt function for all customers. We leave the heterogeneity of the network beneﬁt s(·) among
customers to future research, since it opens up opportunities for sophisticated information release
policies than the simple sales disclosure or nondisclosure ones we focus on in this paper.) Now we
make the following assumptions about V and s(·).
Assumption 1. The density g(·) is continuous on its support. There exist v and v0 such that
g(v) = 0 for v < v and g(v0) > 0 and g(v) is nonincreasing for v ≥v0. The network beneﬁt function
s(·) is nondecreasing on [0,+1) with s(0) = 0. Furthermore, there exists d0 such that s(d) is
continuously di↵erentiable and s0(d) is nondecreasing for d d0.
The assumption regarding the valuation distribution accommodates commonly used distributions
such as uniform, exponential, Gamma, log-normal and normal distributions truncated below at v.
The assumption that the network beneﬁt function has a (weakly) convex part includes the linear
function as a special case (see, e.g., Bensaid and Lesne 1996 and Jing 2007). If the social utility of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

8
the good is derived from connecting with other users, then a convex s(·) might be plausible; e.g.,
s(d) can be proportional to d(d −1), the number of all possible links in a social network with d
users. In addition, a logistic form of network beneﬁt plus a constant also satisﬁes our assumption.
In this paper, we assume the network beneﬁt of the good for a customer is determined by
the ﬁnal network size, not just the network size at the time of purchase. (This treatment of the
network beneﬁt is appropriate when the purchase period is much shorter than the consumption
period.) Since the utility of the good for a customer depends on the number of other customers
who will eventually purchase it, the market size information inﬂuences each individual customer’s
expectation of the total sales volume of the good, and hence inﬂuences her purchase decision. The
ﬁrm learns more about the exact market size during the sales process. Customers who strategically
wait can make informed purchase decisions if they can observe early sales. Hence, it is a critical
decision for the ﬁrm whether to report its sales information, which is the focus of this paper.
In particular, we focus on ex ante policies for the ﬁrm: The ﬁrm can commit to implementing
either a sales disclosure policy or a sales nondisclosure policy before the sales horizon starts. In the
sales disclosure setting or the “full information” setting (F setting in short), the ﬁrm commits to
disclosing sales information. In this case, customers who wait untill the second period can observe
past sales and make informed purchase decisions. In the sales nondisclosure setting or the “no
information” setting (N setting for short), the ﬁrm commits to sales nondiclosure throughout the
whole horizon. Customers in the N setting make uninformed decisions because they cannot observe
past sales. Since booming sales will potentially attract more customers while slack sales may drive
them away, it is not completely clear whether it would be beneﬁcial for the ﬁrm to disclose sales
information and have customers make informed decisions.
3.
Single-Period Model: Matthew vs. Saturation E↵ect
To gain intuition, we ﬁrst study a preliminary model, which essentially boils down to a single-
period model. This model is used to illustrate the main trade-o↵in a ﬁrm’s decision making. We
then extend this prototypical model to a more realistic setting in the next section. We assume
that, in the F setting, customers can infer the exact market size M after observing the purchase
behavior of a (negligibly) small fraction of customers purchasing at the beginning of the sales
horizon. Therefore, almost all customers (except that initial small fraction) are informed of the
exact value of M in the F setting, but they are not informed in the N setting. Hence, we can
interpret the sales disclosure as the market size disclosure. In this setting, the ﬁrm’s problem is
equivalent to a problem of whether to commit to reporting the market size at the beginning of the
sales horizon. For simplicity, we assume an exogenous price p in the single-period model. Next, we
analyze this single-period model and illustrate the main trade-o↵in the general model.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

9
3.1.
Sales Disclosure: The F Setting
In the F setting, customers can learn the realized market size m before they make their purchase
decisions. We consider symmetric strategies among customers. Each customer believes that ↵
fraction of customers will buy the good.1 Each customer will base her purchase decision on her
belief. One will buy the network good if and only if her expected utility from buying the good
is greater than or equal to the price. We adopt the standard approach of rational expectations
equilibrium (REE) to study the equilibrium outcome. In an REE, a customer’s belief is self-fulﬁlling
and the resulting outcome is consistent with her original belief. More precisely, given the realized
and observed market size m, the equilibrium adoption fraction ↵can be characterized as
↵= ¯G(p −s(↵m)),
(1)
where ¯G(·) = 1 −G(·).
Equation (1) is, in fact, a ﬁxed point problem. In this paper, we formulate serval ﬁxed point
problems like Equation (1). The existence of ﬁxed points for those problems follows from a special
version of Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem, which states that every monotonic function f : [0,1] ! [0,1]
has at least one ﬁxed point.2 Note the right-hand side of Equation (1) is increasing in ↵. Thus,
there exists at least one solution to (1) for any m ≥0. The following lemma provides suﬃcient
conditions for the uniqueness of the equilibrium. (Recall that v0 and d0 are deﬁned in Assumption
1.)
Lemma 1 (Uniqueness of Equilibrium in F Setting). If p > v0 + s(m) and m d0, then
the equilibrium ↵⇤characterized by (1) must be unique and ↵⇤< 1.
Lemma 1 shows that when the market size is relatively small, implying that the network beneﬁt
at its full strength is relatively small, or the price is relatively high, the REE characterized by (1)
is unique. We note that, without the conditions in Lemma 1, Equation (1) has a unique ﬁxed point
if V is uniformly distributed and s(·) is linear, which is a special case of Assumption 1.
When the market size is relatively large or the price is relatively small, the uniqueness of equi-
librium characterized by (1) may not hold. In this paper, we focus on the largest REE if there exist
multiple ones. This is a commonly adopted approach in the literature, see, e.g., Farrell and Saloner
1 In the literature, a belief can be about either the market outcomes or the behavior of other players. But in a
market with many players, a focal customer’s belief is usually about market outcomes, e.g., the number of adopters
in network games (see Jackson and Yariv 2007). In other words, when the market is large enough, each customer’s
private information about her own valuation is negligible, and her belief about the market outcome is close to her
belief about other customers in the market.
2 We refer the readers to Tarski (1955) for a general setting of Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

10
(1985), Katz and Shapiro (1986), Fudenberg and Tirole (2000) and Wang and Wang (2016). On the
one hand, the largest REE is stable to small perturbations. On the other hand, a higher REE leads
to higher social welfare (i.e., more purchases, a higher proﬁt level for the ﬁrm and more surplus
for the customers at the same price). Therefore, it is reasonable to focus on the largest REE.
Figure 1
Matthew e↵ect vs. saturation e↵ect
(a) Adoption fraction
(b) Demand
In the following, we denote the largest solution to Equation (1) by ↵F(m). The demand for the
ﬁrm in the F setting can be written as dF(m) = ↵F(m)m, and the expected proﬁt for the ﬁrm is
RF = pEdF(M).
Next, we identify two countervailing e↵ects of market size disclosure, a pro-disclosure Matthew
e↵ect and a pro-secrecy saturation e↵ect. To this end, we ﬁrst illustrate the e↵ects with an example
where V is uniformly distributed on [0,1], p = 0.8 and s(d) = 0.01d. Figure 1 plots the adoption
fraction function ↵F(m) and the demand function dF(m) (in this example, ↵F(m) is the unique
solution to Equation (1)). Note that in Figure 1 the parameter ˆm = 80 is the smallest market size
such that all customers buy the good in equilibrium.
Figure 1(a) shows that the equilibrium adoption fraction ↵F(m) has two pieces: when m is
smaller than ˆm, ↵F(m) increases convexly in m; when m is larger than ˆm, ↵F(m) = 1. Thus, the
demand function has two pieces as well (see Figure 1(b)). These two pieces correspond to the two
countervailing e↵ects in the F setting as mentioned: the Matthew e↵ect and the saturation e↵ect.
The ﬁrst piece with convexity implies that the beneﬁt of revealing market size, due to customers
being encouraged to make a purchase when the market turnout is high, outweighs the loss resulting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

11
from customers being discouraged when the turnout is disappointing. This phenomenon, which
we call the Matthew e↵ect, is intrinsically driven by the positive network externalities. As a new
customer enters the market, existing customers will increase their expectation of the ultimate
network size, which determines their expected utility of buying the good. As a result, the new
customer is more willing to buy the good. In anticipation of that, other customers will further
increase their utility of buying the good. Therefore, the equilibrium adoption fraction is more than
linearly increasing in the market size in this range of the ﬁrst piece. We will show that the ﬁrm
prefers committing to sales disclosure when the Matthew e↵ect is strong enough, i.e., when the
probability that M falls into the region where ↵F(·) is convex is high enough.
However, the Matthew e↵ect can be saturated. The adoption fraction ↵F(m) is capped by 1 for
m ≥ˆm. In other words, if the realized market size is suﬃciently large, the market is saturated.
That is, all customers in the market are induced to make a purchase; a fortiori, the entire market
of an even larger turnout would all make a purchase as well, due to an even stronger network
beneﬁt. Hence, the information when the exact market size is more than ˆm is redundant. We call
this phenomenon the saturation e↵ect. With the market saturated, revealing information can be
detrimental: the beneﬁt of revealing information when the realized market size is large may be
limited, while the risk of turning away potential buyers looms in case the realized market size is
low. We will show that a ﬁrm beneﬁts from the sales nondisclosure policy when the saturation
e↵ect is strong enough, i.e., when the probability that ↵F(M) = 1 is high enough.
To conclude this subsection, we formalize the observations from the example in Figure 1.
Lemma 2 (Matthew Effect vs. Saturation Effect).
(i) (Matthew E↵ect) If p > v0 +s(d0), then both ↵F(m) and dF(m), m d0, are (weakly) increas-
ing and (weakly) convex in m; the increasing and convex properties here are in a strict sense
if ¯G(p) > 0 and s0(d) > 0 for d < d0.
(ii) (Saturation E↵ect) If p v + s(m), then ↵F(m) = 1 and dF(m) = m.
3.2.
Sales Nondisclosure: The N Setting
In the N setting, each customer only knows the distribution of the market size throughout the
sales horizon. Similar to the F setting, the equilibrium adoption fraction can be characterized as
↵= ¯G
!
p −Es(↵M)
"
.
(2)
The existence of a ﬁxed point of (2) is again a direct consequence of Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem.
The following lemma provides suﬃcient conditions for the uniqueness of the equilibrium.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

12
Lemma 3 (Uniqueness of Equilibrium in N Setting). If p > v0 + Es(M) and P{M 
d0} = 1, then the equilibrium ↵⇤characterized by (2) must be unique, and ↵⇤< 1.
Lemma 3 points out that, when the market size is (stochastically) small, which implies that the
expected network beneﬁt at its full strength is small, or the price is relatively high, the equilibrium
characterized by (2) is unique. The intuition behind this result is similar to that behind Lemma 1.
As before, if there are multiple ﬁxed points to (2), we focus on the largest one, denoted by ↵N.
Thus the demand for the ﬁrm in the N setting can be written as dN = ↵NEM, and the expected
proﬁt for the ﬁrm can be written as RN = pdN.
3.3.
Sales Disclosure vs. Nondisclosure
In this single-period model, we focus on the case in which the price p(≥0) is exogenous. We will
analyze a general case with endogenous prices in a two-period model; see Section 4.
To illustrate better the main trade-o↵, we assume for the time being that s(·) is linear. Under
this assumption, by comparing Equations (1) and (2), ↵N = ↵F(EM), which yields dN = dF(EM).
To compare RN with RF, the key is the second-order property of dF(·). As shown in Lemma 2
and Figure 1(b), dF(m) is ﬁrst convex, then linear. By Jensen’s inequality, EdF(M) ≥dF(EM) if
P{p > v0 +s(M)} is high enough, i.e., the Matthew e↵ect is strong enough; and EdF(M) dF(EM)
if the probability that p v + s(M) is high enough, i.e., the saturation e↵ect is strong enough.
For a general s(·), we can no longer compare RN with RF in such a simple way, but the trade-
o↵between Matthew e↵ect and saturation e↵ect persists and plays a key role in the comparison
between the two settings. The following proposition provides suﬃcient conditions for either policy
to be optimal.
Proposition 1 (Sales Disclosure vs. Nondisclosure).
(i) (Weak Network Beneﬁt) If p ≥v0 + s(m) and m d0, then RF ≥RN, where m is the upper
bound of the support of M.
(ii) (Strong Network Beneﬁt) If p v + Es(M), then RF RN.
Proposition 1(i) presents a case where the Matthew e↵ect dominates the saturation e↵ect. In
particular, when the exogenous price p is high enough or the network beneﬁt at its full strength
is relatively weak, the Matthew e↵ect will be the dominant driving force in the F setting, and
hence the ﬁrm is better o↵committing to revealing its sales information. In contrast, Proposition
1(ii) provides a suﬃcient condition under which the saturation e↵ect is relatively strong. When the
exogenous price p is low enough or the expected network beneﬁt is relatively strong, the ﬁrm is
better o↵not committing to revealing the market size because of the dominating saturation e↵ect.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

13
Figure 2
Matthew e↵ect vs. saturation e↵ect
(a) Adoption fraction
(b) Demand
Note. Parameters are the same as in Figure 1 except that V ⇠N(0.5,0.25).
To conclude this section, we provide some remarks on Assumption 1. Under this assumption, the
stand-alone valuation V has a lower bound v. When the expected network beneﬁt is strong enough,
any customer in the market will buy the good, even with the lowest valuation. Hence, the adoption
rate function achieves 1 when the market size reaches some threshold, as shown in Figure 1(a).
However, the network e↵ect may not always be able to make the market saturated. For example,
when the stand-alone valuation V follows a normal distribution and can take negative values, the
market is never entirely covered, regardless of how strong the expected network beneﬁt is. In this
case, the shape of the equilibrium adoption function of the market size is ﬁrst-convex-then-concave,
as shown in Figure 2(a). The concave segment limits the beneﬁt of revealing information when
the realized market size is beyond some level; hence revealing information is more likely to be
detrimental than in the example in Figure 1. This phenomenon can be referred to as the generalized
saturation e↵ect. Nevertheless, the central trade-o↵between the F setting and the N setting in
this paper—Matthew e↵ect vs. saturation e↵ect—continues to hold.
4.
Two-Period Model
In the single-period model, we assume that in the F setting, (almost) all customers can learn the
exact market size at the very beginning of the sales horizon, which helps us illustrate the trade-o↵
between the two settings F and N. In this section, we consider a more realistic two-period model
in which the ﬁrst-period customers make uninformed decisions without knowing the exact market
size, whereas the second-period customers will learn the market size and make informed decisions
if the ﬁrm commits to reporting the ﬁrst-period sales.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

14
In the two-period model, we consider customers’ intertemporal purchase behavior. All customers
arrive at the beginning of the ﬁrst period. They recognize that they can learn the market size in
the second period if the ﬁrm commits to reporting ﬁrst-period sales. Since the network beneﬁt
for a customer depends on the total sales volume across the two periods, to maximize individual
expected surplus, a customer chooses between buying immediately in the ﬁrst period or delaying
her purchase decision to the second period. For example, after a new gadget is launched, given
the option of adopting it now or later, customers take into account the expected future network
beneﬁt. With sales disclosure, a customer who buys immediately takes the risk that the ultimate
number of adopters may be disappointing, whereas a customer who delays her decision will get
a discount on her utility via a discount factor δ, 0 < δ < 1. Moreover, in the two-period model,
the ﬁrm can also choose di↵erent pricing policies. In this section, we examine four pricing policies:
exogenous pricing, state-independent pricing, contingent preannounced pricing, and contingent
pricing without commitment.
In the next four subsections, we analyze each pricing policy and explore which information policy,
i.e., committing to sales disclosure or nondisclosure, is optimal in that speciﬁc setting.
4.1.
Exogenous Pricing
In this case, we assume that the prices for both periods, p1(≥0) and p2(≥0), are exogenously
given. This scenario emerges, for example, when the retailer is unable or unwilling to change the
prices across the two periods. Let v be the upper end of the support of V . We assume v is large
enough that a positive fraction of customers will always buy the good in the ﬁrst period in either
the F or the N setting.3 Below, we present the model, analyze the REE results and characterize
the optimal policy for the ﬁrm.
Sales Disclosure: The F Setting. With sales disclosure, customers who delay their purchase
decisions to the second period can observe the ﬁrst-period sales d1. At the beginning of the second
period, given that ↵1 fraction of the cohort have adopted the good in the ﬁrst period, customers
who delayed their purchase decisions form an identical belief that ↵2 fraction of the cohort will
buy the good. The second-period adoption fraction ↵2 in an REE can be characterized by
↵1 + ↵2 = max{↵1, ¯G(p2 −[s(d1 + ↵2m)|↵1,d1])},
(3)
3 This assumption is made to simplify the discussion. It does not a↵ect the results in this subsection. In fact, when
this assumption is violated, i.e., when no customer buys the good in the ﬁrst period, the second-period customers
are uninformed of the market size even in the F setting. In that case, the two settings, F and N, become e↵ectively
identical.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

15
where (m|↵1,d1) = d1/↵1. We can see from (3) that ↵2 in an REE is a function of ↵1 and the
realized market size m.
In the ﬁrst period, all customers identically anticipate that ↵1 fraction of customers will buy the
good in the ﬁrst period, and that ↵2 fraction of customers will buy the good in the second period,
where ↵2 = {↵2(↵1,M)} is a function of ↵1 and M. Based on these beliefs, a customer with an
intrinsic valuation v will have an expected utility u1(v) from buying the good immediately, and
u2(v) from waiting, where
u1(v) = v −p1 + δEs
!
(↵1 + ↵2(↵1,M))M
"
,
u2(v) = δE
⇥
v −p2 + s
!
(↵1 + ↵2(↵1,M))M
"⇤+.
Here, we assume that the network beneﬁt from the ﬁrst period is negligible. This assumption is
reasonable for group buying and crowdfunding, where the group beneﬁt only kicks in at the end
of the pledging horizon. This assumption also holds for other settings such as launching of gadgets
with pre- and regular ordering, in which the selling horizon is relatively short compared to the
time the customers enjoy the product with the network beneﬁt. Even though the customers may
enjoy some network beneﬁt when they buy early, that beneﬁt can be negligible compared to the
relatively long product usage period. Our main results hold qualitatively when the network e↵ects
are imposed in the alternative way of taking into account the ﬁrst-period network beneﬁt.
An individual customer buys the good in the ﬁrst period whenever u1(v) ≥u2(v) ≥0. It can be
seen that there exists a threshold vc(↵1,↵2) for the intrinsic valuation, above which the customer
will buy the good immediately and below which the customer will wait and see. An REE requires
that the outcomes in the two periods be consistent with what customers expect. Then we can
characterize the REE for the two-period game by the following equations:
↵1 + ↵2(↵1,m) = max
%
↵1, ¯G
!
p2 −s(↵1m + ↵2(↵1,m)m)
" 
, 8 m,
u1(vc(↵1,↵2)) = max
%
u1(v),u2(vc(↵1,↵2))
 
,
vc(↵1,↵2) = G−1(1 −↵1),
where G−1(x) = infy≥0{y : G(y) ≥x}.
Let ↵(↵1,m) = ↵1 + ↵2(↵1,m) be the total adoption fraction conditional on ↵1 and m, and let
˜↵(m) be the ﬁxed point of
˜↵= ¯G(p2 −s(˜↵m)), 8m.
(4)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

16
Then, the REE equations can be rewritten as
↵(↵1,m) = max{↵1, ˜↵(m)}, 8m,
(5)
G−1(1 −↵1) −p1 + δEs
!
↵(↵1,M)M
"
= δE
⇥
G−1(1 −↵1) −p2 + s
!
↵(↵1,M)M
"⇤+, if ↵1 < 1,
v −p1 + δEs(M) ≥δE[v −p2 + s(M)]+, if ↵1 = 1.
An REE, as a solution to these equations, has two components: ↵1 and ˜↵, where ˜↵={˜↵(M)}. The
existence of ˜↵is derived from Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem.
If there are multiple equilibria, we select the equilibrium (↵1,˜↵) such that
↵1 = sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1 + δEs
!
max{x, ˜↵(M)}M
"
≥δE
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p2 + s
!
max{x, ˜↵(M)}M
"⇤+o
(6)
and
˜↵(m)
is
the
largest
ﬁxed
point
of
(4).
We
write
the
ﬁrst-period
adoption
frac-
tion, the second-period adoption fraction, and the total adoption fraction in the REE as
↵1,F(p1,p2), {↵2,F(p1,p2,M)}, and {↵F(p1,p2,M)}, respectively. Furthermore, we let d1,F(p1,p2) =
↵1,F(p1,p2)EM, d2,F(p1,p2,M) = ↵2,F(p1,p2,M)M, and dF(p1,p2,M) = ↵F(p1,p2,M)M denote the
ﬁrst-period demand, the second-period demand, and the total demand, respectively. We also denote
by ˜↵F(p2,m) the largest ﬁxed point of (4), and ˜dF(p2,M) = ˜↵F(p2,M)M. Thus we have that
↵F(p1,p2,M) = max{↵1,F(p1,p2), ˜↵F(p2,M)}. The expected total proﬁt for the ﬁrm is RF(p1,p2) =
p1d1,F(p1,p2) + p2E[d2,F(p1,p2,M)].
Sales Nondisclosure: The N Setting. Without sales disclosure, customers only know the
distribution of the market size, even if they delay their purchase decisions to the second period.
Similar to the F setting, given the ﬁrst-period adoption fraction ↵1, the second-period adoption
fraction ↵2 in an REE can be characterized by
↵1 + ↵2 = max
%
↵1, ¯G
!
p2 −Es
!
(↵1 + ↵2)M
"" 
.
At the beginning of the ﬁrst period, all customers form an identical belief over an adoption
fraction ↵1 in the ﬁrst period and ↵2 in the second period. Let ↵= ↵1 + ↵2 be their belief over the
total adoption fraction. With these beliefs in mind, a customer with an intrinsic valuation v will
buy the good in the ﬁrst period if and only if
v −p1 + δEs(↵M) ≥δ[v −p2 + Es(↵M)]+.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

17
There exists a threshold vc(↵) for the intrinsic valuation above which the customer will buy the
good in the ﬁrst period. In an REE, the adoption fractions in the two periods can be characterized
as
↵= max{ ¯G
!
p1−δEs(↵M)
"
, ¯G
!
p2 −Es(↵M)
"
},
(7)
G−1(1 −↵1) −p1 + δEs(↵M) = δE
⇥
G−1(1 −↵1) −p2 + s(↵M)
⇤+, if ↵1 < 1,
v −p1 + δEs(M) ≥δ[v −p2 + Es(M)]+, if ↵1 = 1.
If there are multiple solutions, similar to the F setting model, we focus on the one that satisﬁes
↵1 = sup
x2[0,↵]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1 + δEs(↵M) ≥δ[G−1(1 −x) −p2 + Es(↵M)]+o
,
(8)
and that ↵is the largest ﬁxed point of (7). We write the ﬁrst-period adoption fraction, the second-
period adoption fraction, and the total adoption fraction in the REE as ↵1,N(p1,p2), ↵2,N(p1,p2)
and ↵N(p1,p2), respectively. Let d1,N(p1,p2) = ↵1,N(p1,p2)EM, d2,N(p1,p2) = ↵2,N(p1,p2)EM and
dN(p1,p2) = ↵N(p1,p2)EM denote the ﬁrst-period demand, the second-period demand, and the total
demand, respectively. The total proﬁt for the ﬁrm in the N setting is RN(p1,p2) = p1d1,N(p1,p2) +
p2d2,N(p1,p2).
Sales Disclosure vs. Nondisclosure. As highlighted in the single-period model, there are
two countervailing e↵ects of market size disclosure, i.e., the Matthew e↵ect and the saturation
e↵ect. We have shown that in the single-period model the strengths of the two e↵ects determine
whether it is optimal to commit to sales disclosure or to sales nondisclosure. In the two-period
model with strategic customers, these two e↵ects can still exist in the second period, because the
second-period customers are informed of the market size and will base their purchase decisions on
such information, if the ﬁrm commits to reporting early sales. The following lemma summarizes
the two e↵ects in the two-period model.
Lemma 4 (Matthew vs. Saturation Effect). Deﬁne
m0
=
inf{m
:
¯G
!
p2
−
s(↵1,F(p1,p2)m)
"
≥↵1,F(p1,p2)}. The total adoption fraction ↵F(p1,p2,m) has the following
properties:
(i) (Matthew E↵ect) If p2 > v0 + s(d0), then ↵F(p1,p2,m) and dF(p1,p2,m), m0 m d0, are
(weakly) increasing and (weakly) convex in m; the increasing and convex properties are in a
strict sense if ¯G(p2) > 0 and s0(d) > 0 for d < d0.
(ii) (Saturation E↵ect) If p2 v + s(m), then ↵F(p1,p2,m) = 1, and dF(p1,p2,m) = m.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

18
By Lemma 4, we ﬁnd that the comparison between EdF(p1,p2,M) and dN(p1,p2) depends on the
second-order property of dF(p1,p2,m) in m. In fact, from deﬁnitions of ˜dF(·) and dN(·), we have
that, if p1 ≥p2 and s(·) is linear, then ˜dF(p2,EM) = dN(p2), which yields
dF(p1,p2,EM) = max{↵1,F(p1,p2)EM, ˜dF(p2,EM)} ≥dN(p2),
where we write dN(p1,p2) as dN(p2) in short, since dN(·) depends solely on p2 when p1 ≥p2.
Analogous to the discussion in the single-period model, the expected total demand in the F setting
will be greater than the expected total demand in the N setting if the Matthew e↵ect that exists
in the second period is strong enough, and vice versa. The two e↵ects still play an important role
in the ﬁrm’s choices between the two settings, F and N.
In addition to the Matthew and saturation e↵ects, committing to sales disclosure results in
another e↵ect, which we call the e↵ect of information free-riding. That is, customers in the F
setting delay their purchase not only for a possible lower price in the future, but also for a free-ride
on the information generated by the others’ purchase decisions. In contrast, customers in the N
setting wait only for a possible lower price. Now, we are going to show that the comparison between
Ed1,F(p1,p2,M) and d1,N(p1,p2) depends signiﬁcantly on the information free-riding e↵ect. Deﬁne
HF(x) =G−1(1 −x) −p1 + δEs
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"
−δE
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p2 + s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤+,
HN(x) =G−1(1 −x) −p1 + δEs
!
max{x,↵N(p2)}M
"
−δ
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p2 + Es
!
max{x,↵N(p2)}M
"⇤+.
Then we have
HF(x) −HN(x) =δ
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −Es
!
max{x,↵N(p2)}M
"⇤+
−δE
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤+.
When the ﬁrst-period adoption rate is x, −HN(x) (resp., −HF(x)) measures how much a customer
with valuation G−1(1 −x) wants to delay her purchase to the second period in the N (resp., F)
setting. Accordingly, HN(x) −HF(x) measures how much this customer wants to free-ride on the
sales information in the second period. By Equations (6) and (8), we have
↵1,F(p1,p2) = sup
0x1
{x : HF(x) ≥0},
↵1,N(p1,p2) = sup
0x1
{x : HN(x) ≥0}.
We have the following lemma.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

19
Lemma 5. For p1 ≥0 and p2 ≥0,
(i) ↵1,F(p1,p2) ↵1,N(p1,p2);
(ii) if p1 ≥p2 then ↵1,F(p1,p2) = ↵1,N(p1,p2).
Whether a ﬁrm should disclose sales information depends on the strengths of the three e↵ects.
The following proposition provides suﬃcient conditions for each policy, F or N, to be optimal, in
terms of δ, the form of s(·) and the distributions of M and V .
Proposition 2 (Exogenous Pricing).
(i) (Weak Network Beneﬁt) If p1 ≥p2 ≥v0 + s(m) and m d0, then RF(p1,p2) ≥RN(p1,p2); if
p1 < p2, p2 ≥v0+s(m) and m d0, then there exists δc > 0 such that when δ < δc, RF(p1,p2) ≥
RN(p1,p2);
(ii) (Strong Network Beneﬁt) If p2 min{p1,v + Es(M)}, then RF(p1,p2) RN(p1,p2).
Proposition 2(i) presents a scenario in which committing to sales disclosure results in a higher
expected demand and a higher expected proﬁt. In particular, when the network beneﬁt at its
full strength is small enough, the Matthew e↵ect dominates the saturation e↵ect. That is, with
sales disclosure, the beneﬁt of reporting large sales outweighs the loss of reporting disappointing
early sales in the second period, i.e., the second-period demand under sales disclosure is greater
than that under sales nondisclosure. In addition, when the discounting factor δ is small enough
(customers experience larger surplus discounting if they wait), the incentive for customers to delay
their decision—to reduce the risk in estimating the network beneﬁt—is small enough that the ﬁrst-
period demand is only slightly smaller under sales disclosure than under sales nondisclosure. Note
that the e↵ect of information free-riding does not exist when p1 ≥p2 (see Lemma 5(ii)). With all
forces combined, the total proﬁt under sales disclosure is greater that under sales nondisclosure,
in other words, the Matthew e↵ect dominates the sum of the saturation e↵ect and the e↵ect of
information free-riding. Therefore, in this case, it is optimal to commit to sales disclosure.
In contrast, Proposition 2(ii) provides a suﬃcient condition under which committing to sales
nondisclosure makes the seller better o↵. When the expected network beneﬁt at its full strength is
large enough, the saturation e↵ect in the second period dominates, that is, the expectation of the
network beneﬁt at the beginning of the selling season is large enough. In anticipation of a large
network beneﬁt, almost all customers will buy the good even without knowing the exact market
size, while a fraction of them will wait and buy the good in the second period under sales disclosure.
If the ﬁrm commits to reporting sales in this case, then customers who chose to delay their decision
to the second period might be discouraged if the ﬁrst-period sales turn out be low. Meanwhile, the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

20
ﬁrst-period demand in the F setting is always no greater than that in the N setting. Thus, it can
be unproﬁtable for the ﬁrm to commit to sales disclosure.
In the online games industry, the price is often exogenously determined, e.g., the subscription fee
for a game often follows the competitive market price. Consistent with Proposition 2(ii), Blizzard’s
World of Warcraft, a massively multiplayer online role-playing game, announced on its oﬃcial
website that the subscription numbers for its future releases would not be reported (Tassi 2015).
The game had already built a huge customer base and hence a strong network e↵ect, thanks to
the popularity of its previous versions. However, at the same time, numerous niche online game
operators with small market potentials have their subscription numbers reported by third-party
sales watchdogs such as addictinggames.com. These observations are consistent with our results.
4.2.
State-Independent Endogenous Pricing
In Section 4.1, we assume that the ﬁrm’s prices are exogenously given, which is often the case for
competitive markets. However, the ﬁrm can sometimes set the prices by themselves. This subsection
explores the case in which the ﬁrm decides not only whether to disclose the early sales information
but also how to set (state-independent) prices for the two periods.
The ﬁrm’s optimal pricing problems in the F and N settings can be formulated, respectively,
as R⇤
F = maxp1,p2 RF(p1,p2), and R⇤
N = maxp1,p2 RN(p1,p2). We denote the optimal prices by
(p⇤
1,F,p⇤
2,F) and (p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N).4 Unless stated otherwise, other symbols they have the same meaning
as in the previous sections.
Next, we compare R⇤
F and R⇤
N. Recall that under exogenous pricing, if p1 ≥p2, then the ﬁrm
will gain the same ﬁrst-period proﬁts in the two settings, N and F. See the following lemma.
Lemma 6 (State-Independent Pricing). p⇤
1,N ≥p⇤
2,N.
We can see from Lemma 5(ii) and Lemma 6 that ↵1,F(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N) = ↵1,N(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N), that is,
the e↵ect of information free-riding does not exist as long as the ﬁrm charges p1,F = p⇤
1,N and
p2,F = p⇤
2,N. That is because, under these prices, customers who are willing to buy the good in
the ﬁrst period have suﬃciently high stand-alone valuations that they will also be willing to buy
the good even if they choose to wait and observe a small market size in the second period, i.e.,
δE
⇥
−G−1(1 −↵⇤
1,N) + p⇤
2,N −s
!
max{↵⇤
1,N, ˜↵F(p⇤
2,N,M)}M
"⇤+ = 0. Furthermore, the ﬁrm can be
also better o↵from committing to sales disclosure in the second period just by pricing the same as
in the N setting, if the Matthew e↵ect under the optimal prices of the N setting is strong enough,
which implies R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N. We formalize this result as follows.
4 In general, an optimal solution to a proﬁt-maximization problem may not exist. In this case, we focus on the
supremum of the objective function, and an optimal price is thought of as a limit of a sequence of prices at which
the sequence of objective function values converges to its supremum.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

21
Proposition 3 (State-Independent Pricing).
(i) If there exist r,r1,r2 such that r1 > r > r2 > v0 +s(m), m d0, P{V ≥r1} ≥r/r1, P{r2 V 
(r −δr2)/(1 −δ)} ≥[v0 + s(m)]/r2, then R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N.
(ii) If v + Es(M) > 0, P{V v + Es(M)} = 1 and E[M · 1{s(M)≥min{r(v+Es(M))−v0,s(d0)}}] EM/r
for any r > 1, then R⇤
F R⇤
N.
Proposition 3(i) presents a case in which committing to sales disclosure is optimal under endoge-
nous pricing. This case holds when customers’ valuation distribution has a heavy tail relative to
the expected network beneﬁt at its full strength. In this situation, the optimal prices in the N set-
ting are relatively high in order to extract the surplus from a relatively large fraction of customers
who have high stand-alone valuations. Speciﬁcally, the condition P{V ≥r1} ≥r/r1 implies p⇤
1,N ≥r
and the condition P{r2 V (r −δr2)/(1 −δ)} ≥[v0 + s(m)]/r2 implies p⇤
2,N ≥v0 + s(m) (see the
proof for details). Then, in the F setting, by charging p1,F = p⇤
1,N and p2,F = p⇤
2,N, the Matthew
e↵ect tends to dominate the sum of the saturation e↵ect and the e↵ect of information free-riding,
because of the high price in the second period; see Proposition 2(i). Therefore, committing to sale
disclosure is optimal in this scenario.
Proposition 3(ii) presents a case in which committing to sales nondisclosure is optimal. It requires
that (a) the stand-alone valuation be bounded from above by the expected network beneﬁt, and
(b) the market size distribution have a relatively light tail. In this situation, the ﬁrm would do
reasonably well without information disclosure by pricing at the expected network beneﬁt, i.e.,
p2,N = v+Es(M). Because the network beneﬁt would be strong, the ﬁrm would saturate the second-
period market and earn a healthy proﬁt by pricing high in the ﬁrst period. In the F setting, the ﬁrm
faces the following conundrum. If it charges lower than v + Es(M) in the second period, it cannot
gain more demand than in the N setting even if the market size is large because the adoption
fraction is already 1, while it can do worse if the realized market is small; hence the expected
network beneﬁt is smaller than that in the N setting, implying that its ﬁrst/second-period proﬁt is
also smaller. Meanwhile, if the ﬁrm prices higher, e.g., p2,F > v + Es(M), it cannot do better with
information disclosure either. This is because the gain from sales disclosure is limited due to the
light-tailed market size, whereas the loss in proﬁt if the realized market is small can be much more
signiﬁcant. Overall, the ﬁrm does better in the N setting than in the F setting in this case.
When the density of customers’ valuation g(·) takes some special form, e.g., nonincreasing in its
support, Proposition 3(i) can be rewritten in a much simpler way as follows.
Corollary 1 (State-Independent Pricing). Suppose g(·) is nonincreasing on [v,+1).
Then R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N if m d0 and P{V ≥r(v0 + s(m))} ≥(r + 1)/(2r) for some r > 1.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

22
4.3.
Contingent Preannounced Pricing
We consider a contingent preannounced pricing setting in which the ﬁrm chooses a price in the sec-
ond period depending on the ﬁrst-period sales. In this subsection we compare the two information
release policies, i.e., the F setting and the N setting, under contingent preannounced pricing.
Sales Disclosure: The F Setting. At the beginning of the ﬁrst period in the F setting, the
ﬁrm charges a price p1,F for the ﬁrst period, and preannounces a pricing scheme p2,F(d1), as a
function of the ﬁrst-period sales d1, for the second period. Since (m|↵1,d1) = d1/↵1, p2,F(d1) can
be rewritten as p2,F(m). We write p2,F ={p2,F(M)} for simplicity.
Given ↵1, d1 and p2,F , the second-period customers identically anticipate that ↵2 fraction of the
market size will purchase the good in the second period. The adoption fraction ↵2 in an REE, for
any given ↵1, d1 and corresponding p2,F, must satisfy
↵1 + ↵2 = max{↵1, ¯G(p2,F(m) −s((↵1 + ↵2)m))}.
We can see that ↵2 in an REE is a function of ↵1, p2,F(m) and m. Let ↵(↵1,p2,F(m),m) =
↵1 + ↵2(↵1,p2,F(m),m) be the total adoption fraction conditional on ↵1, p2,F(m) and m, and let
˜↵(p2,F(m),m) be the ﬁxed point of
˜↵= ¯G(p2,F(m) −Es(˜↵m)), 8m.
(9)
Then the REE condition for the second period can be rewritten as
↵(↵1,p2,F(m),m) = max{↵1, ˜↵(p2,F(m),m)}.
(10)
In the ﬁrst period, the analysis of the REE equation is similar to the state-independent pricing
scenario. If there are multiple equilibria, by following the same steps as in Section 4.1, we select
the equilibrium (↵1,˜↵) such that
↵1 = sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1,F + δEs
!
max{x, ˜↵(p2,F(M),M)}M
"
≥δE
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p2,F(M) + Es
!
max{x, ˜↵(p2,F(M),M)}M
"⇤+o
(11)
and ˜↵(p2,F(m),m) is the largest ﬁxed point of (9).
We use the same notation as in Section 4.1 to denote outcomes in an equilibrium characterized
as above. Thus the ﬁrm’s problem is
max
p1,F ,p2,F RF(p1,F,p2,F ) = p1,F↵1,F(p1,F,p2,F )EM + E[p2,F(M)↵2,F(p1,F,p2,F ,M)M].
With slight abuse of notation, we denote the optimal value of the above formulation by R⇤
F.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

23
Sales Nondisclosure: The N Setting. In the N setting, it is assumed that because of sales
nondisclosure customers have no knowledge of the exact market size, even in the second period.
Hence, in this setting, the ﬁrm can only preannounce a price for the second period that is inde-
pendent of the ﬁrst-period sales volume. This case has been discussed in Section 4.2. Again with
slight abuse of notation, we denote the optimal revenue for this setting by R⇤
N.
Sales Disclosure vs. Nondisclosure. In the F setting, if the ﬁrm can commit to future prices
contingent on the revealed ﬁrst-period sales, not only can the saturation e↵ect be dampened,
because now the ﬁrm can commit to a higher price for booming market, but also the downside
of the Matthew e↵ect can be mitigated, because now the ﬁrm can commit to a lower price to
boost demand if the early sales volume proves to be lower. The following proposition compares the
optimal proﬁts in the F and N setting under contingent preannounced pricing.
Proposition 4 (Contingent Preannounced Pricing). R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N.
Proposition 4 conﬁrms our intuition, by showing that the ﬁrm is better o↵combining sales
disclosure and nimble pricing contingent on the sales. The intuition comes from two aspects. First,
with contingent pricing, the ﬁrm has the ﬂexibility to moderate the Matthew and saturation e↵ects
in the F setting through charging di↵erent prices based on the realization of M, while in the N
setting, the ﬁrm just determines two prices depending on the distribution of M. Hence, committing
to sales disclosure coupled with pricing ﬂexibility can outperform committing to sales nondisclosure
by allowing the ﬁrm to better respond to market size uncertainty, especially for the second period.
The second aspect is commitment and assurance. Preannouncing a contingent pricing policy
for the second period helps ensure a relatively high utility for ﬁrst-period customers who buy
immediately. In particular, the ﬁrm can preannounce a low second-period price if the ﬁrst-period
sales volume is low. Doing so not only improves the expected network beneﬁt but also reduces
the risk that the ultimate network beneﬁt will be disappointing to ﬁrst-period customers, thereby
driving more customers to buy a good in the ﬁrst period.
We note that the ability to commit to a contingent pricing policy is necessary for sales disclosure
to be optimal. A ﬁrm that cannot make such a commitment to customers will only focus on
maximizing the second-period proﬁt when it observes the remaining potential customers at the
beginning of that period. As a result, the ﬁrm may achieve a higher second-period proﬁt under
sales disclosure, but it may not ensure greater attraction in the ﬁrst period. In this case, some
additional conditions are required for sales disclosure to be optimal. This case is discussed formally
in the next subsection.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

24
4.4.
Contingent Pricing without Commitment
In this subsection, we consider a scenario in which the ﬁrm determines the ﬁrst-period (resp.,
second-period) price at the beginning of the ﬁrst (resp., second) period, where the second-period
price is contingent on two state variables: the ﬁrst-period sales d1 and the ﬁrst-period adoption
fraction ↵1. Again, we consider the F setting and the N setting and compare the ﬁrm’s proﬁts R⇤
F
and R⇤
N in those two settings.
Sales Disclosure: The F setting. We study this two-stage game by backward induction. In
the second period, given the ﬁrst-period sales volume d1 and the ﬁrst-period adoption fraction ↵1,
customers can infer the realization m of the random market size M, and, when facing the second-
period price p2,F, they anticipate that ↵2 fraction of customers will buy the good. The equilibrium
adoption fraction ↵2 can be characterized by
↵1 + ↵2 = max{↵1, ¯G(p2,F −s((↵1 + ↵2)m))}.
To optimize its second-period proﬁt, the ﬁrm must charge a price such that ↵2 > 0 for all possible
ﬁrst-period sales volumes as long as ↵1 < 1. (Otherwise, the ﬁrm will gain nothing from the second
period.) Consequently, the REE for the second period can be rewritten as
↵1 + ↵2 = ¯G(p2,F −s((↵1 + ↵2)m)).
(12)
Denote by ↵2,F(↵1,p2,F,m) the largest ﬁxed point in (12). For any ↵1 and m, the ﬁrm’s prob-
lem at the second period is maxp2,F R2,F(↵1,p2,F,m) = p2,F↵2,F(↵1,p2,F,m)m. Clearly, the optimal
solution is a function of ↵1 and m, denoted by p⇤
2,F(↵1,m). And we use ↵⇤
2,F(↵1,m) to denote the
adoption fraction under this optimal price.
In the ﬁrst period, analogous to the state-independent pricing case, the REE can be characterized
by
↵1 = sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1,F + δEs
!
(x + ↵⇤
2,F(x,M))M
"
≥δ
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −Ep⇤
2,F(x,M) + Es
!
(x + ↵⇤
2,F(x,M))M
"⇤o
= sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1,F ≥δ
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −Ep⇤
2,F(x,M)
⇤o
.
(13)
Note that G−1(1 −x) −p⇤
2,F(x,m) + s
!
(x + ↵⇤
2,F(x,m))m
"
is always nonnegative for all x
and m. It can be seen that ↵1 in an REE is a function of p1,F, denoted by ↵1,F(p1,F).
Then
the
ﬁrm’s
problem
at
the
ﬁrst
period
is
maxp1,F RF(p1,F) = p1,F↵1,F(p1,F)EM +
E
⇥
p⇤
2,F (↵1,F(p1,F),M)↵⇤
2,F (↵1,F(p1,F),M)M
⇤
. Its optimal value is denoted by R⇤
F.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

25
Sales Nondisclosure: The N setting. For this setting, we also use backward induction to
study the two-period game. In the second period, conditional on the ﬁrst-period adoption fraction
↵1, the second-period adoption fraction ↵2 in equilibrium can be characterized by
↵1 + ↵2 = ¯G
!
p2,N −Es((↵1 + ↵2)M)
"
.
Denote by ↵2,N(↵1,p2,N) the largest ﬁxed point. For any ↵1, the ﬁrm’s problem in the second period
is
max
p2,N R2,N(↵1,p2,N) = p2,N↵2,N(↵1,p2,N)EM.
Let p⇤
2,N(↵1) and ↵⇤
2,N(↵1) be the optimal solution to this problem.
In the ﬁrst period, the REE can be characterized by
↵1 = sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1,N + δEs
!
(x + ↵⇤
2,N(x))M
"
≥δ
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p⇤
2,N(x) + Es
!
(x + ↵⇤
2,N(x))M
"⇤o
= sup
x2[0,1]
n
x : G−1(1 −x) −p1,N ≥δ
⇥
G−1(1 −x) −p⇤
2,N(x)
⇤o
.
It can be seen that ↵1 in an REE is a function of p1,N, denoted by ↵1,N(p1,N). Then the ﬁrm’s
problem at the ﬁrst period is
max
p1,N RN(p1,N) = p1,N↵1,N(p1,N)EM + p⇤
2,N (↵1,N(p1,N))↵⇤
2,N (↵1,N(p1,N))EM.
Its optimal value is denoted by R⇤
N.
Sales Disclosure vs. Nondisclosure. The second-period price in the F setting will be chosen
to maximize the second-period proﬁt given the ﬁrst-period adoption fraction ↵1 and the realized
market size m. In contrast, the second-period price in the N setting will be chosen to maximize
the second-period proﬁt conditional on ↵1. The following proposition compares the second-period
proﬁts in the F setting and the N setting under contingent pricing without commitment.
Lemma 7 (Contingent Pricing without Commitment). For ↵1 2 (0,1], ER⇤
2,F(↵1,M) ≥
R⇤
2,N(↵1).
Lemma 7 shows that, for any ↵1, the expected second-period proﬁt under sales disclosure always
dominates that under sales nondisclosure, unlike in the exogenous pricing case. This result high-
lights certain beneﬁts of being ﬂexible on pricing in the F setting.
However, we do not always have Ep⇤
2,F(↵1,M) ≥p⇤
2,N(↵1). It can be seen from Equation (13)
that the ﬁrst-period demand under sales disclosure does not necessarily dominate that under sales
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

26
nondisclosure. One special case occurs when the discount factor is suﬃciently large. In this case,
most customers will delay their purchase to the second period in the F or N setting, and hence the
total proﬁts under sales disclosure and nondisclosure come mainly from the second period. Then
it follows from Lemma 7 that committing to sales disclosure is likely to result in a higher proﬁt in
this case. This intuition is formalized in the following proposition.
Proposition 5 (Contingent Pricing without Commitment). Suppose sup
n
¯G(x)/g(x) :
g(x) > 0
o
is ﬁnite. Then there exists δc such that 0 δc < 1 and when δ 2 [δc,1), R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N.
5.
Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we studied two information disclosure policies, full disclosure (transparency) and
no disclosure (secrecy), in selling network goods under market size uncertainty. The problem is
nontrivial because demand is endogenized as an equilibrium outcome, depending on customers’
knowledge of market size. We show that the fundamental trade-o↵is between two countervailing
e↵ects, the Matthew e↵ect and the saturation e↵ect, and our results apply to a fairly general
class of stand-alone valuation distributions and market size distributions. The model captures
the key trade-o↵in this class of problems, with insights carrying over to a variety of modeling
extensions. Our work shows that full-disclosure policy coupled with a commitment to contingent
pricing is always better than no-disclosure policy. This is consistent with the observation that many
crowdfunding platforms reveal full information throughout the pledging process and encourage
contingent updates and stimuli. For example, Kickstarter.com encourages a project creator to o↵er
discounts or add new goodies to re-energize the funding process when the funding falls below
expectation (see Du et al. 2016).
Our model could in part account for customer risk aversion. In the N setting, if consumers
are only risk averse about the uncertain social utility due to the uncertain network e↵ects, it is
equivalent to replacing s(·) in the base model by u(s(·)) for the risk-aversion case, where u(·) is
a concave utility function. Nevertheless, the two identiﬁed e↵ects remain as long as the demand,
as a function of the realized market size, is shaped as in Figure 2. In the F setting, customers
face a realized market size without uncertainty, therefore their behavior stays the same. As s(·) is
replaced by u(s(·)), the equilibrium adoption fraction in the F setting, ↵F(m), is closer to a concave
function in the market size, and hence risk-averse behavior tends to favor sales nondisclosure by
dampening the Matthew e↵ect. Moreover, our model assumes that sales information reaches all
customers. In reality, this may not be true and social interaction such as word of mouth will lead
to a wider spread of the information if the sales volume is higher. Such sales-dependent valence
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

27
of word of mouth can be approximated and captured by modifying the network beneﬁt functions.
The sales-dependent word-of-mouth e↵ect tends to result in a more convex social utility function
and is expected to tilt the ﬁrm in favor of sales disclosure by boosting the Matthew e↵ect.
Though we study a monopoly model in this paper, many of its insights are ready to be extended
to a competitive setting. First, disclosing early sales information is beneﬁcial to customers. Hence
in a competitive setting, we expect that committing to sales disclosure is more likely to be a ﬁrm’s
information policy in equilibrium. Second, in a competitive environment, the market size possessed
by each ﬁrm can be small. According to Proposition 3(i), when the expected network beneﬁt
is relatively weak and the customer valuation distribution has a heavy tail, committing to sales
disclosure is likely to be optimal for a ﬁrm. Third, Proposition 4 and Lemma 7 have shown that
committing to sales disclosure coupled with pricing ﬂexibility may lead to higher proﬁt. Hence,
those ﬁrms that have more pricing ﬂexibility in reacting to varying market conditions are more
likely to implement sales disclosure policy.
Finally, while this paper focuses mainly on the comparison between two simple policies, i.e.,
full and no sales disclosure, there might be other more sophisticated mechanisms by which the
seller can disclose sales information in the presence of network externalities. Below we discuss these
policies brieﬂy; we leave a thorough study of them for future research.
Partial Disclosure: It is possible for a ﬁrm to consider a partial disclosure policy, e.g., to disclose
sales information when the sales reach (or fall below) a certain threshold. Such policies may have
the potential to generate more proﬁt for the ﬁrm. However, there could be additional challenges
in implementation because the ﬁrm may have an incentive to deviate from such a policy after
learning the sales information. Moreover, there are other forms of partial disclosure that can be
more sophisticated than the threshold-type policy.
Dynamic Disclosure: While we studied dynamic pricing schemes along with customers’ intertem-
poral purchase behavior, we did not consider dynamic sales information disclosure and the corre-
sponding learning by customers, which can be critical, especially when the market size is evolving
over time. One can apply the Bayesian persuasion framework to study such a problem (see, e.g.,
Ely 2017, Bimpikis et al. 2018). Again, such a study could be quite complicated given the market
size as a continuous quantity in our model.
Randomized Disclosure: This paper considered whether to commit to sales disclosure at a ﬁxed
time. One interesting direction for future research would be to consider randomizing the timing of
sales disclosure. Price randomization has been shown to be beneﬁcial in the context of markdowns
with customers strategically monitoring the price changes (see, e.g., Moon et al. 2017, Chen et al.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

28
2018). When customers monitor the sales online with heterogenous monitoring costs, randomizing
the timing of sales disclosure might beneﬁt the ﬁrm. Expanding the policy space from a determin-
istic mapping (from a realized state to an action) to a stochastic one may signiﬁcantly complicate
the problem.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Department Editor, Ramesh Johari, the anonymous Associate Editor,
and two reviewers for their constructive and insightful suggestions, which signiﬁcantly improved
the paper.
References
Akhlaghpour, H., M. Ghodsi, N. Haghpanah, V. S. Mirrokni, H. Mahini, A. Nikzad. 2010. Optimal iterative
pricing over social networks. International Workshop on Internet and Network Economics. Springer,
415–423.
Anari, N., S. Ehsani, M. Ghodsi, N. Haghpanah, N. Immorlica, H. Mahini, V. S. Mirrokni. 2010. Equilib-
rium pricing with positive externalities. International Workshop on Internet and Network Economics.
Springer, 424–431.
Arthur, D., R. Motwani, A. Sharma, Y. Xu. 2009. Pricing strategies for viral marketing on social networks.
International workshop on internet and network economics. Springer, 101–112.
Aviv, Y., A. Pazgal. 2008. Optimal pricing of seasonal products in the presence of forward-looking consumers.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 10(3) 339–359.
Bensaid, B., J. P. Lesne. 1996. Dynamic monopoly pricing with network externalities. Int. J. Ind. Organ.
14(6) 837–855.
Bergemann, D., A. Bonatti, A. Smolin. 2018. The design and price of information. Amer. Econom. Rev.
108(1) 1–48.
Bergemann, D., M. Pesendorfer. 2007. Information structures in optimal auctions. J. Econo. Theory 137(1)
580–609.
Bimpikis, K., S. Ehsani, M. Mostagir. 2018. Designing dynamic contests. Oper. Res. Forthcoming.
Bitran, G., R. Caldentey. 2003. An overview of pricing models for revenue management. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 5(3) 203–229.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

29
Bloch, F., N. Qu´erou. 2013. Pricing in social networks. Games and Economic Behavior 80 243–261.
Board, S. 2009. Revealing information in auctions: The allocation e↵ect. Economic Theory 38(1) 125–135.
Cabral, L. 2011. Dynamic price competition with network e↵ects. Rev. Econ. Stud. 78(1) 83–111.
Cabral, L. M.B., D. J. Salant, G. A. Woroch. 1999. Monopoly pricing with network externalities. Int. J.
Ind. Organ. 17(2) 199–214.
Campbell, A. 2013. Word-of-mouth communication and percolation in social networks. Amer. Econom. Rev.
103(6) 2466–2498.
Candogan, O., K. Bimpikis, A. Ozdaglar. 2012. Optimal pricing in networks with externalities. Oper. Res.
60(4) 883–905.
Chen, H., M. Hu, J. Wu. 2018.
Intertemporal price discrimination via randomized pricing.
ssrn.com/
abstract=3223844.
Correa, J., R. Montoya, C. Thraves. 2016. Contingent preannounced pricing policies with strategic consumers.
Oper. Res. 64(1) 251–272.
Dhebar, A., S. S. Oren. 1986. Dynamic nonlinear pricing in networks with interdependent demand. Oper.
Res. 34(3) 384–394.
Du, L., M. Hu, J. Wu. 2016. Dynamic stimulus in crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=2925962.
Economides, N. 1996. The economics of networks. Int. J. Ind. Organ. 14(6) 673–699.
Elmaghraby, W., A. G¨ulc¨u, P. Keskinocak. 2008. Designing optimal preannounced markdowns in the presence
of rational customers with multiunit demands. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 10(1) 126–
148.
Elmer-DeWitt, P. 2012. Apple’s earnings disappoint. Fortune, July 24, 2012.
Ely, J. C. 2017. Beeps. Amer. Econom. Rev. 107(1) 31–53.
Fainmesser, I. P., Andrea Galeotti. 2015. Pricing network e↵ects. Rev. Econ. Stud. 83(1) 165–198.
Farrell, J., G. Saloner. 1985. Standardization, compatibility, and innovation. RAND J. Econ. 16(1) 70–83.
Fudenberg, D., J. Tirole. 2000. Pricing a network good to deter entry. J. Industrial Econ. 48(4) 373–390.
Hu, M., Y. Li, J. Wang. 2017. Eﬃcient ignorance: Information heterogeneity in a queue. Management Sci. .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

30
Hu, M., M. Shi, J. Wu. 2013. Simultaneous versus sequential group-buying mechanisms. Management Sci.
59(12) 2805–2822.
Jackson, M. O., L. Yariv. 2007. Di↵usion of behavior and equilibrium properties in network games. Amer.
Econom. Rev. 97(2) 92–98.
Jing, B. 2007. Network externalities and market segmentation in a monopoly. Econ. Lett. 95(1) 7–13.
Kamenica, E., M. Gentzkow. 2011. Bayesian persuasion. Amer. Econom. Rev. 101(6) 2590–2615.
Katz, M. L., C. Shapiro. 1986. Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities. J. Political
Econ. 94(4) 822–841.
Lizzeri, A. 1999. Information revelation and certiﬁcation intermediaries. RAND J. Econ. 30(2) 214–231.
Merton, RK. 1968. The Matthew e↵ect in science. Science 159(3810) 56–63.
Mezzetti, C., A. S. Pekeˇc, I. Tsetlin. 2008. Sequential vs. single-round uniform-price auctions. Games and
Economic Behavior 62(2) 591–609.
Milgrom, P. R., R. J. Weber. 1982. A theory of auctions and competitive bidding. Econometrica 50(5)
1089–1122.
Moon, K., K. Bimpikis, H. Mendelson. 2017. Randomized markdowns and online monitoring. Management
Sci. 64(3) 1271–1290.
Nagle, T. 1984. Economic foundations for pricing. Journal of Business S3–S26.
Ostrovsky, M., M. Schwarz. 2010. Information disclosure and unraveling in matching markets. American
Economic Journal Microeconomics 2(2) 34–63.
Ottaviani, M., A. Prat. 2001. The value of public information in monopoly. Econometrica 69(6) 1673–1683.
Radner, R., A. Radunskaya, A. Sundararajan. 2014. Dynamic pricing of network goods with boundedly
rational consumers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(1) 99–104.
Rayo, L., I. Segal. 2010. Optimal information disclosure. J. of Political Econom. 118(5) 949–987.
Streitfeld, D., C. Haughney. 2013. Expecting the unexpected from Je↵Bezos. New York Times, August 17.
Tarski, A. 1955. A lattice-theoretical ﬁxpoint theorem and its applications. Paciﬁc J. of Math. 5 285–309.
Tassi,
P.
2015.
Activision
no
longer
has
to
fear
declining
‘world
of
warcraft’
subscrip-
tions.
Accessed
November
2015,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/insertcoin/2015/11/03/
activision-no-longer-has-to-fear-declining-world-of-warcraft-subscriptions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

31
Wang, R., Z. Wang. 2016. Consumer choice models with endogenous network e↵ects. Management Sci.
63(11) 3944–3960.
Xie, J., M. Sirbu. 1995. Price competition and compatibility in the presence of positive demand externalities.
Management Sci. 41(5) 909–926.
Zhou, J., Y.-J. Chen. 2015. Key leaders in social networks. J. Econo. Theory 157 212–235.
Zhou, J., Y.-J. Chen. 2016. Targeted information release in social networks. Oper. Res. 64(3) 721–735.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

1
Online Appendix to
“Information Disclosure and Pricing Policies for Sales of
Network Goods”
A.
Proofs
This online appendix provides all proofs of propositions, and lemmas in our paper. Since it is a
trivial case for our analysis that s(M) = Es(M) in probability 1, in this appendix we always assume
Var(s(M)) > 0.
Proof of Lemma 1. Let H(↵) = ¯G(p −s(↵m)) for any m ≥0. We have
H0(↵) = g(p −s(↵m))s0(↵m)m.
(A.1)
By Assumption 1, it is easy to see that H(↵) is nondecreasing and (weakly) convex in ↵if p >
v0 + s(m) and m d0.
Since p > v0 + s(m), it follows that H(1) = ¯G(p −s(m)) < ¯G(v0) 1. Also we have H(0) ≥0.
Therefore, H(↵) can only have one ﬁxed point on [0,1) in this case.
⇤
Proof of Lemma 2. We prove the properties in part (i) and (ii) only for ↵F(·), since the properties
of dF(·) are direct sequences of the properties of ↵F(·).
By Equation (1), we have
@↵F(m)
@m
= g
!
p −s(↵F(m)m)
"
s0(↵F(m)m)↵F(m)
1 −g
!
p −s(↵F(m)m)
"
s0(↵F(m)m)m .
(A.2)
Note that g
!
p−s(↵F(m)m)
"
s0(↵F(m)m)m = H0(↵F(m)) where H(·) is deﬁned by Equation (A.1).
If p > v0 + s(m) and m d0, by the convexity of H(·), we have
H0(↵F(m)) H(1) −H(↵F(m))
1 −↵F(m)
< 1 −↵F(m)
1 −↵F(m) = 1;
hence, the right-hand side of (A.2) is well deﬁned and nonnegative. Then from (A.2) and Assump-
tion 1, we can see that ↵F(m) is (weakly) increasing and (weakly) convex in m as long as p >
v0 +s(m) and m d0; if we also have ¯G(p) > 0 and s0(·) > 0, then ↵F (m)
m
> 0 and strictly increasing,
that is, “increasing” and “convex” properties here are in a strict sense.
For part (ii), we have H(1) = ¯G(p −s(m)) = 1 if p v + s(m). Thus the largest ﬁxed point of
H(↵) = ↵, i.e., ↵F(m), is 1. Therefore, the proof is completed.
⇤
Proof of Lemma 3. The proof is analogous to the proof of Lemma 1.
⇤
Before we prove Proposition 1, we give the following lemma:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

2
Lemma A.1. Let X be a random variable and f(·) and g(·) be increasing functions. Suppose
f(X), g(X) and f(X)g(X) all have ﬁnite expectations. Then E[f(X)g(X)] ≥Ef(X) · Eg(X).
Proof of Lemma A.1. Deﬁne x0 = infx{g(x) ≥Eg(X)}. We have
E[f(X)(g(X) −Eg(X))] = E[f(X)(g(X) −Eg(X));X > x0] + E[f(X)(g(X) −Eg(X));X < x0]
+ E[f(X)(g(X) −Eg(X));X = x0]
≥E[f(x0)(g(X) −Eg(X));X > x0] + E[f(x0)(g(X) −Eg(X));X < x0]
+ E[f(x0)(g(X) −Eg(X));X = x0]
= f(x0) · E[g(X) −Eg(X)] = 0.
Thus the lemma is proved.
⇤
Proof of Proposition 1. Part (ii) holds because, if p v+Es(M), ↵F(m) ↵N = 1 for any m ≥0,
which yields RN ≥RF. Next we will prove part (i).
From lemma A.1, we see EdF(M) ≥E↵F(M)EM. Consequently, to prove EdF(M) ≥dN, it suﬃces
to prove E↵F(M) ≥↵N.
Given p ≥v0 + s(m), we have G(·) is concave on [v0,1). From the deﬁnition of ↵F(M), i.e.,
Equation (1), we have
E↵F(M) = E ¯G
⇣
p −s
!
↵F(M)M
"⌘
≥¯G
⇣
p −Es
!
↵F(M)M
"⌘
.
Note that when p > v0 + s(m), by Lemma 3, ↵N is the unique solution to (2). Thus it suﬃces to
prove
E↵F(M) ≥¯G
⇣
p −Es
!
ME↵F(M)
"⌘
.
(A.3)
In fact, if (A.3) holds, then ↵N must be between 0 and E↵F(M). To show (A.3), it suﬃces to show
that
Es
!
↵F(M)M
"
≥Es
!
ME↵F(M)
"
.
(A.4)
Now we prove (A.4). For any M, because of the convexity of s(·), we have
s
!
M↵F(M)
"
≥s
!
ME↵F(M)
"
+ [↵F(M) −E↵F(M)] · M · s0!
M↵F(M)
"
.
(A.5)
By Lemma A.1 and taking expectation of both sides of (A.5) with respect to M1, we have (A.4).
This completes the proof.
⇤
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

3
Proof of Lemma 4. We will only prove the properties of ↵F(·) in part (i) and (ii), because the
properties of dF(·) follow directly.
From Equation (5) we see that ↵F(p1,p2,m) = ˜↵F(p1,p2,m) if m ≥m0. By comparing Equations
(1) and (4), we have that ˜↵F(p1,p2,m), a function of m, has the same properties as ↵F(m), deﬁned
as the largest ﬁxed point of (4). Therefore, this lemma follows from Lemma 2.
⇤
Proof of Lemma 5. (i) We have known that
HF(x) −HN(x) =δ
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −Es
!
max{x,↵N(p2)}M
"⇤+
−δE
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤+.
For x ↵N(p2), G−1(1−x)−p2 +Es
!
max{x,↵N(p2)}M
"
≥G−1(1−↵N(p2))−p2 +Es
!
↵N(p2)M
"
=
0. Thus in this case we have HF(x) −HN(x) 0, which yields ↵1,F(p1,p2) ↵1,N(p1,p2).
We now consider the case when x > ↵N(p2). In this case, we have
E
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤+
= E
h⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤
· 1{˜↵F (p2,M)x}
i
,
and
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −Es
!
max{x,↵N(p2,)}M
"⇤+ = E
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s(xM)
⇤
.
Since
⇥
−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s
!
max{x, ˜↵F(p2,M)}M
"⇤
· 1{˜↵F (p2,M)x}
≥−G−1(1 −x) + p2 −s(xM), 8M,
it follows that HF(x) −HN(x) 0. Hence we still have ↵1,F(p1,p2) ↵1,N(p1,p2).
(ii) If p1 ≥p2, we have ↵1,N(p1,p2) ↵N(p2). Thus we have
0 HN(↵1,N) = G−1(1 −↵1,N) −p1 −δ[G−1(1 −↵1,N) −p2],
which yields G−1(1 −↵1,N) ≥p1 ≥p2. Here, we write ↵1,N(p1,p2) as ↵1,N for short. Therefore, we
conclude that HF(↵1,N) −HN(↵1,N) = 0, which yields ↵1,F(p1,p2) = ↵1,N(p1,p2).
⇤
Proof of Proposition 2. (i) As alluded to in the proof of Proposition 1, E ˜dF(p2,M) ≥dN(p2) if
p2 ≥v0 +s(m) and m d0. Since dF(p1,p2,M) ≥˜dF(p2,M), we have that EdF(p1,p2,M) ≥dN(p2).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

4
Consider p1 ≥p2. In this case, we have dN(p1,p2) = dN(p2) EdF(p1,p2,M). By Lemma 5, we
also have d1,F(p1,p2) = d1,N(p1,p2). Therefore, RF(p1,p2) ≥RN(p1,p2).
Then consider p1 < p2. We also consider δ = 0. In this case, we have HF(x) = HN(x) for all x 2
[0,1], which yields d1,F(p1,p2) = d1,N(p1,p2). Since we have assumed Var(s(M)) > 0 at the beginning
of this appendix, either of the following two results holds: (a) Ed2,F(p1,p2,M) > d2,N(p1,p2), (b)
d2,N(p1,p2) = d2,F(p1,p2,m) = 0. Thus we must have either that RF(p1,p2) > RN(p1,p2) for δ = 0
or that RF(p1,p2) = RN(p1,p2) for all δ. Therefore, there must be a threshold δc > 0 such that
RF(p1,p2) ≥RN(p1,p2) when δ δc.
(ii) If p2 min{p1,v + Es(M)}, then we have d1,F(p1,p2) = d1,N(p1,p2) by Lemma 5 and
EdF(p1,p2,M) dN(p1,p2) by Lemma 4(ii). Therefore, RF(p1,p2) RN(p1,p2).
⇤
Proof of Lemma 6. First we prove ↵⇤
2,N > 0. Suppose ↵⇤
2,N = 0. Thus ↵⇤
1,N = ↵⇤
N must be the
largest ﬁxed point of the following equation:
↵= ¯G
!
p⇤
1,N −δEs(↵M)
"
,
and hence RN(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N) = p⇤
1,N↵⇤
N. If we take p2,N = p⇤
1,N and take p1,N such that p1,N > p⇤
2,N and
¯G(p1,N) > 0, then RN(p1,N,p2,N) > RN(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N). That is a contradiction. Hence we have ↵⇤
2,N > 0.
Consider ↵2,N(p1,N,p2,N) > 0. Thus ↵N is the largest ﬁxed point of the following equation:
↵= ¯G
!
p2,N −Es(↵M)
"
,
which implies that ↵N depends only on p2,N. Hence, RN(p1,N,p2,N) = p2,N↵N(p2,N) + (p1,N −
p2,N)↵1,N(p1,N,p2,N). Since RN(p2,N,p2,N) > RN(p1,N,p2,N) if p1,N < p2,N, it follows that
p⇤
1,N ≥p⇤
2,N.
⇤
Proof of Proposition 3. (i) From Proposition 2(i) and Lemma 6, we see that, to prove R⇤
F ≥
RF(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N) ≥R⇤
N, it suﬃces to prove p⇤
2,N ≥v0 + s(m).
We ﬁrst show p⇤
1,N ≥r. Suppose p⇤
1,N < r, which yields p⇤
2,N < r. We have RN(r1,r1) ≥r1 ·
¯G(r1)EM ≥rEM > RN(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N). That is a contradiction. Hence, p⇤
1,N ≥r.
Now we prove p⇤
2,N ≥v0 + s(m). Suppose p⇤
2,N < v0 + s(m). Then we have that ↵1,N(p⇤
1,N,r2) ≥
↵1,N(p⇤
1,N,p⇤
2,N), which yields R1,N(p⇤
1,N,r2) ≥R⇤
1,N, and that R2,N(p⇤
1,N,r2) ≥r2 · P{r2 V 
r−δr2
1−δ } ≥(v0 +s(m))EM > R⇤
2,N. That is a contradiction. Therefore, we must have p⇤
2,N ≥v0 +s(m),
which completes the proof.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

5
(ii) Now we show that, for any p1,F and p2,F, there always exist p1,N and p2,N such that
RN(p1,N,p2,N) ≥RF(p1,F,p2,F). We ﬁrst consider the case in which p2,F v + Es(M). Take
p2,N = p2,F and p1,N = p1,F. Thus dN(p2,F) = EM ≥EdF(p1,F,p2,F,M). By Lemma 5(i) we have
RN(p1,N,p2,N) ≥RF(p1,F,p2,F).
Then we consider p2,F = r(v + Es(M)) where r > 1. Consider also p1,F > v + Es(M). Since
P{V βEM} = 1, it follows that 0 is the unique ﬁxed point of (7). Hence, ↵1,F(p1,F,p2,F) 
↵1,N(p1,F,p2,F) = 0. The F setting boils down to the N setting, earning 0 proﬁt. Next, we consider
p1,F v + Es(M).
If s(M) < min{p⇤
2,F −v0,s(d0)}, then we can see from Lemma 1 that ˜↵F(p⇤
2,F,M) is the unique
ﬁxed point of (4), and futhermore we have ↵F(p⇤
2,F,M) = 0 because P{V βEM} = 1. Thus we
have
RF(p1,F,p2,F) = p1,F↵1,FEM + r(v + Es(M))E[max{0, ˜↵F(p2,F,M) −↵1,F}M]
p1,F↵1,FEM + r(v + Es(M))(1 −↵1,F)E[M · 1{s(M)≥min{p2,F −v0,s(d0)}}]
(v + Es(M))↵1,FEM + (v + Es(M))(1 −↵1,F)EM
= (v + Es(M))EM
= RN(v + Es(M),v + Es(M)),
where the last inequality uses the fact that E[M · 1{s(M)≥min{p2,F −v0,s(d0)}}] EM
r . Therefore, we
conclude that R⇤
N ≥R⇤
F.
⇤
Before proving Corollary 1, we ﬁrst introduce some symbols and some lemmas (see below).
Let v1,N(p1,p2) and v2,N(p1,p2) be the lowest valuations among consumers buying respectively in
periods 1 and 2 in the N setting. If they are interior points of the support of V , then we must have
v1,N(p1,p2) = p1 −δp2
1 −δ
= p1 −p2
1 −δ + p2,
v2,N(p1,p2) = p2 −Es
!
↵N(p2)M
"
Under state-independent pricing, the ﬁrm’s problem in the N setting is equivalent to
max
p1,p2 RN(p1,p2) = p1 ¯G(v1,N)EM + p2
⇣
G(v1,N) −G(v2,N)
⌘
EM.
(A.6)
Let v⇤
1,N and v⇤
2,N be values of v1,N(·) and v2,N(·) at p⇤
1,N, p⇤
2,N.
Proof of Corollary 1. By the FOCs of (A.6), we have
¯G(v⇤
1,N) = (p⇤
1,N −p⇤
2,N)g(v⇤
1,N)
1
1 −δ.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

6
Since g(·) is nonincreasing on (0,+1), it follows that (v⇤
1,N −v⇤
2,N)g(v⇤
1,N) G(v⇤
1,N) −G(v⇤
2,N).
Since v⇤
1,N −v⇤
2,N ≥
p⇤
1,N −p⇤
2,N
1−δ
, we have
¯G(v⇤
1,N) G(v⇤
1,N) −G(v⇤
2,N),
which yields ↵⇤
1,N ↵⇤
2,N and ↵⇤
1,N 1/2.
To prove this corollary, it suﬃces to prove p⇤
2,N ≥v0 + s(m). Suppose p⇤
2,N < v0 + s(m). Then
we must have
R⇤
N
EM < p⇤
1,N ¯G(v⇤
1,N) + (v0 + s(m)) · G(v⇤
1,N). Take p2,N = r(v0 + s(m)) where r > 1 and
take p1,N such that p1,N −p⇤
1,N = δ(r(v0 + s(m)) −p⇤
2,N), which imples v1,N(p1,N,p2,N) = v⇤
1,N if
v2,N v⇤
1,N. Next we prove RN(p1,N,p2,N) > R⇤
N for some r > 1.
If v2,N v⇤
1,N, then we have
RN(p1,N,p2,N) −R⇤
N
EM
> r(v0 + s(m))[G(v1,N) −G(v2,N)] + p1,N ¯G(v1,N) −p⇤
2,NG(v⇤
1,N) −p⇤
1,N ¯G(v⇤
1,N)
= r(v0 + s(m))[G(v1,N) −G(v2,N)] −p⇤
2,NG(v⇤
1,N) + (p1,N −p⇤
1,N) ¯G(v⇤
1,N)
≥r(v0 + s(m))[G(v1,N) −G(v2,N)] −(v0 + s(m))G(v⇤
1,N)
= (v0 + s(m))
⇥
(r −1)G(v⇤
1,N) −rG(v2,N)
⇤
≥(v0 + s(m))
⇥(r −1)
2
−rG(v2,N)
⇤
.
where the last inequality uses the fact that ↵⇤
1,N 1/2. Since v2,N p2,N = r(v0 + s(m)), we have
RN(p1,N,p2,N) > R⇤
N ( G(v2,N) min{(r −1)
2r
,G(v⇤
1,N)}
( G
!
r(v0 + s(m))
"
(r −1)
2r
( P{V ≥r(v0 + s(m))} ≥r + 1
2r .
Therefore, if P{V ≥r(v0 + s(m))} ≥r+1
2r for some r > 1, then R⇤
F ≥R⇤
N.
⇤
Proof of Proposition 4. Let p⇤
1,N and p⇤
2,N be the optimal prices in the N setting. And let ↵⇤
1,N
and ↵⇤
2,N be the corresponding adoption fractions. Let ↵⇤
N = ↵⇤
1,N + ↵⇤
2,N. We have p⇤
1,N ≥p⇤
2,N. By
the deﬁnition of ↵2,N(·), we have
p⇤
2,N = G−1(1 −↵⇤
N) + β↵⇤
NEM.
where G−1(x) = infy≥0{y : G(y) ≥x}. We will prove that there exist p1,F and {p2,F(M)} such that
RF(p1,F,p2,F ) ≥R⇤
N. Note that this proposition will hold if we prove this result.
Take p1,F = p⇤
1,N and p2,F(M) = G−1(1 −↵⇤
N) + s(↵⇤
NM). Thus at least ↵⇤
N fraction of customers
will buy the good in the F setting for any M > 0, since p2,F(M) and ↵⇤
N satisfy the REE condition
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

7
(9), implying ˜↵F(p2,F(M),M) ≥↵⇤
N and furthermore ↵F(p1,F,p2,F ,M) ≥↵⇤
N for any M > 0 by
Equation (10). Hence, dF(p1,F,p2,F ,M) ≥d⇤
N for any M > 0.
For any M, we have
G−1(1 −↵⇤
1,N) −p2,F(M) + s
⇣
max{↵⇤
1,N, ˜↵(p2,F(M),M)}M
⌘
= G−1(1 −↵⇤
1,N) −p2,F(M) + s(↵⇤
NM)
≥G−1(1 −↵⇤
N) −p2,F(M) + s(↵⇤
NM)
= 0.
Since Ep2,F(M) = p⇤
2,N, we can see from Equation (11) that ↵1,F(p1,F,p2,F ) = ↵⇤
1,N, which yields
d1,F(p1,F,p2,F ) ≥d⇤
1,N. We also have
RF(p1,F,p2,F ) = (p1,F −Ep2,F(M))d1,F(p1,F,p2,F ) + E[p2,F(M)dF(p1,F,p2,F ,M)]
≥(p⇤
1,N −p⇤
2,N)d⇤
1,N + p⇤
2,Nd⇤
N
= R⇤
N,
which completes the proof.
⇤
Proof of Lemma 7. As in the proof of Proposition 4, we take p2,F(M) = G−1(1 −↵⇤
N) + s(↵⇤
NM)
where ↵⇤
N ≥↵1. Thus we have
R⇤
2,F(↵1,M) = max
p2
p2↵2,F(↵1,p2,M)M ≥p2,F(M)(↵⇤
N −↵1)M.
It follows that ER⇤
2,F(↵1,M) ≥E
⇥
p2,F(M)(↵⇤
N −↵1)M
⇤
≥p⇤
2,N(↵⇤
N −↵1)EM = R⇤
2,N(↵1), where the
last inequality holds by Lemma A.1.
⇤
The proof of Proposition 5 makes use of the following lemma.
Lemma A.2. Suppose sup
n ¯
G(x)
g(x) : g(x) > 0
o
is ﬁnite. Then R⇤
N is continuous in δ 2 [0,1); ↵⇤
1,N
and R⇤
1,N are left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1); furthermore, ↵⇤
1,N ! 0 and R⇤
1,N ! 0, as δ ! 1−.
Proof of Lemma A.2. Let y2(↵1,N,p2,N) = p2,N[↵N(p2,N)−↵1,N]. We note that the second-period
problem in the N setting is equivalent to
max
n
max
p2,N y2(↵1,N,p2,N),Es(M)(1 −↵1,N)
o
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

8
We can see that y⇤
2 is continuous in ↵1,N. By the submodularity of y2 with respect to ↵1 and p2,N,
we have p⇤
2,N(↵1,N) decreasing in ↵1. We can also have p⇤
2,N right-contiguous in ↵1,N. Let
ˆy⇤
2(↵1,N) = p⇤
2,N(↵1,N)↵⇤
N(↵1,N) = y⇤
2(↵1,N) + p⇤
2,N(↵1,N)↵1,N.
It can be seen that ˆy⇤
2 is right-continuous in ↵1,N. By the Envelope theorem, we have
@ˆy⇤
2
@↵1,N
= @y⇤
2(↵1,N)
↵1,N
+ p⇤
2,N(↵1,N) + @p⇤
2,N(↵1,N)
@↵1,N
↵1,N = @p⇤
2,N(↵1,N)
@↵1,N
↵1,N 0.
Hence ˆy⇤
2 is decreasing in ↵1,N.
Let y1(δ,v1,N) =
RN (δ,v1,N )
EM
. Since v1,N −p2,N =
p1,N −p2,N
1−δ
for δ < 1, it follows that
y1(δ,v1,N) = [p1,N −p⇤
2,N(v1,N)] ¯G(v1,N) + ˆy⇤
2(v1,N)
= (1 −δ)(v1,N −p⇤
2,N(v1,N)) ¯G(v1,N) + ˆy⇤
2(v1,N).
We note that maxv v ¯G(v) is bounded if sup
n ¯
G(x)
g(x) : g(x) > 0
o
is ﬁnite. Thus, (v⇤
1,N −
p⇤
2,N(v⇤
1,N)) ¯G(v⇤
1,N) and ˆy⇤
2(v⇤
1,N) must be bounded for all δ < 1. It follows that (1 −δ)(v⇤
1,N −
p⇤
2,N(v⇤
1,N)) ¯G(v⇤
1,N) is continuous in δ 2 (0,1). Since
+++max
v
y1(δ1,v) −max
v
y1(δ2,v)
+++ max
v
+++y1(δ1,v) −y1(δ2,v)
+++,
we can deduce that y⇤
1(δ) = y1(δ,v⇤
1,N) is continuous in δ 2 [0,1), i.e., R⇤
N(δ) is continuous in δ 2 [0,1).
Hence ˆy⇤
2(v⇤
1,N) is continuous in δ 2 [0,1). Since ˆy⇤
2(v1,N) is increasing and left-continuous in v1,N,
it follows that v⇤
1,N is left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1), implying ↵⇤
1,N is left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1). We
have shown y⇤
2(v1,N) is continuous in v1,N. It follows that y⇤
2(v⇤
1,N) is left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1),
i.e., R⇤
2,N(δ) is left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1), which yields that R⇤
1,N(δ) is left-continuous in δ 2 (0,1).
Consider δ ! 1−. By the monotonicity of ˆy⇤
2(v1,N), we must have v⇤
1,N ! 1 (or the supremum of
the support of g(·)), implying ↵⇤
1,N ! 0. We note that p⇤
2,N is bounded for all δ because maxv v ¯G(v)
is bounded. Hence y1(1,v⇤
1,N) = ˆy⇤
2(v⇤
1,N) = p⇤
2,N(↵⇤
1,N + ↵⇤
2,N) ! p⇤
2,N↵⇤
2,N, therefore it follows that
R⇤
1,N ! 0.
⇤
Proof of Proposition 5. It can be seen from Lemma A.2 that, for any suﬃciently small ✏> 0,
there exists δc < 1 such that ↵⇤
1,N(δ) < ✏and R⇤
1,N(δ) < ✏if 1 > δ > δc. For any δ > δc (δ < 1), take
p1,F(δ) such that ↵⇤
1,F(δ) = ↵⇤
1,N(δ) (> 0). In this case, the total proﬁts in the F and N setting
mainly come from the second-period proﬁts. More precisely, we have
RF(δ,p1,F(δ)) −R⇤
N(δ) ≥−✏+ ER⇤
2,F(↵⇤
1,N,M) −R⇤
2,N(↵⇤
1,N)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311

9
As alluded to in the proof of Lemma 7, R⇤
2,F(↵1,M) is strictly convex in M, which yields that
ER⇤
2,F(↵1,M) −R⇤
2,N(↵1) > 0 for all ↵1 as long as Var(M) > 0. Since ER⇤
2,F(↵1,M) −R⇤
2,N(↵1) > 0,
it follows that there exists ✏> 0 such that ✏< ER⇤
2,F(↵1,M)−R⇤
2,N(↵1) for all 0 < ↵1 < ✏. Therefore,
there must be a δc < 1 such that RF(δ,p1,F(δ)) −R⇤
N(δ) ≥0 if 1 > δ > δc.
⇤
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2248311