TITLE: Stochastic Approximation of Symmetric Nash Equilibria in Queueing Games
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.0306
---

Stochastic Approximation of Symmetric Nash Equilibria in
Queueing Games∗
Liron Ravner1 and Ran I. Snitkovsky2
1Department of Statistics, University of Haifa
2Coller School of Management, Tel Aviv University
August 30, 2023
Abstract
We suggest a novel stochastic-approximation algorithm to compute a symmetric Nash-
equilibrium strategy in a general queueing game with a finite action space.
The algorithm
involves a single simulation of the queueing process with dynamic updating of the strategy at
regeneration times. Under mild assumptions on the utility function and on the regenerative
structure of the queueing process, the algorithm converges to a symmetric equilibrium strategy
almost surely. This yields a powerful tool that can be used to approximate equilibrium strategies
in a broad range of strategic queueing models in which direct analysis is impracticable.
Keywords: Simulation; Queues; Noncooperative Games; Queue Approximations
1
Introduction
This paper presents a simulation-based algorithm that computes, or learns, a symmetric Nash equi-
librium in a general class of queueing games. Our purpose is to suggest a robust, easy-to-implement
equilibrium approximation scheme, mainly targeted at queueing games in which identifying equi-
librium strategies is difficult to pursue analytically. In particular, we consider service systems to
which rational customers arrive according to a renewal process, each chooses between finitely many
actions with the goal of maximizing their expected utility. Customers in our model assume that the
system operates in a steady state, however, their assessment of the utility depends on other cus-
tomers’ actions, giving rise to a game-theoretic equilibrium problem: Identifying a behavior profile
that prescribes an optimal play for customers, such that the induced steady state is consistent with
each customer’s belief regarding the behavior of the others.
Though the initiation of the literature about strategic customer behavior in queues is often
accredited to Naor [61], the most basic, yet non-degenerated queueing game was first introduced
by Edelson and Hildebrand [27], and was coined the unobservable M/M/1 model. It discusses a
single-server queue were customer utility decreases linearly with the waiting time, and customers
need to decide whether to join the queue or balk, without observing the system state. Since then,
various different queueing games have been studied in the literature, to model the behavior of callers
in call centers, users of communication networks, passengers in a transportation system, and more
(see overviews and exhaustive surveys in [38] and [35]).
∗To appear in Operations Research.
1
arXiv:2104.13949v5 [math.PR] 29 Aug 2023

Traditionally, this literature distinguishes between ‘unobservable’ and ‘observable’ models, al-
though this conceptual distinction is rather obscure. By unobservable, one usually means that the
strategy of a customer cannot rely on any state information but the premise that this state is drawn
from the stationary distribution. Conversely, observable (and partially observable) models are com-
monly used to describe games in which customers are endowed with information about the state
to which they arrive, hence, making their actions state dependent. In that sense, the observable
framework arguably allows a richer description of customer behavior, although technically, many
observable queueing games discussed in the literature can be reframed as unobservable models via
a suitable modification of the action set.
In most queueing games, observable or unobservable, customer expected utility (ex ante) is a
function of their own strategy, in which the expectation is with respect to the stationary distribu-
tion arising from the cumulative behavior of all players. When customers are homogeneous, the
conventional solution concept is the symmetric Nash equilibrium. Characterizing a symmetric Nash
equilibrium means finding a fixed point of the best-response function, which is the function that
maps a strategy profile to the best strategy to play against it.
Unlike the Markovian setting in [27], for non-elementary queueing models, the stationary state
distribution and the resulting customer expected utility rarely admit closed form expressions. Think,
for example, of a GI/G/1 queue, with customer utility depending on their delay. In this example,
as well as in many others, there is no explicit formula for the expected sojourn time of a customer
(let alone its distribution), hence, approaching an equilibrium solution with only analytic tools is
intractable. Tackling such problems often brings the need for sophisticated numeric calculation and
simulation schemes.
We present a stochastic-approximation (SA) algorithm that converges to an equilibrium solution
for a general class of models. Specifically, the algorithm involves simulating the queueing process,
and based on the realizations, updating the strategy at carefully chosen regeneration times. The
update relies on estimating the deviation of the strategy from its best response, using a smoothing
transformation of the best-response correspondence. Under mild regularity assumptions it is shown
that the algorithm converges almost surely to a Nash equilibrium as the simulation length goes to
infinity. The convergence conditions are verified for several examples, and numerical results are
presented.
Simulation is a very popular technique among queueing theorists and practitioners as a tool to
approximate the performance of a model that cannot be approached analytically. The literature
studying the theory and applications of simulation methods for queueing networks is extensive
(see [7] for a comprehensive overview), and algorithms can efficiently learn the performance of quite
intricate networks, given the set of primitives. However, in the strategic queueing domain, simulation
is hardly ever used, primarily due to the difficulties that arise in the equilibrium search process:
In queueing games, the strategy profile governs the dynamics of the underlying system. Thus, to
identify its best response (or an approximation thereof), the strategy should be fed to the simulator
up front.
For a strategy given a priori, simulation can be used to verify, with high certainty,
whether this strategy approximately meets the equilibrium criterion.
But when an equilibrium
strategy is to be found, with no simple solution at hand, this will require traversing through the set
of possible strategies, and performing a separate simulation at each iteration to check each strategy.
This procedure can be tedious and even impractical, especially when the simulation time at each
iteration is exceedingly long. Moreover, the outcome of each iteration is subject to uncertainty, and
so, if not carefully implemented, such a process is not guaranteed to converge at all, or perhaps
worse – converge to an undesired limit.
It is possible that for these reasons the literature of strategic queueing is often limited to stylized
models, of which performance measures can be easily expressed. In their own right, stylized models
2

play an important role in understanding the theoretical properties of queueing games. Yet, for
the purpose of departing from a merely theoretical framework, it is crucial to have the ability to
compute the equilibrium outcome in elaborate systems as well.
We introduce a novel simulation scheme that jointly learns the system’s statistical character-
istics and customer best-response dynamics, such that the process efficiently converges to a Nash
equilibrium. Our framework allows for customer strategies to depend on state information, thus,
it is applicable for a wide range of models. Still, the key results and intuition supporting these
results are more easily conveyed using the so-called ‘unobservable’ class of models. We first discuss
our method in the context of unobservable queueing games, and later complement the discussion
by suggesting a refinement for observable models as well. We further discuss several practical and
theoretical aspects of implementation, such as rate of convergence.
Our method relies on the SA algorithm commonly known as the Robbins-Monro algorithm [64], a
fundamental building block underpinning various stochastic optimization techniques, among which
is the renowned Stochastic Gradient Descent method. However, as opposed to standard optimization
problems, we do not seek the root of a gradient. In our framework, the equilibrium condition needs
to satisfy an indifference principle between randomly chosen actions. Under regularity conditions,
an equilibrium is found by the SA algorithm in the limit with probability one. In other words, a long
enough (single) simulation is guaranteed to converge to an equilibrium strategy. This idea draws
inspiration from our understanding of how equilibrium emerges in real world systems: customers
adapt their strategy based on observing past empirical performance of the system, and eventually
converge to an equilibrium.
1.1
A motivating example – Two unobservable GI/G/1 queues in parallel
The main purpose of the paper is to describe a general approximation technique for a broad range
of applications, and therefore the fundamental queueing game formulated in Section 2, and its
extension in Section 5, are relatively abstract. Yet, to demonstrate the competency of our method
we first look at a special setup that is easily explained on one hand, but is analytically intractable
on the other hand.
Consider a network, termed the system, consisting of two FCFS queues (stations), indexed by
m ∈{1, 2}, with dedicated servers working in parallel, one for each queue. Service times at station
m = 1, 2 are independent and follow a general light-tailed distribution Fm with mean 1/µm, such
that w.l.o.g. 1/µ1 ≥1/µ2. Potential customers arrive at the system according to a renewal process
with inter-arrival time distribution H and mean 1/λ. The state of the system at an arbitrary point
in time is characterized by a vector X = (X[1], X[2]), with X[m] being the workload at station m.
Upon arrival, potential customers make decisions based on a prior belief regarding the mean
waiting time at each queue (e.g., relying on historic observations), yet, they cannot observe the
current system state. Each customer strategically chooses one of three possible actions: (1) Join
station 1; (2) Join station 2; or (3) Balk. Respectively, we denote the set of actions for a customer
by A = {1, 2, 3}. A strategy p = (p1, p2, p3) ∈∆(A) is a distribution over the action set with pi
being the probability of taking action i ∈A. We assume the utility from joining is linear in the
waiting time: Following the conventional notation of [38], let R > 0 denote the customer reward
for service and C > 0 be the customer waiting-time cost. When a customer finds the system at
state X and joins queue m ∈{1, 2}, their utility is given by vm = R −C · (X[m] + Ym), where
Ym ∼Fm is a r.v. representing the customer’s service time at server m. The utility from balking,
v3, is normalized to 0.
Customers assume when they arrive, that the state X admits its stationary distribution (embed-
ded at arrival instants), which is determined by the population strategy p. To avoid diverting the
3

discussion towards issues of stability, we assume that λ < µ1, implying that X indeed admits a sta-
tionary distribution for every p. A detailed discussion of the stability conditions for generalizations
of this model can be found in Section 4.1.
Equilibrium strategy.
We are interested in characterizing an equilibrium strategy pe =
(pe
1, pe
2, pe
3) ∈∆(A), such that under the stationary state distribution induced by pe, each customer’s
choice is utility maximizing in expectation. In other words, pe is a strategy such that for each i ∈A
pe
i > 0 ⇒i ∈arg max
j∈A
E[vj],
where the expectation is taken jointly w.r.t the random variables Y1, Y2, and the stationary system
state at arrival instants, X, induced by the strategy pe. The following lemma, whose proof follows
standard arguments (see Section C.1 in the appendix), establishes existence and uniqueness of the
equilibrium strategy in focus.
Lemma 1. Assume the inter-arrival distribution H is continuous. For any pair of distributions
(F1, F2) and parameters R and C, there exists a unique symmetric Nash equilibrium strategy pe.
However, except for some special cases, an explicit characterization of this equilibrium strategy
is not available, because the values of E[v1] and E[v2] given strategy p are inaccessible. Whether
a strategy p = (p1, p2, p3) ∈∆(A) satisfies the equilibrium condition is a question that cannot be
answered accurately, but rather approximately, based on one’s ability to approximate E[v1] and E[v2]
for the underlying strategy p. For example, one can determine whether p satisfies an ϵ-equilibrium
condition, with ϵ depending on the ability to bound the approximation error for E[vj].
Stochastic approximation. For a given strategy p, assume a customer arrives at the system
when both queues are empty. Then we can consider this moment of arrival as an instant of system
regeneration. Our method relies on simulating regeneration cycles, i.e., simulating the queueing
process between two successive instants of system regeneration. During each cycle we assume that
the customer strategy p is fixed, and keep track of the system state at every arrival instant. Let the
r.v. L denote the number of arrivals during a cycle (including the arrival that initiates the cycle).
Using discrete-event simulation, we generate a single cycle consisting of L ≥1 samples of the system
state, X1, . . . , XL, with Xj = (X[1]
j , X[2]
j ), and combine them together by defining
G =








G1
G2
G3








=
L
X
j=1








R −C · (X[1]
j
+ 1/µ1)
R −C · (X[2]
j
+ 1/µ2)
0








.
In words, we sum up the (conditional) expected utility over all arriving customers of that cycle, for
each action they could have taken, had they observed the system state upon arrival. The motivation
for the construction of G above is that for any p, the term Gi/E[L], i ∈{1, 2, 3}, can be regarded
as an unbiased point estimator for E[vi]. Yet the values E[L] and E[vi] themselves are assumed
unknown, and obviously are not given as inputs to the algorithm.
This particular form of the
estimator G is tailored to correct for the length bias that often arises when estimating performance
measures of a stochastic processes from random samples.
An application of our SA algorithm works as follows: Setting an arbitrary initial strategy p(1),
at each iteration n = 1, 2, . . . , we construct an estimator G(n) assuming the strategy p(n) is fixed.
Given a constant γ0 > 0, we then apply the following update rule:
p(n+1) = π∆

p(n) + γ0
n G(n)
,
4

where π∆denotes the projection onto the standard (2-)simplex. In Section 3.2 of the paper we
prove that under mild regularity of the primitives the proposed scheme converges (almost surely) to
the true equilibrium, p(n) →as pe. The parameter γ0 is measured in the reciprocal of utility units,
and clearly, the choice of its value will impact the performance of the algorithm, but we defer the
discussion of this issue to later sections.
Simulation results. Below are results from a simulation, in which F1 is Beta(10, 10) + 0.5,
F2 is Bernoulli(0.1) · 10, and inter-arrivals are distributed according to Gamma(0.1, 11), implying
altogether that λ = 10/11 < µ1 = µ2 = 1. The reward and cost parameters are given by R = 5
and C = 1.
To set up the simulation we initialize p(1) = (1/3, 1/3, 1/3) and γ0=0.1, and run
the algorithm for N = 106 iterations.
The convergence of the sequence {p(n)} is depicted in
Figure 1.
After terminating at iteration N = 106, the algorithm produces an output p(N) =
(0.525, 0.330, 0.145).
We note that the coefficient of variation of F2 is significantly higher than
that of F1 (3 compared to 0.11), and generally speaking, higher service-time variation leads to
longer waiting time and in turn to smaller utility. Thus, it is expected that in equilibrium, the
negative impact of the higher variance in Server 2 will be effectively balanced by less arrivals,
namely, that pe
1 > pe
2. A short numerical study described in Appendix A suggests that with high
certainty (>99%), our approximated solution p(N) satisfies the criterion for an ϵ-approximate Nash
equilibrium ([24]) for ϵ ≤0.028.
Figure 1: A stacked-area plot showing the convergence of the SA algorithm as n →∞.
The
coordinates of p(n) = (p(n)
1 , p(n)
2 , p(n)
3 ) are plotted vs. n on a square-root scale. The blue curve
depicts p(n)
1 , and the green curve depicts p(n)
1
+ p(n)
2 . Thus, the blue, green and orange shaded areas
correspond with p(n)
1 , p(n)
2 , and p(n)
3 , respectively.
1.2
Outline and main results
As discussed, our main result is the derivation of a simulation-based approximation technique to
compute equilibria. The method is robust in the sense that it can be applied to a wide range of
strategic queueing models. Below we summarize the organization of the paper and its results:
Theoretical results. In Section 2 we introduce a unified framework for unobservable queueing
games with homogeneous customers and finitely many actions. As a byproduct we derive sufficient
5

conditions for the existence of a symmetric Nash equilibrium in this class of games (Lemma 3),
which we show how to reduce down to a fixed-point problem of a real continuous function. This
naturally yields an iterative (deterministic) mechanism to approximate equilibrium solutions, had
customer stationary utility been known. In Section 3 we explain how this stationary utility can
be estimated based on samples drawn from simulated regeneration cycles. The proposed estimator
serves in place of the unknown original utility, in combination with the iterative fixed-point scheme
from Section 2, to form the SA algorithm. The SA algorithm is shown, in Theorem 5, to converge
almost surely to an equilibrium under mild regularity conditions. Our main convergence result is
accompanied with a thorough discussion of the assumptions and convergence-rate results in Sections
3.3 and 3.4. In Section 5 we then extend the method to account for state-dependent strategies in
order to deal with observable models.
Examples and implementation. All along Sections 2 and 3 we use the canonical unobservable
M/G/1 queue as an instructive tool to exemplify and generate intuition from the general model.
In Section 4 we discuss relevant applications, namely multiple GI/G/1 queues in parallel (Section
4.1), and selective routing between queues with different buffer capacity (Section 4.2). We verify
the sufficient convergence conditions for these applications, and use them to present refinements
for run-time improvement. In Section 5 we discuss the observable GI/G/1 model as an example of
observable queueing games and provide results from numeric experiments.
1.3
Related literature
Fundamentals of queueing games. The game of joining or balking from an unobservable queue
was first introduced by Edelson and Hildebrand [27]. They consider an M/M/1 queue with strategic
customers wishing to maximize a utility function comprised of a fixed reward and a linear cost for
waiting. As a simple formula is readily available for the expected waiting time in an M/M/1 queue,
the equilibrium joining probability can be computed explicitly. This model easily extends to general
service times [9]. Numerous other queueing games have been studied over the years and we refer
interested readers to the books by Hassin and Haviv [38] and Hassin [35] for complete overview
and surveys. Recently, Haviv and Oz [43] suggested a unified approach to formulate unobservable
queueing games by analyzing the interactions between the (random) set of customers who visit
the system during the same busy period. Their formulation is related to our work in that our SA
algorithm updates the strategy in between busy periods. Broadly speaking, both works rely on
the understanding that, given the strategy, all the statistical properties of the underlying queueing
process are encapsulated in a single regeneration cycle.
Stochastic optimization in queueing systems. A comprehensive overview of the theory
of stochastic approximations, which was initiated by the seminal work of Robbins and Monro [64],
can be found in Kushner and Yin [50] and in Borkar [13]. An adaptation of the Robbins-Monro
algorithm for the purpose of optimization was first presented by Kiefer and Wolfowitz [49], who
laid the groundwork for the rapid development of stochastic optimization techniques. Among their
notably wide range of applications, these techniques have been applied to problems of optimizing
the steady-state performance of queueing systems, to which we give emphasis next.
The computation of an optimal service rate for a single-server queue using stochastic approx-
imations was initially studied by Suri and Zazanis [70] where the gradient estimation problem is
addressed via the method of Infinite Perturbation Analysis. Empirical experiments for the M/M/1
queue (building on the machinery developed in [70]) were carried by Suri and Leung [71]. Fu [28]
later extended this theory to the GI/G/1 queue, exploiting the regenerative structure underlying
it. Further convergence properties are given for the GI/G/1 model in L’Ecuyer and Glynn [51],
for different estimators of the gradient such as finite-difference and likelihood-ratio estimators. A
6

numerical study of the techniques discussed in [51] for the M/M/1 case can be found in L’Ecuyer
et. al [52]. A review of optimization techniques using simulation, including applications to GI/G/1
queues, is provided by Fu [29], and a unified framework for stochastic optimization of the steady-
state performance in regenerative systems is established in Andradóttir [5]. In all these settings
the objective function is continuously differentiable in the parameter and the focus is on estimating
the gradient towards the ultimate goal of computing its root. Our setting is different in that we do
not focus on optimizing a given objective, but rather on identifying Nash equilibrium solutions – a
problem that is not dealt with in this line of literature.
Recently, Chen et. al [19] proposed an SA algorithm for jointly optimizing price and capac-
ity in a GI/G/1 queue, and formulated conditions for convergence to the optimal solution. Chen
et. al [19] further perform thorough analysis of the regret, drawing connections between stochastic
approximations and reinforcement learning in the context of revenue management in queues. Re-
inforcement learning has been employed in recent studies to approach optimal control policies as a
means of optimizing steady-state performance in queueing networks, by Liu et. al [54] and by Dai
and Gluzman [22].
Simulation and learning in queueing games. Stochastic approximation and adaptive sim-
ulation algorithms have been discussed in different branches of Game Theory. In particualr, some
SA schemes were shown to converge to Nash equilibrium in certain classes of stochastic games with
repeated interaction and decision making (see, for example, [10], and [13, Ch. 10.4]). However, in the
area of strategic queueing, literature involving simulation-based methods to approach equilibrium
solutions is rather scarce. Altman and Shimkin [3] explicitly analyze an observable processor-sharing
queue with strategic customers, exponential services, and linear waiting cost. They suggest an ad-
hoc simulation-based learning algorithm, to demonstrate the convergence of customers’ iterative
decision-making process to a symmetric Nash equilibrium. This was extended to a model with
heterogeneous customers in Ben Shahar et al. [11]. Buche and Kushner [14] verify convergence of
the algorithm presented in [3] to a Nash equilibrium and explain how it extends to non-linear cost
functions. In the context of customers strategically timing their arrivals to a transient queueing
processes, Sakuma et. al [67] construct a heuristic dynamic algorithm to approximate the Nash
equilibrium arrival strategy. We note, however, that the framework of strategic arrival scheduling
in queues is significantly different than ours – in the former, the focus is on transient queueing
processes, and additionally, customer action space is usually assumed continuous (see more details
in [44]).
Indirectly related to our work is the study of best-response dynamics; iterative updating of
strategies by maximizing utility given the strategy in the previous iteration. Best-response algo-
rithms are known to converge in some queueing games, such as S-modular games as defined by Yao
[79]. For example, the S-modular framework was applied to a problem of decentralized control of
a wireless network by Altman and Altman [2]. However, in most settings the known conditions
required for convergence of best-response dynamics are not satisfied, and typically cannot even be
tested due to the intractability of the stationary performance measures of the system.
Potential applications. In the queueing game we introduce, customers are modeled as short-
lived entities who arrive according to a renewal process to a general, regenerative system, and choose
one out of finitely many actions, with the objective of maximizing their utility. Ever since Naor’s [61]
seminal work, this modeling structure has been accepted as a standard approach to study customer
behavior in service systems, and has been applied widely in the operations-management literature.
While in [61] the existence of a dominant strategy deems the equilibrium analysis trivial, here we
focus our attention on cases where the equilibrium search problem is non-degenerated. Below is a
noninclusive list of few representative examples of such models.
Among the classical problem themes in the study of strategic queueing are join-or-balk decisions
7

in observable and unobservable queues [27, 16, 26, 32, 48]; decentralized selective routing in queueing
networks [9, 34, 63, 39]; paying to reduce wait via priority or premium service classes [1, 36, 74, 21];
and provision and acquisition of information in queues [33, 77, 41, 40, 42]. Concrete applications that
motivate the study of such models traditionally include communication and computer information
services [59, 3, 56, 47] and transportation networks [58, 57]. Some very recent business applications
that are increasingly emerging in this line of literature also extend across ride-sharing platforms
[72, 46, 45, 17]; food delivery and curbside pickup in restaurants [18, 69]; as well as omnichannel
services [8, 65, 31, 17].
In many of these papers, solving for customer equilibrium is a preliminary, yet a crucial step
towards answering questions concerning pricing, policy selection, capacity planning and the like.
Due to the intricacy of the equilibrium problem, the majority of these examples aim to capture
the main characteristics of the equilibrium behavior through parsimonious models, on which direct
analysis can be carried out. Two exceptions here are [77], who adopt a mean-field approach, and
[56] who resort to heavy-traffic approximations (in the Halfin-Whitt regime). In [56], the authors
further highlight the need for exhaustive simulations in tackling the pre-limit analog of their model.
The framework we study is fairly general, covers both observable and unobservable games, and is
easily extended to multiple (finitely many) customer types (see, e.g., Appendix F). It is rich enough
to capture the customer-behavior model employed in the examples listed above (with the restriction
to finite heterogeneity types when considered). Thus, our results potentially offer a useful method to
approach many of these examples’ variants and extensions that are not amenable to direct analysis.
1.4
Notation
In the paper, the domain of interest over which we define our problem is Rk, k > 1. Thus, we
designate vectors in Rk by bold letters, and so we do for functions whose image is in Rk. We denote
by ei, i = 1, . . . , k, the standard-basis unit vector with 1 in its i-th coordinate, and denote by e the
all-1 k-dimensional vector. By default, we define vectors as column vectors and use ′ to denote their
transpose. The non-negative real half line is denoted by R+. Given a function g with a domain
in R we denote its limit from the left at t by g(t−) = lims↑t g(s). For a real vector space, ∥· ∥is
used by default to refer to the L2-norm, and for p ∈[1, ∞) ∪{∞}, ∥· ∥p denotes the Lp-norm. We
further use ∥·∥0 to denote the L0-“norm”, i.e., the number of non-zero elements. For any non-empty
set S and a point x both defined in a real vector space we denote by πS(x) the projection of x
onto S, namely, πS(x) = arg miny∈S ∥x −y∥. With a slight abuse of notation, when πS(x) is a
singleton we will refer to it as a point in S. For k being the dimension of the problem, we denote
by ∆the (k −1)-simplex (i.e., the unit simplex with k vertices), and its relative interior by ∆o;
∆o = {x + θy | x, y ∈∆, 0 < θ < 1}. Given a probability space we denote by 1(A) the r.v.
representing the indicator of an event A. For a random variable X, σ(X) is the σ-algebra generated
by X. The symbols →as , →P and →d indicate convergence of a sequence of random variables
almost surely, in probability, and in distribution, respectively. Almost-sure convergence of a random
sequence Xn to a set S, denoted by Xn →as S, implies that infx∈S ∥Xn −x∥→as 0 as n →∞.
When comparing random variables, ≤st symbolizes inequality in first-order stochastic dominance.
2
Model and preliminaries
We begin by introducing a general formulation of an unobservable queueing game. By unobservable,
we mean that each customer commits to a specific action (which is possibly chosen randomly)
prior to observing any information about the system’s state. However, we treat the concept of
an action here in rather general abstraction, which allows us to cover many observable models
8

as well (see discussion in 3.5).
Later, in Section 5, we will allow customers to rely on state-
information in their decisions, thereby extending our current formulation, providing a more refined
treatment of observable queueing games. To ease the exposition, we assume throughout the paper
that customers are homogeneous, however the general methods can be generalized to deal with
finitely many heterogeneity types of customers through only incremental changes. An instructive
example of a model with multiple types of customers is given in Appendix F.
The model. Consider a service system in which the state at time t represents some (possibly
multi-dimensional) buffer content, taking values in a state space X ⊂Rd
+. Potential customers
arrive at the system according to a renewal process with inter-arrivals {An}n≥1 (i.e., An are iid),
where we interpret An as the time between the arrivals of the (n −1)-st and the n-th customers.
The arrival epoch of the n-th customer, n ≥1, is therefore given by Tn = Pn
i=1 Ai.
Every arriving customer chooses one out of k ≥2 possible actions, with the action set denoted
by A = {a1, . . . , ak}. Thus, the (k −1)-simplex ∆represents the set of possible strategies (namely,
distributions over A). Given a strategy p ∈∆, we denote its i-th coordinate by pi which is the
probability assigned to action ai.
We denote by {X(t; p)}t≥0 the stochastic process representing the state of the system at time
t when the strategy employed by customers is p. By convention, {X(t; p)}t≥0 is assumed to be
right-continuous with left-hand limits. The evolution of X(t; p) depends on the strategy p played
by the customers, however, in the general setup we suppress the specifics of how new arrivals and
their corresponding actions change the state of the buffer content because that depends on the
specific application.
Example 1. To generate intuition, one can think of the canonical Unobservable M/G/1 queue (see
[9]), in which customers choose whether or not to join a single-server queue, thus k = 2.
For
concreteness, we assume that λ < µ, where λ is the Poisson arrival rate and 1/µ is the mean
service time. In this example, a strategy is characterized by p = (p1, p2) = (p, 1 −p) ∈∆for some
p ∈[0, 1], prescribing the joining and balking probabilities, p and 1 −p, respectively. The content
process X(t; p) corresponds to the workload (or virtual waiting time), hence when a customer arrives
at the system, with probability p they join the queue and add a random job size (with mean 1/µ) to
the workload.
⋄
Let Xn(p) = X(Tn−; p) denote the system state just before the n-th arrival given that customers
adopt the strategy p, and further assume that X1(p) = 0d. In other words the system starts empty,
so that the first customer arrives (at time T1) to an empty system. The strategy p ∈∆defines a
probability measure Pp for {Xn(p)}n≥1. Expectation with respect to the measure Pp is denoted
by Ep. Define the cycle-length r.v. L(p) = inf{n ≥1 | Xn+1(p) = 0d}. With the assumption
X1(p) = 0d, L(p) is a r.v. describing the number of arrivals during a typical regenerative cycle,
provided customers play according to p. Note that separate cycle lengths are iid, that is, for any
n1, n2, . . . satisfying Xni(p) = 0d, i = 1, 2, . . . , the sequence inf{n ≥1 | Xni+n+1(p) = 0d} for
i = 1, 2, . . . consists of iid random variables. Let ℓ(p) = EpL(p) denote the mean cycle length when
the strategy is given by p, and let ℓr(p) = EpLr(p) denote its r-th moment. By embedding our
system at arrival epochs we impose that L(p) ≥1 with probability 1, therefore ℓ(p) ≥1 for every
p ∈∆.
Considering the strategy p as given, it is known that if the first moment of the cycle length
is finite, i.e., if ℓ(p) < ∞, then {Xn(p)}n≥1 is positive Harris recurrent; for further details see [6,
Ch. VI]. This implies Xn(p) →d X(p) as n →∞, where X(p) is a random variable corresponding
to the stationary distribution at arrival times. Note that X(p) may be different from the stationary,
time-averaged distribution of X(t; p). The conditions for convergence of the algorithm presented
9

below demand that the cycle length has a finite second moment, implying that its first moment,
ℓ(p), is also finite.
The utility of a customer depends on the system state at the time of their arrival, their chosen
action ai and possibly some random outcome. Formally, given a realization of the state x ∈X and
a realization of the random outcome y, we let vi(x, y), i = 1, . . . , k denote the value associated with
action ai. We define
v(x, y) =
 v1(x, y), . . . , vk(x, y)

.
(1)
The function v is considered a model’s primitive. Note that the random outcome may depend
on the action chosen, in which case y can be modeled as a vector y ∈Rk with each coordinate
corresponding to an action ai ∈A. The dimension of y is in fact irrelevant to our analysis and
for the sake of simplicity y can be thought of as single valued. The function v, as well as the
distribution of the random outcome, are allowed to depend on the strategy p, but for brevity we
suppress this dependence in the notation.
Our general interest is in treating the state and the random outcome as (possibly dependent)
random variables, say X and Y . The value vector v(X, Y ) then constitutes a k-dimensional random
variable. We introduce the vector of expected stationary values as
u(p) = Ep

v
 X(p), Y

,
(2)
where we recall that X(p) is the random stationary state given p. We assume throughout that
a stationary distribution exists for every p ∈∆, and furthermore that the function v(X, Y ) is
integrable with respect to the measure corresponding to that stationary distribution. This ensures
that u(p) is well defined given p, thus, it describes a function u : ∆→Rk; For each i, ui(p) takes the
interpretation of the mean utility of some “controlled” customer who arrives at a stationary system
and is told to play ai. To clarify, we highlight that u(p) does not represent the (single-valued)
average utility obtained when customers employ the strategy p – the latter can be expressed as
u(p)′p.
Example 1. (Continued) Consider once again the example of the unobservable M/G/1, with arrival
and service rates λ and µ, respectively, satisfying λ < µ.
As explained, a strategy is given by
p = (p, 1 −p) where p ∈[0, 1] depicts the joining probability, thus, we interpret X(p) as the
stationary virtual workload at arrival epochs associated with customers joining at rate pλ, and Y
is the service time of a tagged arrival. The possible actions are joining (a1) or balking (a2), hence
v1(x, y) = R −C · (x + y) for R and C being the reward from service and cost for unit of delay, and
v2(x, y) = 0. In addition, letting w(·) denote the mean virtual workload in the system as a function
of the arrival rate, we have Ep[X(p)] = w(pλ) and therefore u(p) = (R −C · (w(pλ) + µ−1), 0). ⋄
As in Example 1, it is oftentimes the case that Y and X(p) are independent. However, in
general the distribution of Y may depend on the observed state, x, as well as on the strategy of
others, p. One classic example is a processor-sharing system in which the waiting time depends on
the strategy of future arrivals (see [3]).
Equilibrium strategy. Next, we define an equilibrium, the desired solution concept at the
center of attention in this work.
Definition 1. The best-response set for a strategy p ∈∆is the set
BR(p) = arg max
q∈∆
u(p)′q.
10

For a strategy p ∈∆, each of the elements of BR(p) is commonly termed a best-response
strategy (or best response in short) for p. Thus, p is a symmetric equilibrium if it is a best response
to itself, or synonymously, if it is a fixed point of BR, when the latter is viewed as a set-valued
map, BR : ∆→2∆. Hence,
Definition 2. A Symmetric Nash Equilibrium strategy is a strategy p ∈∆such that
p ∈BR(p) = arg max
q∈∆
u(p)′q.
Nonetheless, describing an equilibrium as a fixed point of the best-response function BR does not
yield any simple method to compute it in general. This is because BR is a set-valued mapping in
a continuous space, and is naturally hard to work with. Moreover, even if BR is a singleton almost
everywhere in the domain ∆and continuous at every such point, it is often the case that the fixed
point pe ∈BR(pe) is a point of jump discontinuity, in the sense that the limits approaching pe
from different directions do not agree.
Example 1. (Continued) In the unobservable M/G/1, recall that a strategy is given by p = (p, 1−p)
with p ∈[0, 1] and that Ep[X(p)] = w(pλ) which is the mean virtual workload when the arrival rate
is pλ. Suppose that R, C and µ are such that 0 < R/C −1/µ < w(λ). Then there exists a unique
equilibrium joining probability pe ∈(0, 1), which is characterized by the unique solution to the
equation R −C · (w(peλ) + 1/µ) = 0, and the corresponding equilibrium strategy is pe = (pe, 1 −pe).
The best-response function (plotted in Figure 2) for a strategy p = (p, 1 −p) takes the form:
BR(p) =





e1
if p < pe;
∆
if p = pe;
e2
if p > pe.
Denoting ˜e = e1 −e2, it can be seen that for any ϵ > 0,
∥BR(pe + ϵ˜e) −BR(pe −ϵ˜e)∥= ∥e1 −e2∥= ∥˜e∥=
√
2.
⋄
Example 1 shows that the set-valued mapping BR in general is not lower-hemicontiuous. Thus,
even in the fundamental unobservable M/G/1 setting, it is not obvious how to approach the equilib-
rium strategy based on fixed-point iterations. To overcome this difficulty, we define next a modified
version of the best-response function, which is a vector-valued function, f : ∆→∆, expressed as:
f(p) = π∆
 p + u(p)

,
(3)
recalling that π∆(x) denotes the projection of x ∈Rk onto the simplex ∆. This vector-valued
function can replace the raw definition of BR for our purpose, and in addition, under appropriate
conditions on the primitives, also possesses desirable attributes like continuity and smoothness.
The intuition behind the definition of f is that f(p) maps p to a strategy obtained by deviating
from p in the direction of one of its (actual) best responses. This can be noticed observing that
p + u(p) is the unique solution of the following (convex) optimization problem:
max
q∈Rk

u(p)′q −1
2∥p −q∥2

.
11

Whenever the best response for p is not unique, f(p) “pushes” p in the direction of the best response
that is the closest to p in the standard euclidean sense (note that the projection of p onto BR(p)
is unique because the latter is a convex polyhedron in Rk). It is intuitive therefore that a strategy
p is a symmetric equilibrium if and only if it is a fixed point of f. This statement is rigorously
formulated in the next lemma, whose proof appears in Appendix B.1:
Lemma 2. A strategy p ∈∆is a Symmetric Nash Equilibrium, i.e., p ∈BR(p), if and only if it
satisfies p = f(p).
p
45◦
0
1
0
1
pe
first component
of BR(p)
first component
of f(p)
Figure 2: The first component of the best-response function BR(p) (red), and the first component
of the best-response surrogate f(p) (blue), for the unobservable M/G/1 model. At pe customers
are indifferent between joining and balking, thus, every joining probability p ∈[0, 1] constitutes
a best-response strategy, (p, 1 −p) ∈BR(pe). The red curve’s left and right limits at pe do not
coincide. The blue curve is a single-valued continuous function over [0, 1] and is smooth at pe.
In Figure 2, both the best-response function, BR, and its surrogate, f, are illustrated for the
unobservable M/G/1 model of Example 1.
It can be seen that both functions admit a unique
fixed point at the equilibrium strategy.
However, BR is discontinuous (in the sense of lower-
hemicontinuity) at that point, while f(p) is indeed continuous.
Remark 1. The result of Lemma 2 would still prevail if we extended our definition of f(p) to
π∆
 p + h(p)u(p)

, for any positive real function h : ∆→R. In using our suggested equilibrium-
approximation scheme, it is useful to choose a function h that is bounded away from 0.
Iterative equilibrium-approximation scheme. Equipped with Lemma 2 we focus our in-
terest on characterizing a solution to p = f(p). To ensure that such a fixed point exists, we assume
that u is continuous, in which case we have, as an implication of the maximum theorem, that f is
continuous as well. We can then state the following lemma.
Lemma 3. Assume that u(p) is continuous for all p ∈∆. Then a symmetric equilibrium strategy
pe ∈∆exists, and this strategy satisfies pe = f(pe).
Lemma 3 follows directly from Lemma 2 and the continuity of f by applying Brouwer’s fixed-
point theorem. As a consequence of Lemma 3, when u(p) is accessible and can be evaluated directly,
12

then a simple fixed-point iteration algorithm can be used to approximate an equilibrium; To this
end, we think of u(p) as the vector that determines the direction of the step at each iteration, giving
rise to the following (deterministic) adaptive-iteration scheme:
p(n+1) = π∆

p(n) + γnu(p(n))

,
(4)
where {γn}n≥1 is a positive sequence called the step-size sequence, and satisfies P∞
n=1 γn = ∞(in ap-
plications, the requirement γn →0 is further imposed for regulation). Assuming u(·) is continuous,
any limit of the sequence in (4) corresponds to an equilibrium strategy. Yet, the latter statement
alone does not make any conclusion about whether or not convergence takes place, and in some cases
the iterate may indeed end up oscillating between non-equilibrium strategies. Further regulating
assumptions on u(·) are needed (for example, Assumption A3 below) to guarantee convergence of
the algorithm. General conditions under which (4) converges is a rather technical issue that exceeds
the scope of our discussion here; some relevant information is provided in Appendix B.2.
Remark 2. Consider a point p ∈∆, and let γ > 0 be an arbitrary step size. Define
γz = π∆(p + γu(p)) −(p + γu(p)),
which is the shortest vector needed to bring p + γu(p) back into ∆. Starting at p, applying one
iteration of (4) with the step size γ results in the updated iterate p + γu(p) + γz. Thus, p is a fixed
point for (4) if (and only if) z = −u(p), namely, the shortest trajectory from p + γu(p) back to the
simplex has to be along the opposite direction of u(p).
When p ∈∆o, i.e., p is in the (relative)
interior of ∆, the latter condition means that u(p) has to be orthogonal to the hyperplane spanned
by ∆. In other words, all entries of u(p) have to be equal. This observation falls in line with the
well-known indifference principle: If p is a strategy such that when customers play p, an individual
customer is indifferent to choosing any action in A, then p induces equilibrium. The latter argument
and its intuitive interpretation can be extended to any strategy p = (p1, . . . , pk) that lies in a facet
of ∆, with its corresponding subset of supported actions, {ai ∈A | i s.t. pi > 0}.
Clearly, the deterministic algorithm just described is only useful when the utility function u(p)
can be computed. In many settings, however, the entries of u(p) may not be given in closed form,
and even numerical approximations can be difficult to obtain. Therefore we devise a method of
approaching the desired equilibrium using an SA algorithm.
3
Simulation and stochastic approximation
The stochastic approximation procedure is based on the Robbins-Monro algorithm, which aims
to mimic the deterministic fixed-point iteration of (4), replacing the progression direction u(p)
with a noisy estimator based on a realization of the queueing process. However, estimating u(p)
naively by taking a sample average over a (finitely long) simulation path, often results in a biased
estimator. Using such biased estimators in the SA scheme, one risks the algorithm will converge
to an undesirable limit. In light of Remark 1, we thus replace u(p) in (4) with g(p) = ℓ(p)u(p),
which we can easily estimate, without bias, based on realizations of regeneration cycles. A typical
iteration of the SA algorithm then runs as follows. At iteration n, assume that the strategy is p(n),
and that we are provided with an estimator G(n) for g(p(n)). Recall that γn is the n-th step size.
The update at the next iteration of the SA scheme is done by
p(n+1) = π∆

p(n) + γnG(n)
, n ≥1,
(5)
13

where p(1) ∈∆is an arbitrary initial strategy. If G(n) is unbiased for g(p(n)), then under mild
regularity conditions the algorithm will converge to a fixed point of f (see Theorem 5), i.e., to a
Nash equilibrium. The remainder of this section is dedicated to the construction of an unbiased
estimator and to presenting the necessary assumptions and steps for our main convergence result.
3.1
Unbiased estimator
Assume that the strategy p is given. To avoid using cumbersome notation we suppress in some
places the dependency on p, however all the distributions of the random variables to be defined next
should be regarded as functions of p. To construct the estimator, we simulate a single regenerative
cycle starting with the arrival of a customer at an empty system; X1(p) = 0d.
As before, we
denote by L = inf{n ≥1 | Xn+1(p) = 0} the number of arrivals during that cycle. For each
arrival j = 1, . . . , L, let Xj be the state and Yj be the corresponding random outcome. For the
j-th customer, the vector v(Xj, Yj) as defined in (1) reflects the potential utility that each action
will yield to that customer. We clarify that calculating v(Xj, Yj) for each customer j requires to
assess their realized value for every action in A as if they chose it, yet in the simulation process,
the action taken by the j-th customer is fully governed by p.
Denote the expectation of the utility conditional on observing state X by
v(X) = EY

v
 X, Y
  X

.
(6)
Throughout the paper we assume, for all p ∈∆, that v is integrable with respect to the dis-
tribution of X(p).
Then the vector of expected stationary utilities, u(p), can be written as
u(p) = Ep

v(X(p))

. Define
G =
L
X
j=1
v(Xj).
(7)
The following lemma, which is a direct result of a classical formula of regenerative processes (see,
for example, [20, Prop. A.3]), states that G is an unbiased estimator for g(p).
Lemma 4. Suppose that ℓ2(p) < ∞for all p ∈∆, then
EpG = ℓ(p)u(p) = g(p).
(8)
Lemma 4 explains the rational behind the choice of an estimate for g(p) over an estimate for
u(p). As discussed, one may attempt to estimate u(p) directly, for example by considering the
naive estimator
Z = 1
L
L
X
j=1
v(Xj),
however, such an estimator is generally biased. To see why, we provide an example.
Example 1. (Continued) Recall the unobservable M/G/1 model with service rate µ, reward R, and
delay cost C, where we use p = (p, 1−p) to denote a strategy and Xj to describe the virtual workload
at the j-th arrival, so that Ep[X(p)] = w(pλ) is the mean virtual workload when the arrival rate
is pλ. In particular, the estimator Z when constructed from a single regeneration cycle (i.e., one
busy period) is a 2-dimensional vector, Z = (R −C · ( ¯X + 1/µ), 0), where ¯X = (1/L) PL
j=1 Xj is
the average workload at arrival instants over all customers of that cycle. It is known that ¯X is a
biased estimator of w(pλ), i.e., that Ep[ ¯X] ̸= w(pλ) (see, for example, [20]), and so, Z is biased
for u(p). The fact that ¯X is biased can be explained as a ramification of the well-known length
14

bias: The average virtual workload over long busy periods will naturally tend to be larger than that
over short busy periods. Yet, during a long busy period more customers will typically arrive at the
system than in a short one. By averaging the sampled workloads one erroneously normalizes the
length of the busy period, and as a result, gives disproportional importance to short busy periods in
the estimation, resulting in an underestimate of the mean workload. By contrast, the estimator G
presented above, for the unobservable M/G/1 model takes the form
G =
L
X
j=1
v(Xj) =
L
X
j=1




R −C · (Xj + 1/µ)
0



.
This estimator is indeed unbiased for g(p), and in particular, Ep
PL
j=1 Xj

= ℓ(p)w(λp).
⋄
It is important to point out the difference between using the realized value vector for customer
j, v(Xj, Yj), and using the conditional expectation v(Xj), as prescribed in (7). The latter has two
main advantages. Firstly, using the expected value instead of the realization reduces the variance of
the estimator. Secondly, v is merely a function of the state, and hence is more convenient to work
with. Yet, in some settings it may not be trivial to express this function explicitly.
In principle, one can directly use v(Xj, Yj) in Equation (7) instead of v(Xj). However, since
v(Xj, Yj) is a function of both the observed state Xj and the random outcome Yj, in order to apply
the result of Lemma 4, one must make assumptions about the dependence between Xj and Yj. For
example, the following assumption is sufficient: At the j-th arrival with the observed state xj, the
random outcome conditioned on the state observed, Yj | Xj = xj, should be independent of Xj′
and Yj′ for all j′ ̸= j. This assumption may not hold in systems with elaborate service policies such
as priority queues or processor sharing: For instance, in processor sharing, the waiting of the j-th
arriving customer indeed depends on the service demand (as well as the action) of later-arriving
customers. Furthermore, the value v(Xj, Yj) is not a byproduct of a single busy period simulation
because it must be computed for every possible action of a customer, including those not taken in the
realization of the simulation. A possible solution is, for each j = 1 . . . , L, to obtain an independent
sample of v(xj, Yj) using subordinate simulations, independently of the main simulation path. To
generate a sample of any component vi(xj, Yj) of the vector v(xj, Yj), one can run an independent
subordinate simulation that starts with the arrival of a customer at state xj who takes action ai,
and terminates when the utility of that customer is realized. When possible, the same subordinate
simulation can be used to evaluate as many components of the vector v(xj, Yj) as needed, as long
as this is done independently of the main simulation path.
3.2
Convergence and main result
In the approximation process, given a strategy p, we make use of the estimator G at each iteration
of the algorithm as a “proxy” for the true value g(p). Following the framework of [50, Ch. 5] we
present conditions for this algorithm to converge almost surely to a set of equilibrium points. In
particular, we assume that the variance of the unbiased estimator G is finite for any strategy p. This
is combined together with the assumptions required for existence of an equilibrium, as discussed
in Section 2, to obtain the convergence result described in Theorem 5. The proof of that theorem
appears in Appendix B.2.
To state our assumptions, we first introduce the hyperplane H = {x ∈Rk | e′x = 0} which is a
(k −1)-dimensional subspace of Rk, parallel to ∆. We further note that the orthogonal projection
15

onto H, πH : Rk →H, is a linear transformation, and can be represented by a symmetric matrix
H ∈Rk×k, namely, πH(x) = Hx.
Assumption A1. The second moment of the cycle length L(p) is bounded for every strategy;
ℓ2(p) < ∞for all p ∈∆.
Assumption A2. The second moment of the estimator G is uniformly bounded on ∆;
supp∈∆Ep∥G∥2 < ∞.
Assumption A3. The projected utility function Hu(·) is continuous, and there exists a differen-
tiable function u∗: ∆→R such that −Hu(p) is the gradient of u∗at p, i.e., −Hu(p) = ∇u∗(p).
Assumption A4. The step-size sequence {γn}n≥1 satisfies
∞
X
n=1
γn = ∞,
∞
X
n=1
γ2
n < ∞,
(9)
Theorem 5. Suppose Assumptions A1–A4 are satisfied. As n →∞, p(n) →as Se, where Se ⊆∆
is a set of equilibrium strategies, namely, f(p) = p for every p ∈Se.
Corollary 6. Under the conditions of Theorem 5, if the set of equilibrium strategies is finite, then
as n →∞, p(n) →as pe, where pe is an equilibrium.
3.3
Discussion of assumptions
Assumption A1 is required for positive recurrence of the underlying regenerative process, which in
turn ensures the existence of a stationary distribution for any strategy. The step-size condition of
Assumption A4 is standard and enables the application of the law of large numbers for martingale
differences, which underlies the convergence result in Theorem 5.
Assumptions A2–A3 impose
regularity conditions on the utility function which are specific to the framework of queueing games,
and therefore deserve more attention, as discussed below.
A straightforward generalization of Lemma 3 shows that the continuity of Hu(·) implies that
an equilibrium exits, in accordance with the first part of Assumption A3. The second part of the
assumption, which relates to the existence of some potential function u∗, states, in different words,
that Hu(·) should be a conservative vector field on ∆. Still, the function u∗need not be specified.
Its existence prevents the iterate from circulating a perpetual loop of off-equilibrium strategies. Im-
portantly, without this assumption there is no guarantee that the deterministic algorithm converges
to an equilibrium, even when u(p) is explicitly given. For a continuous utility u(·), Assumption A3
holds, for example, when k = 2, or alternatively when k > 2 and u itself is a conservative vector
field on ∆(see Remark 5 in Appendix B.2). Further elaboration on Assumption A3 is provided in
Appendix B.2.
Assumption A2 imposes that the variance of the estimator G is finite. Finite variance of the
increments is quite a common assumption in the framework of stochastic approximation. However,
verifying it for specific queueing games with only limited knowledge about the stationary distribution
can be challenging. In this paper we provide specific examples in which we rely on queueing-analytic
tools to verify this assumption. Example 1 below provides an analogous condition to Assumption
A2 for the unobservable M/G/1 queue, which is formulated in terms of moments of the service-time
distribution.
16

Example 1. (Continued) Consider once more the unobservable M/G/1 model described in Sections
2 and 3: Denote the generic service time random variable by Y with EY = 1/µ. As before, we
assume that λ < µ. We further assume EY 4 < ∞, which clearly implies EY 2 < ∞. In this case
Assumptions A1 and A3 can be verified by applying known properties, which is done in Section 4.1.
In the particular unobservable M/G/1 model, EY 4 < ∞is also a necessary condition for Assumption
A2; Recall that G1 = PL
i=1(R−C(Xi+1/µ)), where Xi is the virtual workload observed by customer
i. Hence, G1 is an affine transformation of the sum of waiting times during a busy period. An
explicit formula of the variance of the cumulative workload during a busy period was given in [23] as
a function of λ and EY r for r = 1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore, for the strategy p = e1 (all customers join),
if λ < µ and EY 4 < ∞, then
Ee1∥G∥2 = Ee1

L
X
j=1
v(Xj(e1))

2
< ∞.
Furthermore, by standard coupling arguments it can be verified that for every strategy p ∈∆,
Ep∥G∥2 ≤Ee1∥G∥2.
We conclude that λ < µ together with EY 4 < ∞form a necessary and sufficient condition for
Assumption A2. Theorem 5 then implies that under these conditions the SA algorithm converges
almost surely to the unique equilibrium.
⋄
The conditions in Assumptions A1–A3 are imposed on all strategies in the simplex. However, any
strategy in ∆for which the system is not stable, in general, refutes the assumptions. This issue can
be alleviated in some cases using a small modification of the algorithm. If there exists a known closed
convex set of strategies S ⊆∆that contains an equilibrium, and conditions A1–A2 are satisfied
for all p ∈S, then the projection πS can be used in (5) and all our results carry over. In practice,
such a set can often be found because stability conditions are known for many models even without
explicit derivation of the stationary distribution. In absence of a-priori knowledge of the stability
region, the algorithm has to be modified to incorporate ‘stability-enforcing’ dynamics. Appendix D
presents a heuristic modification of the algorithm that terminates a busy cycle if its length exceeds
a threshold.
Of course, this introduces a bias in the estimation step.
To eliminate this bias,
the termination threshold is increased gradually, with the goal of making the bias asymptotically
negligible once the algorithm is absorbed in the stability region.
That said, we acknowledge that the task of detecting stability regions using simulation is chal-
lenging. In fact, the problem of determining whether a queueing system is stable under a general
schedueling policy was shown in [30] to be undecidable even in a simple system configuration. A
simulated-annealing method to identify stability regions in some practical setups is suggested in
[55]. Some ad-hoc solutions have been discussed in recent papers that involve learning and control
algorithms for queueing systems (see [22] and [19]).
3.4
Rate of convergence and approximate equilibrium
An important question from a practical standpoint is how many iterations are needed to obtain
a ‘good’ approximation. This question has been the subject of interest for a large body of works
in the literature of stochastic gradient-descent algorithms, where it is often implied by appropriate
conditions on the primitives that the iterate p(n) converges (almost surely) to a unique point pe.
Then, the above question is addressed via studying different notions of convergence of the scaled
approximation error, (p(n) −pe)/√γn. For a specific choice of the step-size sequence {γn}n≥1, [62]
17

established L2-convergence of the scaled error, by imposing strong convexity and smoothness on
the potential function u∗. Under these assumptions, the equilibrium exists uniquely (as it is the
minimum point of u∗), and the vector −Hu is the gradient for which we have noisy observations. In
what follows we leverage this framework to bound our algorithm’s equilibrium-approximation error
with high probability.
Rather than studying the scaled error per se, we find it more meaningful in our setup to un-
derstand, given the iteration index n, how “close" the strategy p(n) is to meeting the equilibrium
condition. We therefore adopt the concept of ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium (see [24]). Recall that
a strategy p is a (symmetric) ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium, or an ϵ-equilibrium for short, if no
deviation from this strategy can increase a customer’s expected utility by more than ϵ:
u(p)′p ≥max
q∈∆u(p)′q −ϵ.
(10)
Proposition 7 below relates the convergence of the scaled errors to ϵ-equilibria. The proof is provided
in Appendix B.3.
Proposition 7. Suppose that Assumptions A1–A3 hold. Suppose also that u is (locally) Lipschitz
on ∆, and that u∗in A3 is strongly convex on ∆, i.e., there exists a constant C > 0 such that
u∗(p) ≥u∗(q) + Hu(q)′(p −q) + C
2 ∥p −q∥2, ∀p, q ∈∆.
(11)
Let γn = η/n, where η > 1/(2C). Then there exists a constant M, such that for all n ≥1 and
δ ∈(0, 1),
P

u(p(n))′p(n) ≥max
q∈∆u(p(n))′q −
√
n−δ

≥1 −M · nδ−1;
(12)
that is, for all n and δ ∈(0, 1), the n-th iterate p(n) is a
√
n−δ-equilibrium with probability (at least)
1 −M · nδ−1.
Notice that the choice of the step size γn = η/n in Proposition 7 satisfies A4. Following [62],
under the conditions of Proposition 7, this choice of γn implies that E∥p(n) −pe∥2 = o(1/n).
Proposition 7 shows this also yields an ϵn-equilibrium with high probability (1 −o(nδ−1)), where
ϵn =
√
n−δ. For example, with δ = 1/2, the result ensures that an ϵ-equilibrium is reached, with
1 −o(ϵ2) certainty, after ϵ−4 iterations.
There are various other conditions in the literature for convergence of the scaled error, including
almost-sure convergence rates (e.g., [68] for unconstrained stochastic optimization) and weak con-
vergence to the normal distribution (e.g., [13, Ch. 8.4]). All of these results require assumptions on
the utility vector u and the penitential function u∗that ensure the algorithm is “well behaved”, so
to speak, in the neighborhood of equilibrium points. In Proposition 7, these assumptions take the
form of (11) and the corresponding step-size constant η > 1/(2C). Though in applications these
conditions can be hard to verify, our result sheds light on the obtainable rates when some limited
structure of the stationary expected utility is available. For a detailed discussion of the convergence
rate for constrained and unconstrained stochastic-approximation algorithms, see [15] and [50].
3.5
Accounting for observable information in customer’s decisions
In the context of queueing games, it is natural to think of an ‘action’ as representing a possible ter-
minal outcome of the customer’s decision, e.g., ‘join’ or ‘balk’, as described in Example 1. However,
in our framework, the term ‘action’ is in fact synonymous with ‘pure strategy’ (this interpretation
18

slightly deviates from the terminology used in extensive-form games, see [60, Ch. 3]). Thus, an ele-
ment in A can potentially represent a comprehensive decision rule, prescribing what to do at each
possible event, with respect to the information available to the customer during their sojourn in the
system. For instance, assuming customers observe the queue length, a pure strategy can prescribe
joining at some queue-lengths while balking at others. It can further capture the evolution of the
system state after the arrival, e.g., for x ∈{1, 2, 3}, specify whether to abandon the queue after x
minutes if the queue length did not decrease.
One way to account for observable information in the customer decision-making process is to
extend the action space, i.e., the set of possible pure strategies, to encompass all possible decision
rules. Note that the information can also pertain to individual customer features, and not necessarily
the system state. In Appendix F we implement this approach in a game with two customer types.
Below we explain through a brief example how to amend the action set when state information is
available upon arrival.
Consider an observable GI/G/1/N queue: Each customer observes the number n of customers
in the queue, and assuming it is not full (0 ≤n ≤N −1), they choose whether to join or balk. Then
a pure strategy is an element in {0, 1}N determining which queue lengths to join, and we associate
it with a single action in the (finite) set A.
Observable queueing games with finitely many pure strategies are covered by the formulation in
Section 2 and hence our results are applicable to such games. However it can be noticed, particularly
in the example above, that the dimension of the strategy space grows exponentially with the number
of signals potentially observed. When the number of signals is large, this approach may not be
practical. In Section 5 we discuss an extension of the algorithm that traverses a strategy space
whose dimension grows proportionally (as opposed to exponentially) in the number of signals.
4
Applications, implementation and refinements
This section presents two applications of the SA algorithm. The first, discussed in Section 4.1, is
a general game of choosing a queue from a pool of parallel single-server queues, or balking from
the system altogether.
This model, inspired by [9], generalizes the canonical M/G/1 model of
Example 1 and also the motivating example of two parallel queues in Section 1.1.
The second
example, in Section 4.2 is a generalization of the model introduced in [39], considering a system
comprised of two parallel servers; one with an infinite buffer queue and one with no queueing buffer,
and customers have the option to probe (sense) the no-buffer server at a cost before joining the
infinite buffer queue. For both applications the sufficient convergence conditions of Theorem 5 are
verified in detail, and some numerical results are reported. The related proofs appear in Appendix
B. Based on the second example we introduce and illustrate two practical refinement techniques of
the algorithm, one that reduces the variance of the estimator and one that dynamically chooses the
step size.
4.1
Unobservable GI/G/1 queues in parallel
The main purpose of the section is to rigorously verify Assumptions A1–A3, which imply the con-
vergence of the SA algorithm, in the queueing game described below. The proof of Proposition 8
is provided in Appendix C.2 and relies on a coupling construction, which we believe can be found
useful in verifying the assumptions for further generalizations and variations of the model here.
For some integer k > 1, consider a system of k −1 parallel GI/G/1 queues where customers
can choose which queue to join, with the possibility of balking, i.e., not joining any queue at all.
Arrivals to the system are generated according to a renewal process with a continuous inter-arrival
19

distribution H and mean 1/λ. Each arriving customer chooses, without observing the system state,
whether at all to join a queue, and if so, which of the k −1 queues to join. Denote the generic
service time variable in station m ∈{1, . . . , k −1} by Ym ∼Fm, and its mean by 1/µm. A strategy
p = (p1, . . . , pk) ∈∆, for each m ∈{1, . . . , k −1} expresses the probability pm of joining queue m,
with pk being the probability of balking. Arriving at a realization of the state x = (x[1], . . . , x[k−1]),
the net value for a customer joining queue m = 1, . . . , k −1, is given by vm(x, ym) = νm(x[m] + ym),
where ym is a realization of Ym. The value from balking is normalized to zero; vk(x) = 0.
Clearly, this is a generalization of the motivating example presented in Section 1.1 and the unob-
servable M/G/1 model discussed in Example 1. The next proposition presents sufficient conditions
for convergence of the SA algorithm to a Nash equilibrium.
Proposition 8. Assume that for every m ∈{1, , . . . , k −1}: (i) λ < µm; (ii) E[Y 4
m] < ∞; and
(iii) the function νm : R+ →R is Lipschitz continuous. Then for any initial strategy p(1) ∈∆and
step-size sequence {γn}n≥1 satisfying Assumption A4, the SA algorithm defined in (5) converges
almost surely to a set of equilibrium strategies, in the sense of Theorem 5.
4.2
Selective routing in queues with different buffer capacities
Consider a queueing network comprised of two servers, Server 1 that has no waiting room, and
Server 2 that offers unlimited queuing capacity. Customers arrive at the system following a Poisson
process with rate λ, with iid service-length requirements distributed according to F. Let Y ∼F
represent some arbitrary service duration, and let E[Y ] = 1/µ.
Upon arrival a customer cannot observe the system’s state, and is given the option to sense,
that is, to make a costly attempt to obtain service by Server 1, at a fixed cost cs. A customer
that chooses to sense and finds Server 1 idle, immediately commences service, otherwise they are
instantaneously sent to the end of the infinite-capacity queue and waits to be served by Server 2.
The sensing option is offered only upon the customer’s arrival, and the cost is incurred regardless
of whether Server 1 is found idling or not. Customers who do not choose the sensing option do not
incur a sensing cost and are sent directly to the end of the queue served by Server 2. All customers
queueing for Server 2 incur a linear waiting cost at rate cw per unit time.
Let A = {a1, a2}, where a1 and a2 represent the actions “sense” and “not sense” respectively. A
strategy in this game is given by p = (p, 1 −p), where p > 0 is the probability of choosing a1. It is
shown in [39] that when customers’ service demand is exponentially distributed, the game admits a
unique equilibrium strategy which can be efficiently approximated. Yet even for the special case of
exponential services, a simple expression for the equilibrium strategy is not available, because the
solution in [39] for the stationary distribution given a strategy p makes use of Cardano’s formula. It
is worth mentioning in this context that in general, the queue served by Server 2 cannot be treated
as a standard M/G/1, because the effective arrival process to Server 2 is not renewal, as it depends
on the state of Server 1.
To approach the equilibrium using simulation we define the state as a pair X = (X[1], X[2])
where each component X[m] stands for the workload at Server m ∈{1, 2}. Given a realization
x = (x[1], x[2]) of X, the components of the vector function v(x) take the form
v1(x) = −cs −cw · 1(x[1] > 0) · x[2],
v2(x) = −cw · x[2].
Proposition 9. Assume the service-time distribution F is chosen such that (i) λ < µ; (ii) E[Y 4] <
∞; and (iii) u(p) is continuous in p ∈∆. Then for any initial strategy p(1) ∈∆and step-size
20

sequence {γn}n≥1 satisfying Assumption A4, the SA algorithm defined in (5) converges almost surely
to a set of equilibrium strategies, in the sense of Theorem 5.
The simplicity of the model here sets up a convenient platform to demonstrate some practical
heuristics that can enhance the algorithm’s performance, which is what we focus on next.
4.3
Variance reduction using control variates
The variance reduction technique discussed here is a fundamental control-variate method based on
[66], that exploits our knowledge of the strategy p at the beginning of each iteration, as well as
some model parameters used to construct the simulation. Adapted to our framework, the goal is to
modify the estimator G in a way that does not introduce bias, but reduces its generalized variance.
The underlying principle is the following: Suppose one can characterize an l-dimensional random
vector C, referred to as the control vector, with zero mean (entrywise), such that it is also strongly
correlated with G. Then an appropriate matrix of control coefficients Ψ ∈Rl×k can be found, for
which the new estimator G −Ψ′C is unbiased for the original unknown quantity, but has smaller
generalized variance than that of G. Mathematically, this means that we would like to choose Ψ
such that G −Ψ′C satisfies
Ep[G −Ψ′C] = Ep[G] = g(p),
and
det(Varp[G −Ψ′C]) < det(Varp[G]).
Observe that unbiasedness is obtained irrespective of the choice of Ψ. It is shown in [66] that the
optimal choice for Ψ (in terms of minimal variance) is given by Ψ∗= ΣGCΣ−1
CC, where ΣCC =
Varp[C] is the variance-covariance matrix of the control vector C, and ΣGC = Covp(G, C) is the
cross-covariance matrix of G with C.
In most practical applications, both ΣCC and ΣGC are
unknown, and so Ψ∗has to be estimated from the data. Moreover, in the setting here the optimal
Ψ∗varies with the strategy p. Luckily, our numerical results show that significant variance reduction
is obtained even when using a rough approximation of Ψ∗which is based on naive sampling. Our
guiding intuition is that as the iteration index n increases, the change in the strategy p(n) becomes
smaller. Given a constant strategy, it is known that the estimator for Ψ∗constructed from the
sample covariance and cross-covariance matrices is likelihood maximizing (see [4], Section 4.3.1).
At iteration n > 1, let G(n) be the estimator defined in (7), and C(n) be the control vector. We
use a naive choice for the matrix of control coefficients ˆΨ(n) by defining (note that C(1), . . . C(n)
have mean zero):
ˆΣ(n)
CC =
1
n −1
n
X
m=1
C(m) C(m) ′ ,
ˆΣ(n)
GC =
1
n −1
n
X
m=1
G(m) C(m) ′ , and
ˆΨ(n) = ˆΣ(n)
GC
−1 ˆΣ(n)
CC.
Thus, at every iteration n > 1 we replace G(n) in Equation (5) by G(n) −ˆΨ(n) ′ C(n).
Example 2. Consider the model presented in Section 4.2.
We choose a 3-dimensional control
vector C = (C1, C2, C3). As prescribed in Section 3.2, given a strategy p = (p, 1−p), we generate L
observations X1, . . . , XL based on a single regeneration cycle, and construct the original estimator
G = PL
j=1 v(Xj) introduced in (7). Let D1, . . . , DL, be a sequence of sensing indicators, namely
for j = 1, . . . , L, Dj ∼Bernoulli(p) is the indicator of the event “the j-th customer chooses action
a1 (sense)”. Let Yj be the service demand of that j-th customer. Our control vector of choice, C, is
21

given by:
C =








C1
C2
C3








=
L
X
j=1








Dj −p
Yj −1/µ
1(X[1]
j
> 0) −
λp
µ+λp








.
Because the underlying process is regenerative, we have for every p,
Ep[C] = ℓ(p) ·








Ep[D] −p
Ep[Y ] −1/µ
Ep[1(X[1] > 0)] −
λp
µ+λp








= 0,
where D ∼Bernoulli(p) is the sensing indicator of an arbitrary customer, Y ∼F is an arbitrary
service demand, and X = (X[1], X[2]) is the stationary system state, given strategy p = (p, 1 −p).
It is therefore immediate that Ep[D] = p and Ep[Y ] = 1/µ, and because Server 1 can essentially
be modeled as an M/G/1/1 loss-system with arrival rate λp and service rate µ, we also have in
stationarity that Ep[1(X[1] > 0)] =
λp
µ+λp. This specific choice of the control vector C is led by the
understanding that customers’ actions, their realized service demand, as well as the state of Server
1 observed by the different customers during the simulated cycle, are all affecting the utility sum G
in that cycle.
⋄
Figure 3 depicts the performance of the algorithm incorporating control variates and dynamic
step sizes (described below) for the model described in Section 4.2. Further information about the
efficiency and selection of control coefficients for the method of control variates in vectored-output
simulations can be found in [66] and [78].
4.4
Dynamic step size selection
Next we consider the selection of the step-size sequence, {γn}n≥1. Our main idea underlying the
SA algorithm is that instead of estimating u(p), to which unbiased estimators in general are not
known, one can estimate ℓ(p)u(p) with no bias, based on a single regeneration cycle, and use this
estimator to determine the progression of the algorithm. Yet, as noted in Remark 1, the function
ℓ(p) chosen is not exclusive; If h : ∆→R+ is a real continuous function such that h(p) ≥a for
some constant a > 0, and in addition if one is endowed with a finite-variance unbiased estimator
for h(p)u(p), then this estimator can be used instead of the one suggested in Section 3, and the
convergence result in Theorem 5 carries over. The exact form of h(p) need not be expressed or
specified, neither should it be introduced as input to the algorithm.
In theory, if ℓ(p) can be computed, then the estimator G/ℓ(p) can be taken to directly estimate
u(p) without bias. This is essentially equivalent to dynamically choosing the step size at iteration
n to be γn/ℓ(p(n)) instead of the original γn. The dynamic choice of strategy-dependent step size
has the advantage of “neutralizing”, in some sense, the unwanted impact of the cycle lengths on the
algorithm’s progression. Of course, in applications, exact knowledge of ℓ(p) is an unrealistically
strong requirement. However, even a coarse approximation ˜ℓ(p) ≈ℓ(p) can impose a similar neu-
tralizing effect, leading to substantial efficiency improvement. Thus, instead of using the estimator
G to estimate ℓ(p)u(p), given an approximation ˜ℓ(p) we can use the estimator G/˜ℓ(p) to estimate
22

(ℓ(p)/˜ℓ(p))u(p), or equivalently, divide the step size by ˜ℓ(p). We believe this method to be effec-
tive especially in heavily loaded systems, in which the mean cycle length is typically large, and in
addition, many approximation techniques tend to become more accurate under this regime.
Remark 3. Natural approximations for ℓ(p) can be derived from available approximations for mean
busy periods in queues. For instance, many approximations, in addition to some special-case exact
expressions, are available for the mean busy period in the GI/G/1 queue (see, for instance, [12]).
The length of an arbitrary regeneration cycle L of a GI/G/1 can be interpreted as the number of
service completions during the corresponding busy period B. Thus, the relation between L and B is
expressed by B = PL
j=1 Yj, where Y1, . . . , YL are the service lengths during the cycle. This relation
implies E[L] = E[B]/E[Y ], where Y is the length of an arbitrary service.
Example 2. (Continued) In the model of Section 4.2, a back-of-the-envelope approximation for ℓ(p)
is obtained by (erroneously) treating the two nodes, Server 1 and 2, as two independent Markovian
systems with service rate µ in both systems. Thus, given p = (p, 1 −p), we have one M/M/1/1
system with arrival rate λ[1] = pλ, and another independent M/M/1 system with arrival rate λ[2] =
λ·(1−p+λ[1]/(λ[1]+µ)). The stationary probability of finding each server idling is π[1]
0 = µ/(µ+λ[1])
in the M/M/1/1 system and π[2]
0 = 1 −λ[2]/µ in the M/M/1 system, and by independence the joint
distribution of the events is π[1]
0 π[2]
0 . By the PASTA principle, this coincides with the probability
that a customer finds both servers idle upon arrival, therefore the mean number of arrivals between
two subsequent such incidents is given by ˜ℓ(p) = 1/(π[1]
0 π[2]
0 ), and we shall use this quantity to
approximate the true mean cycle length ℓ(p).
⋄
In the following numerical example, we employ variance reduction and dynamic step-size se-
lection on the model described in Section 4.2.
Services are exponentially distributed, µ and
cw are normalized to 1, λ = 0.99 and cs = 5.
The initial strategy for the SA algorithm is
p(1) = (1/2, 1/2).
In Figure 3 we compare, over the first N = 5 × 104 iterations, the perfor-
mance of the crude implementation of the algorithm with that of the refined version.
For the
sequence of strategies, {p(n)}n≥1 = {(p(n), 1 −p(n))}n≥1, the figure depicts the convergence of the
sequence p(n) to the (unique) equilibrium probability pe, that corresponds with the unique equilib-
rium strategy pe = (pe, 1 −pe). The estimator used at iteration n in the refined version (orange)
is G(n) −ˆΨ(n) ′ C(n), and the step size at iteration n is (1/n)˜ℓ(p(n)). In the crude version (blue),
we keep our original estimator G(n), with comparable, non-dynamic step size given by (1/n)˜ℓ(p(1))
for each n. For reference, we plot the correct equilibrium (red dashed horizontal line), which, for
exponential services can be approached numerically up to any arbitrary precision level using the
machinery developed in [39].
23

Figure 3: Convergence of the SA algorithm as n →∞. The first coordinate of p(n) = (p(n), 1−p(n)),
i.e., the sensing probability at stage n, is plotted vs. n. The blue curve corresponds to the crude
algorithm’s progression, and the orange corresponds to the refined version. The red dashed line
depicts the correct equilibrium sensing probability, pe, computed numerically in 8-digit precision.
5
Games with state information
In this section, we explain how to amend our SA algorithm to cope with so-called observable models.
More precisely, we assume that customers, at the moment they arrive to the system and make their
decision, have access to an information signal, which is a function of the system state. Unlike the
approach described in 3.5, the one we take here does not suffer from the same issue of dimensionality.
From a mathematical perspective, the previous formulation described in Section 2 can be seen
as a special case of the model below when the function mapping states to signals is constant (i.e.,
non-informative).
Although, from a nomenclature perspective, this understanding is somewhat
inconsistent with how the terms ’observable’ and ’unobservable’ are used in the literature to describe
two disjoint classes of games. In what follows, we treat a strategy as a function from signals to
(mixed) actions, and so, the dimension of our problem grows proportionally to the number of possible
signals. Thus, to enable a direct implementation of our framework, we assume throughout that the
number of possible signals is finite (if the actual information space is continuous then a suitable
discretization of the information set is required).
The new formulation suggests a practical method for the computation of equilibrium strategies
in the observable GI/G/1 queue, a generalization of Naor’s [61] model, which we use as a guiding
example in this section. The special case with Poisson arrivals, which itself is a generalization of
[61], was thoroughly studied in [48].
5.1
Model description
As before, we assume a renewal sequence of customer arrivals {An}n≥1, each customer chooses
an action from the set A = {a1, . . . , ak}.
The state of the system at any moment in time is
represented by a vector x of buffer contents in the state space X ⊂Rd
+, in which 0d ∈X is an
element. Upon arrival, a customer is provided with an information signal which depends on the
24

state at which they arrive. Let I be a countable set of information signals, thus, arriving at state
x ∈X, a customer receives information ψ(x), where ψ : X →I is a mapping from states to signals.
We therefore reintroduce the concept of a strategy, now taking the interpretation of a behavioral
strategy, i.e., a mapping p : I →∆from signals to distributions over actions. We denote by P the
set of possible strategies. Hence, given p ∈P, a customer who arrives at state x ∈X will choose
their action according to the distribution p(ψ(x)) =
 p1(ψ(x)), . . . , pk(ψ(x))

∈∆, which assigns a
probability pj(ψ(x)) for each action aj ∈A. Consistent with the previous sections, we assume each
strategy p ∈P gives rise to a regenerative system-state process {Xn(p)}n≥1 embedded at arrival
instants, with 0d being a regenerative state and X1(p) = 0d. Thus, given p ∈P, the stationary
state X(p), the cycle length L(p), and the r-th moment of the cycle length ℓr(p), all follow the
definitions introduced in Section 2. Consistent with Sections 2 and 3, when facing state x ∈X
(hence a signal ψ(x) is observed) and a realization y of a random outcome Y , the value vector is
v(x, y) =
 v1(x, y), . . . , vk(x, y)

, and we let v(X) = EY

v
 X, Y
  X

.
Assuming the state is drawn from the stationary distribution induced by p, the signal observed
is given by the r.v. ψ(X(p)) supported on I. We denote the (point) probability function of ψ(X(p))
by ξp(s) = Pp(ψ(X(p)) = s) and its support by I(p) = {s ∈I s.t. ξp(s) > 0}. For conciseness, we
ignore any irrelevant signals, i.e., we assume I = S
p∈P I(p).
For any signal s ∈I(p) we define, analogous to (2), the (k-dimensional) conditional expected
value vector as
u(p | s) = Ep

v
 X(p), Y
  ψ(X(p)) = s

=
Ep

v
 X(p), Y

· 1(ψ(X(p)) = s)

ξp(s)
.
(13)
For completeness, when s /∈I(p) we let u(p | s) = 0. Finally, the best response set for a strategy
p is given by
BR(p) = arg max
q∈P
X
s∈I(p)
ξp(s) · u(p | s)′q(s),
(14)
and similarly to Definition 2, we have that p is a symmetric Nash equilibrium if p ∈BR(p). The
objective in the optimization problem of (14) can be thought of as the ex-ante expected utility
(prior to receiving state information) of a customer who plays q, when all other customers play p.
It can be further seen that the optimization problem is separable, in the sense that it can be solved
independently for every s ∈I(p). In other words, to constitute a best response, a strategy has to
prescribe an optimal play, separately, under any information signal observed.
5.2
Simulation and stochastic approximation
Again, we construct our utility estimator by simulating a single regenerative cycle starting at the
arrival of a customer to state 0d, with Xj, j = 1, . . . , L, being the state at the j-th arrival in that
cycle, and L being the cycle length. To apply the SA algorithm we construct an estimator for every
s ∈I defined by
G(s) =
L
X
j=1
v(Xj) · 1(ψ(Xj) = s).
Assuming ℓ2(p) < ∞, an immediate extension of Lemma 4 yields, for all s ∈I,
Ep[G(s)] = ℓ(p) · ξp(s) · u(p | s).
(15)
Note that if s /∈I(p), then ξp(s) = 0, and equality in (15) trivially holds as we have that G(s) = 0
with probability 1.
25

In the case with state information, our algorithm constructs at each iteration a point estimate
G(s) for every s ∈I. Thus, for practical reasons we make the assumption hereafter that I is a
finite set. In many applications, a trivial bound on |I| can be derived, as demonstrated in Example
3 below. In other applications, different heuristics can be applied to cap the number of signals,
with arguably “minimal” effect on the best-response function, however such considerations exceed
the scope of the this paper.
The progression of the SA algorithm is similar to the one described in the previous sections:
Let the step-size sequence be {γn}n≥1 and the initial strategy be p(1) ∈P. At iteration n, with a
corresponding strategy p(n), we use one regeneration cycle to construct |I| estimators, {G(n)(s)}s∈I.
The update at the next iteration for every s ∈I is done by
p(n+1)(s) = π∆

p(n)(s) + γnG(n)(s)

, n ≥0,
(16)
The following assumptions are sufficient for the convergence of the algorithm to an equilibrium
strategy:
Assumption B1. The second moment of the cycle length L(p) is bounded for every strategy;
ℓ2(p) < ∞for all p ∈P.
Assumption B2. The second moment of the estimator G(s) is uniformly bounded on P;
supp∈S Ep∥G(s)∥2 < ∞for all s ∈I.
Assumption B3. For all s ∈I, ξp(s) · Hu(p | s) is continuous with respect to p, and there exists
a function u∗: P →R such that for all s ∈I, −ξp(s) · Hu(p | s) = ∇p(s)u∗.
Theorem 10 introduces the key result of the section, which is a generalization of Theorem 5:
Theorem 10. Suppose Assumptions B1–B3 and A4 are satisfied. As n →∞, p(n) →as Se, where
Se ⊆P is a set of equilibrium strategies, namely, p ∈BR(p) for every p ∈Se.
The proof of Theorem 10 is similar to that of Theorem 5, after introducing a suitable surrogate
best-response function, analogous to the one defined in Equation (3). This is described in further
elaboration in Appendix E. Noticeably, Theorem 10 also implies that an equilibrium strategy exists.
In fact, if one only cares to prove that an equilibrium strategy exists, then only the continuity of
ξp(s) · Hu(p | s) is needed (see Appendix E).
As in Section 3.4, the existence of a potential function u∗, as referred to in Assumption B3,
ensures that (with probability 1) in the limit, the iterate will not oscillate between non-equilibrium
points. In the absence of Assumption B3, even a non-stochastic variant of the algorithm can exhibit
such undesirable oscillations in the limit.
Although the implementation of the algorithm does
not require u∗to be specified, verifying Assumption B3 can be difficult in practical settings. It
is nevertheless the case that if the limit limn→∞p(n) exists then it must satisfy the equilibrium
condition, regardless of whether Assumption B3 holds or not.
Example 3. Consider a first-come first-served GI/G/1 queue with observable queue lengths: The
state x = (x[1], x[2], . . . ) is a vector of residual service times, where x[i] is the residual service of the
i-th customer in line, which, for i = 1, is that of the one in service. For simplicity, we assume here
that service times are strictly positive iid random variables with mean 1/µ < ∞. Customer utility
when joining the queue is linear in the waiting time, and is equal to zero when balking. Formally,
v(x, y) = (v1(x, y), v2(x, y)) = (R −C · (y + ∥x∥1), 0) for positive constants R, C > 0, implying that
for a random state X, v(X) = (R −C · (1/µ + ∥X∥1), 0).
26

The information available to a customer arriving at state x is the number of jobs in the system,
∥x∥0 = |{i s.t. x[i] > 0}|. Importantly, following the FCFS assumption, any customer not in service
has an expected residual service time of 1/µ. Hence, from an arriving customer’s standpoint, the
(state-dependent) utility function v can be further simplified into v(X) = (R−C·(∥X∥0/µ+X[1]), 0).
It is therefore immediate that when ∥x∥0 ≥Rµ/C, an arriving customer strictly prefers balking over
joining. By defining K = ⌊Rµ/C⌋we can thus assume that customers balk when observing K + 1
(or more) customers in queue, and we restrict attention to decision epochs, which are the arrival
instants of customers to states in X = {x s.t. ∥x∥0 ≤K}. This implies that at decision epochs, the
state-information function ψ(x) = ∥x∥0 defines a finite set of possible information signals (queue
lengths), I = {0, . . . , K}.
A strategy p is a mapping from I to the two-dimensional simplex,
p(s) = (p(s), 1 −p(s)) ∈∆, with p(s) ∈[0, 1] being the probability of joining when s ∈I customers
are observed. Hence, ξp(s) is the stationary probability of observing s ∈I customers in queue at a
decision epoch, provided all customers play according to p.
Given p, the dynamics of the process imply that if customers balk with probability 1 at queue
length s, i.e., if p(s) = 0, then any queue length ˜s > s is transient. Put formally, we have for all
p ∈P, I(p) = {s ∈I s.t ∀˜s < s, p(˜s) > 0}. An equilibrium, adapted to this example, is a strategy
p ∈P such that for all s ∈I(p), if u1(p | s) > 0 then p(s) = 1, and if u1(p | s) < 0 then p(s) = 0.
We note that if p is an equilibrium, there could be at most one s ∈I(p) satisfying u1(p | s) < 0,
which also constitutes a threshold on the length of the queue (as long as customers play according
to p).
Figure 4 depicts a simulation in which we set C = 1 and R = 1.7, implying that K = 1 and
I = {0, 1}. Thus, every customer that observes two (or more) other customers automatically balks.
In both panels, interarrival times are exponentially distributed with mean 1, which is equal to the
mean service time, yet the service distribution varies between the two panels. In panel (a), services
are exponentially distributed, hence it is a particular case of Naor’s observable M/M/1 model ([61])
in which the unique equilibrium, {pe(s)}s∈{0,1} = {(pe(s), 1 −pe(s))}s∈{0,1} is easily found, with
pe(0) = 1 and pe(1) = 0, i.e., join if and only if the system is empty. In panel (b), services are
uniformly distributed over [0, 2]. We note that the uniform distribution is of a decreasing mean
residual lifetime, and by Proposition 3.1 in Kerner ([48]) the equilibrium exists uniquely. In both
experiments we run the simulation for N = 105 iterations of the algorithm, with γn = 2/n and initial
strategy p(1)(s) = (1/2, 1/2) for all s ∈{0, 1}. Interestingly, in the right panel, the equilibrium to
which the algorithm converges is of a randomized threshold type; when a customer observes another
customer in service, they join with probability p(N)(1) ≈0.37, in accordance with the analysis and
intuition provided in [48].
27

(a) exponential service
(b) uniform service
Figure 4: The convergence of the SA algorithm as n →∞. The joining probability p(n)(s) is plotted
vs. n on a square-root scale, for s = 0, 1. In both panels, the blue curve depicts p(n)(0) and the
green curve depicts p(n)(1).
Remark 4. It is possible that some information signals are transient under some strategies but
recurrent under different strategies. For instance, in the observable GI/G/1 queue, any strategy
p(s) = (p(s), 1 −p(s)) with s ∈I(p) such that p(s) = 0 (meaning customers balk when observing
queue length s), imply that the probability of observing a queue longer than s is zero, i.e., for all
s0 > s, s0 /∈I(p). As a matter of fact, the equilibrium condition p ∈BR(p) does not impose any
restriction on customer decisions in the (null) event they receive a zero-probability signal. Hassin
and Haviv [37] introduce an adaptation of the concept of sub-game perfect Nash equilibria to queueing
games, which is a refinement of the equilibrium concept, adding the requirement that customers play
optimally also when arriving to transient states. In our setup, convergence to a sub-game perfect
equilibrium cannot be guaranteed: Assuming the algorithm converges to an equilibrium pe with
s0 /∈I(pe), the s0-th (vector) component of the strategy will be updated, if at all, only finitely often;
the tail of the sequence {p(n)(s0)}n≥0 is a constant vector (almost surely); and the limiting strategy
pe is possibly suboptimal at s0.
6
Concluding remarks
This work introduces a robust stochastic-approximation algorithm that computes symmetric Nash
equilibria in a general class of queueing games. The method involves simulating the system once
and updating the strategy at regeneration times using the Robbins-Monro algorithm. As opposed
to classical stochastic-optimization settings, a Nash equilibrium of a game with a discrete action
space is not given by a first-order gradient condition. Therefore, an equivalent condition for a Nash
equilibrium is formulated based on the root of a continuous function. This enables the construction
of an iterative fixed-point method resembling those used in stochastic approximation. Results from
renewal theory are used in order to construct an unbiased estimator of the total utility observed
during a regeneration period. Verifiable conditions for almost-sure convergence of the algorithm are
further provided. The method is shown to be useful for various interesting applications.
We suspect that the suggested algorithm may be further used in order to find a socially optimal
strategy, by considering the social cost of deviation instead of the individual optimality condition
(see Haviv and Oz [43]). Loosely speaking, the concept of social cost of deviation basically allows
one to reformulate the problem of identifying socially optimal strategies as a problem of finding
28

equilibrium strategies in a game, and therefore deploy the SA algorithm to approximate these
strategies.
The framework developed here can be extended and improved in several ways, in particular,
by introducing more accurate estimators for the utility function. A direct extension is to update
the strategy after multiple regeneration cycles. Having several observations of regeneration cycles
will reduce the variance of the estimator and will improve the accuracy of the iteration steps. Of
course, this method entails an inherent trade-off because the algorithm can potentially “waste time”
on simulating the process for strategies that are far off from the correct solution. Thus, a suitable
dynamic choice of the simulation length at each iteration should be implemented.
The regeneration cycle approach comes along with both theoretical and practical advantages –
its implementation is straightforward and the estimator for g(p(n)) is independent and unbiased.
In this setting, the theory of stochastic approximations provides verifiable sufficient conditions for
almost-sure convergence of the algorithm. An interesting future research direction is to explore the
applicability of the SA framework to a more flexible iterative scheme that updates the strategy at
every arrival and not just at regeneration times. This can be seen as a reinforcement-learning ap-
proach, although the resulting process is clearly not Markov. Implementation of such an algorithm
should be just as easy, but theoretical analysis is much more involved. In particular, the estimation
step is biased and is not independent of previous iterations. The theory on SA algorithms with corre-
lated noise may be useful for constructing meaningful convergence conditions in this setting (see [50,
Ch. 6]). This modification is appealing because it has the potential of coping with strategies that
drive the system out of the stability region. Proving that such a scheme of simple sequential inter-
actions among agents eventually converges to an equilibrium will further strengthen the plausibility
of equilibrium emergence in realistic systems and highlight the importance of studying equilibrium
analysis in queues.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Refael Hassin and Moshe Haviv for their advice and comments on the
paper, as well as to Jim Dai and Binyamin Oz for several fruitful discussions. The authors would
also like to thank the editors and reviewers for their detailed and helpful feedback. This research
was supported in part by the Shenzhen Research Institute for Big Data International Postdoctoral
Fellowship.
Authors
Ran I. Snitkovsky is an Assistant Professor at the Coller School of Management, Tel Aviv Uni-
versity. He received his PhD in Operations Research in 2020 from the School of Mathematical
Sciences, Tel Aviv University. He was a short-term visiting scholar at Tuck School of Business, and
a postdoctoral fellow at Columbia Business School and Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
CUHK Shenzhen. His research revolves around the modeling and methodology of strategic, social,
and behavioral interactions in congestion-prone systems, with a strong emphasis on economic and
managerial insights. Contact details: ran@tauex.tau.ac.il, Coller School of Management, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
Liron Ravner is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Statisitcs, University of Haifa.
He
received his PhD in Statistics in the Hebrew Univsrsity of Jerusalem.
His research interests
focus on the intersection of Applied Probability, Statistics and Game Theory.
Contact de-
tails: lravner@stat.haifa.ac.il, Department of Statistics, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa
29

3498838, Israel.
References
[1] I. Adiri and U. Yechiali (1974). Optimal priority-purchasing and pricing decisions in nonmonopoly
and monopoly queues. Operations Research, 22(5): 1051–1066.
[2] E. Altman and Z. Altman (2003). S-modular games and power control in wireless networks. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 48(5):839–842.
[3] E. Altman and N. Shimkin (1998). Individual equilibrium and learning in processor sharing systems.
Operations Research, 46(6):776–784.
[4] T. W. Anderson (1962). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis, 3rd edition. Wiley, New
York.
[5] S. Andradóttir (1996). Optimization of the transient and steady-state behavior of discrete event
systems. Management Science, 42(5):717–737.
[6] S. Asmussen (2003). Applied Probability and Queues, 2nd edition. Springer, New York.
[7] S. Asmussen and P. W. Glynn (2007). Stochastic simulation: algorithms and analysis, Springer
Science & Business Media.
[8] O. Baron, X. Chen and Y. Li (2022). Omnichannel services: The false premise and operational
remedies. Management Science.
[9] C.E. Bell and S. Jr. Stidham (1983). Individual versus social optimization in the allocation of
customers to alternative servers. Management Science, 29(7): 831–839.
[10] M. Benaïm and M. W. Hirsch (1999). Stochastic approximation algorithms with constant step size
whose average is cooperative. Annals of Applied Probability, 9(1): 216–241.
[11] I. Ben-Shahar, A. Orda and N. Shimkin. (2000). Dynamic service sharing with heterogeneous
preferences. Queueing Systems, 35(1):83–103.
[12] D. J. Bertsimas, D. Nakazato. (1992). Transient and busy period analysis of the GI/G/1 queue:
the method of stages. Queueing Systems, 10(3): 153–184.
[13] V.S. Borkar (2008). Stochastic approximation: a dynamical systems viewpoint, Cambridge University
Press.
[14] R. Buche and H. J. Kushner (2000). Stochastic approximation and user adaptation in a competitive
resource sharing system. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 45(5):844–853.
[15] R. Buche and H. J. Kushner (2002). Rate of convergence for constrained stochastic approximation
algorithms. SIAM journal on control and optimization, 40(4):1011–1041.
[16] A. Burnetas and A. Economou (2007). Equilibrium customer strategies in a single server Marko-
vian queue with setup times. Queueing Systems, 56(3): 213–228.
[17] F. Castro, P. Frazier, H. Ma, H. Nazerzadeh and C. Yan (2020). Matching Queues, Flexibility
and Incentives. Available at SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3627920
[18] M. Chen, M. Hu and J. Wang (2022).
Food delivery service and restaurant: Friend or foe?
Management Science.
[19] X. Chen, Y. Liu and G. Hong (2020). An online learning approach to dynamic pricing and capacity
sizing in service systems. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2009.02911.
[20] M. A. Crane and D.L. Iglehart (1975). Simulating stable stochastic systems: III. Regenerative
processes and discrete-event simulations. Operations Research, 23(1):33–45.
30

[21] S. Cui, Z. Wang and L. Yang (2020). The economics of line-sitting. Management Science, 66(1):
227–242.
[22] J. G. Dai and M. Gluzman (2021). Queueing Network Controls via Deep Reinforcement Learning.
Stochastic Systems.
[23] D. J. Daley and D.R. Jacobs (1969). The total waiting time in a busy period of a stable single-
server queue, II. Journal of Applied Probability, 6(3):565–572.
[24] C. Daskalakis, A. Mehta and C. Papadimitriou (2009). TA note on approximate Nash equilibria.
Theoretical Computer Science, 410(17):1581–1588.
[25] De Meyer, A., and J. L. Teugels (1980). On the asymptotic behaviour of the distributions of the
busy period and service time in M/G/1. Journal of Applied Probability, 17(3): 802–813.
[26] L.G. Debo, L.B. Toktay and L.N. Van Wassenhove (2008). Queuing for expert services. Man-
agement Science, 54(8): 1497–1512.
[27] N. M. Edelson and D. K. Hildebrand (1975). Congestion tolls for poisson queuing processes.
Econometrica, 43(1), 81–92.
[28] M. C. Fu (1990). Convergence of a stochastic approximation algorithm for the GI/G/1 queue using
infinitesimal perturbation analysis. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 65(1):149–160.
[29] M. C. Fu (1994). Optimization via simulation: A review. Annals of Operations research, 53(1):199–
247.
[30] D. Gamarnik (2002). On deciding stability of constrained homogeneous random walks and queueing
systems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 27(2):272–293.
[31] A. Gosh, A. Bassamboo and M. Larviere (2020). The Queue Behind the Curtain: Information
Disclosure in Omnichannel Services. Available at SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3730482
[32] P. Guo and R. Hassin (2001). Strategic behavior and social optimization in Markovian vacation
queues. Operations research, 59(4): 986–997.
[33] P. Guo and P. Zipkin (2007). Analysis and comparison of queues with different levels of delay
information. Management Science, 53(6): 962–970.
[34] R. Hassin (1996). On the advantage of being the first server. Management Science, 42(4): 618–623.
[35] R. Hassin. (2016). Rational Queueing, CRC Press.
[36] R. Hassin and M. Haviv (1997). Equilibrium threshold strategies: The case of queues with priorities.
Operations Research, 45(6): 966–973.
[37] R. Hassin and M. Haviv. (2002). Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection in observable queues.
Annals of Operations Research, 113(1):15–26.
[38] R. Hassin and M. Haviv. (2003). To Queue or Not to Queue: Equilibrium Behavior in Queueing
Systems, Springer.
[39] R. Hassin and R.I. Snitkovsky (2017). Strategic customer behavior in a queueing system with a
loss subsystem. Queueing Systems, 86(3):361–387.
[40] R. Hassin and R.I. Snitkovsky (2021). On the Supermarket Game with finitely many servers.
Working paper.
[41] R. Hassin and R. Roet-Green (2017). The impact of inspection cost on equilibrium, revenue, and
social welfare in a single-server queue. Operations Research, 65(3): 804–820.
[42] R. Hassin and R. Roet-Green (2021). On Queue-Length Information when Customers Travel to
a Queue. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 23(4): 989–1004.
[43] M. Haviv and B. Oz (2021). A busy period approach to some queueing games. Queueing Systems,
97(3):261–77.
31

[44] M. Haviv and L. Ravner (2021). A survey of queueing systems with strategic timing of arrivals.
Queueing Systems, 99(1), 163–198.
[45] M. Hu, J. Wang and H. Wen (2020). Share or solo? Individual and social choices in ride-hailing.
Available at SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3675050
[46] J. Jacob and R. Roet-Green (2021).
Ride solo or pool: Designing price-service menus for a
ride-sharing platform. European Journal of Operational Research, 295(3): 1008–1024.
[47] K. Jagannathan, I. Menache, E. Modiano and G. Zussman (2012). Non-cooperative spectrum
access—The dedicated vs. free spectrum choice. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
30(11): 2251–2261.
[48] Y. Kerner (2011). Equilibrium joining probabilities for an M/G/1 queue. Games and Economic
Behavior, 71(2):521–526.
[49] J. Kiefer and J. Wolfowitz (1952). Stochastic estimation of the maximum of a regression function.
The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(3):462–466.
[50] H. Kushner and G. G. Yin (2003). Stochastic approximation and recursive algorithms and applica-
tions. Springer Science & Business Media.
[51] P. L’Ecuyer and P. W. Glynn (1994). Stochastic optimization by simulation: Convergence proofs
for the GI/G/1 queue in steady-state. Management Science, 40(11):1562–1578.
[52] P. L’Ecuyer, N. Giroux and P. W. Glynn (1994). Stochastic optimization by simulation: Nu-
merical experiments with the M/M/1 queue in steady-state. Management Science, 40(10):1245–1261.
[53] C. Le Van, J. Stachurski (2007). Parametric continuity of stationary distributions. Economic
Theory, 33(2):333–348.
[54] B. Liu, Q. Xie and E. Modiano (2019). Reinforcement learning for optimal control of queueing sys-
tems. 2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton),
663–670. IEEE
[55] M. Mandjes, B. Patch, and N. S. Walton. (2019). Detecting Markov chain instability: a monte
carlo approach. Stochastic Systems, 7(2):289–314.
[56] C. Maglaras and A. Zeevi (2003). Pricing and capacity sizing for systems with shared resources:
Approximate solutions and scaling relations. Management Science, 49(8): 1018–1038.
[57] A. Manou, P.G. Canbolat and F. Karaesmen (2017). Pricing in a transportation station with
strategic customers. Production and Operations Management, 26(9): 1632–1645.
[58] A. Manou, A. Economou and F. Karaesmen (2014). Strategic customers in a transportation
station: when is it optimal to wait?. Operations Research, 62(4): 910–925.
[59] H. Mendelson (1985). Pricing computer services: Queueing effects. Communications of the ACM,
28(3): 312–321.
[60] M. Maschler, E. Solan and S. Zamir. (2013). Game Theory, Cambridge University Press.
[61] P. Naor. (1969). The regulation of queue size by levying tolls. Econometrica, 37(1):15–24.
[62] A. Nemirovski, A. Juditsky, G. Lan and A. Shapiro (2009). Robust stochastic approximation
approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on optimization, 19(4):1574–1609. 37(1):15–24.
[63] A. K. Parlaktürk and S. Kumar (2004). Self-interested routing in queueing networks. Management
Science, 50(7): 949–966.
[64] H. Robbins and S. Monro (1951). A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, Sep: 400–407.
[65] R. Roet-Green and Y. Yuan (2020). Information visibility in omnichannel queues. Available at
SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3485810
32

[66] R. Y. Rubinstein and R. Marcus (1985). Efficiency of multivariate control variates in Monte Carlo
simulation. Operations Research, 33(3): 661–677.
[67] Y. Sakuma, H. Masuyama and E. Fukuda (2020). A discrete-time single-server Poisson queueing
game: Equilibria simulated by an agent-based model.
European Journal of Operational Research,
283(1): 253–264.
[68] O. Sebbouh,R. M. Gower and A. Defazio (2021). Almost sure convergence rates for stochastic
gradient descent and stochastic heavy ball. 2021 Conference on Learning Theory, 3935–3971, PMLR.
[69] K. Sun, Y. Liu and L. Yang (2020). Order Ahead for Pickup: Promise or Peril?. Available at
SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3673617
[70] R. Suri and M. A. Zazanis (1988).
Perturbation analysis gives strongly consistent sensitivity
estimates for the M/G/1 queue. Management Science, 34(1): 39–64.
[71] R. Suri and Y. T. Leung (1989). Single run optimization of discrete event simulations—An empirical
study using the M/M/l queue. IIE transactions, 21(1): 35–49.
[72] T.A. Taylor (2018). On-demand service platforms. Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment, 20(4): 704–720.
[73] H. Thorisson. (1985). The queue GI/G/1: Finite moments of the cycle variables and uniform rates
of convergence. Stochastic processes and their applications, 19(1):85–99.
[74] J. Wang, S. Cui, and Z. Wang (2019). Equilibrium strategies in M/M/1 priority queues with
balking. Production and Operations Management, 28(1): 43–62.
[75] W. Whitt (1974). The continuity of queues. Advances in Applied Probability, 6:175–183.
[76] W. Whitt (1989). Planning queueing simulations. Management Science, 35(11):1341–1366.
[77] J. Xu and B. Hajek (2013). The supermarket game. Stochastic Systems, 3(2):405–441.
[78] W. Yang and B. L. Nelson (1992). Multivariate batch means and control variates. Management
Science, 38(10): 1415–1431.
[79] D. D. Yao (1995). S-modular games, with queueing applications. Queueing Systems, 21(3):449–475.
33

Appendix A
Verification of approximate equilibrium for Section 1.1
For validation purpose, we estimate the mean virtual workloads for the two queues by simulating
2 × 106 arrivals to each of the two GI/G/1 queues separately (assuming they are initially empty).
The choice of simulation length follows the framework laid out in [76]. Note that traffic intensities
are relatively low in these two cases, and (recalling that µ1 = µ2 = 1) are equal to λp(N)
1
≈0.477 in
Server 1, and λp(N)
2
≈0.3 in Server 2. In the two cases below, inter-arrival times are distributed as
S = PZ
i=1 Ui where Ui ∼Gamma(0.1, 11), Z is geometrically distributed with a different parameter
at each case, and services are distributed as described:
1. Z ∼Geom(p(N)
1
) and services are distributed according to F1 (which is Beta(10, 10) + 0.5);
2. Z ∼Geom(p(N)
2
) and services are distributed according to F2 (which is Bernoulli(0.1) · 10).
Under the algorithm’s output strategy p(N), we obtain (consistent) estimators for E[X[1]] and
E[X[2]], in Cases 1 and 2, respectively, by averaging the observed workloads at arrival instants.
To construct asymptotic confidence intervals for the mean workloads we follow the CLT-based
framework of [7, Ch. III]: We set the significance level α = 0.005. Under Case 1 we obtain an
average virtual workload equal to 4.006 with an asymptotic 1 −α confidence interval [3.996, 4.017].
Under Case 2 we get a sample average equal to 4.005 with an asymptotic 1 −α confidence interval
[3.989, 4.021]. This suggests that with more than (1−α)2(≈0.99) certainty, our algorithm’s output
p(N) is such that (E[v1], E[v2]) ∈I1 × I2, where I1 = [−0.017, 0.004] and I2 = [−0.021, 0.011].
Hence, with high certainty (>99%) our approximated solution p(N) satisfies the criterion for an
ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium ([24]) for ϵ ≤max(x,y)∈I1×I2 |x −y| = 0.028.
Appendix B
Proofs
B.1
Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. We show first that every symmetric Nash equilibrium p satisfies p = f(p). Assume p ∈
arg maxq∈∆u(p)′q. Then any q ∈∆satisfies u(p)′q ≤u(p)′p, or equivalently, 0 ≤u(p)′(p −q).
Assuming q ̸= p, we have that
∥p + u(p) −q∥2 = ∥p −q∥2 + 2u(p)′(p −q) + ∥u(p)∥2
> ∥u(p)∥2 = ∥p + u(p) −p∥2,
meaning that p = π∆
 p + u(p)

= f(p).
We proceed to showing that if p is not a symmetric equilibrium strategy then p ̸= f(p). Assume
now that p /∈arg maxq∈∆u(p)′q so that there exists some strategy q ∈∆, q ̸= p, such that
u(p)′(q −p) > 0. Hence, we can choose θ ∈(0, 1] such that
θ < 2u(p)′(q −p)
∥q −p∥2
.
Define ˜q = (1−θ)p+θq, so that p−˜q = θ(p −q). Note that ∆is a convex set, thus ˜q ∈∆. Then,
∥p + u(p) −˜q∥2 = ∥p −˜q∥2 + 2u(p)′(p −˜q) + ∥u(p)∥2
= θ
 θ∥q −p∥2 −2u(p)′(q −p)

+ ∥u(p)∥2
< ∥u(p)∥2 = ∥p + u(p) −p∥2,
therefore p ̸= π∆
 p + u(p)

, meaning that p ̸= f(p).
34

B.2
Proof of Theorem 5 and auxiliary results
The proof of Theorem 5 essentially relies on casting the algorithm in (5) into a specific form, in
which the conditions of Theorems 2.4 in [50, Ch. 5.2] can be verified. Roughly speaking, this theorem
relates the asymptotic behavior of the iterate p(n) in (5) to solution paths of an appropriate ODE
(Equation (17) below), in which the strategy p(·) is understood as a continuous function of time.
The proof will make use of the following result:
Lemma 11. Let p ∈∆and x ∈Rk, then
π∆(p + x) = π∆(p + Hx),
where H is the orthogonal projection matrix onto H = {x ∈Rk | e′x = 0}.
Proof. Denote ˆp = π∆(p + x), and suppose, by way of contradiction, that there exists some q ∈∆
that is closer than ˆp to p + Hx, so that
∥p + Hx −q∥2 < ∥p + Hx −ˆp∥2.
Note, since p, q, ˆp ∈∆, that p −q ∈H and p−ˆp ∈H, so that both p −q and p−ˆp are orthogonal
to x −Hx. Using the (generalized) Pythagorean theorem, together with the above inequality we
therefore have
∥p + x −q∥2 = ∥x −Hx∥2 + ∥p + Hx −q∥2 < ∥x −Hx∥2 + ∥p + Hx −ˆp∥2 = ∥p + x −ˆp∥2,
which is in contradiction to the definition of ˆp.
To define the corresponding ODE let the set-valued map C : ∆→2∆be defined as follows:
For an interior point p ∈∆o, let C(p) = {0}; for a boundary point p ∈∆\ ∆o, let C(p) be the
infinite convex cone generated by the outer normals of the faces of ∆that contain p. Adopted to
our framework, the projected ODE takes the form:
˙p = Hu(p) + z,
and
−z(t) ∈C(p(t)), ∀t ≥0,
(17)
where ˙p(·) is the vector of time derivatives of p(·); ˙p = (dp1/dt, . . . , dpk/dt). The value of z(·)
at each point in time is interpreted as the ‘minimum force’ needed to prevent the path p(·) from
leaving ∆. A stationary point of (17) is a point pe ∈∆such that Hu(pe) + z = 0 for some z such
that −z ∈C(pe), meaning that the minimum force needed to push pe + Hu(pe) into ∆is given by
−Hu(pe). Hence, if pe is stationary,
π∆(pe + Hu(pe)) = p + Hu(pe) −Hu(pe) = pe,
and in light of Lemma 11, pe = f(pe), implying by Lemma 2 that pe is an equilibrium.
Define the limit set of the ODE in (17) as
L =
[
p0∈∆
\
t≥0

p(s) | s ≥t, p(0) = p0 
,
that is, we consider solution paths of (17) starting at an initial point p0, for each such path we pick
all points visited infinitely many times, and then define L as the union of all such points for all
possible initial values p0 ∈∆. Theorems 2.1 and 2.4 in [50, Ch. 5.2] provide sufficient conditions
under which the stochastic iterate p(n) converges (almost surely) to some subset of L as n →∞.
35

Clearly, if pe is stationary, then a path starting at pe will forever remain there, thus pe ∈
L. However, in general L may include points that are not stationary, specifically when there are
solutions of (17) that do no converge to a unique point (e.g., circles). It is therefore of interest to
introduce conditions under which such circular paths do not exist, and Assumption A3 is one such
condition. This is formulated in the lemma below:
Lemma 12. Let S∗be the set of stationary points of (17). If Assumption A3 holds, then S∗= L,
hence, every point in L is an equilibrium.
Proof. As discussed, S∗⊆L holds trivially, therefore it suffices to show that Assumption A3 implies
L ⊆S∗. Let ∇pu∗= −Hu, and let p(·) be a (continuous) trajectory of (17) starting at some p0 ∈∆.
Our goal is to show that p(·) converges to some set of stationary points, using u∗(·) as a Lyapunov
function. Note that u∗(·) is continuous and therefore attains a finite minimum on ∆, hence we
can assume w.l.o.g that u∗(·) is positive on ∆(otherwise it can be increased by a constant without
affecting the assumptions). For any t ≥0, the term p(t) + Hu(p(t)) + z(t) is the projection of
p(t) + Hu(p(t)) onto ∆, hence
∥z(t)∥= ∥p(t) + Hu(p(t)) −(p(t) + Hu(p(t)) + z(t))∥
≤∥p(t) + Hu(p(t)) −p(t)∥= ∥Hu(p(t))∥.
Note that the inequality is strict in the case that p(t) is non-stationary. This, together with the
Cauchy–Schwarz inequality implies, for any non-stationary p(t),
−∥Hu(p(t))∥2 < −∥Hu(p(t))∥· ∥z(t)∥≤
 Hu(p(t))
′z(t).
Denote w(p(t)) = −(d/dt)u∗(p(t)).
Using the gradient chain rule we therefore have, for non-
stationary p(t),
−w(p(t)) = d
dtu∗(p(t)) = ∇pu∗(p(t))′ ˙p(t) = −
 Hu(p(t))
′(Hu(p(t)) + z(t)) < 0.
Following the continuity of Hu(·), w(·) is continuous on ∆, and it can be seen from the above that
for any p ∈∆, w(p) = 0 if and only if p is stationary. Furthermore, for all t ≥0,
0 ≤
Z t
0
w(p(s))ds = u∗(p0) −u∗(p(t)) ≤u∗(p0),
where the last inequality is due to u∗being positive. It follows that 0 ≤
R ∞
0 w(p(s))ds < ∞, thus,
as t →∞, w(p(t)) →0, and by continuity of w(·) and p(·),
p(t) →{pe | w(pe) = 0},
i.e., p(·) converges to a set of stationary points, as desired.
Remark 5. There are cases in which Assumptions A3 can be easily verified. For example, if k = 2,
then each strategy p = (p, 1 −p) ∈∆is uniquely characterized by a single value p ∈[0, 1] which
parametrizes the whole simplex, and the matrix H is given by
H = 1
2 ·




1
−1
−1
1



.
36

Then for any p = (p, 1 −p) ∈∆, denoting s = (s, 1 −s) and ˜e = e1 −e2 = (1, −1), we can simply
define u∗(·) by
u∗(p) =
Z p
0
−(Hu(s))′˜e · ds = −
Z p
0
(u1(s) −u2(s)) ds =
Z p
0
(u2(s, 1 −s) −u1(s, 1 −s)) ds.
If k > 2, then u∗can be easily shown to exist if u(·) itself is known to be conservative. In this
case, for every parameterized curve r(s), s ∈[a, b] ⊆R, that lies entirely in ∆, any tangential vector
at a point along r must lie in H; that is, ˙r(s) ∈H for all s ∈[a, b]. Assuming −u = ∇pv∗for some
v∗: ∆→R, the line integral of −Hu(·) along the curve r(·) is given by
Z b
a
−
 Hu(r(s))
′˙r(s)ds =
Z b
a
−u(r(s))′H˙r(s)ds =
Z b
a
−u(r(s))′˙r(s)ds = v∗(r(b)) −v∗(r(a)),
where the first transition follows from the symmetry of H, the second follows from ˙r(s) ∈H, and
the third is due to u(·) being conservative. This shows that the integral of −Hu(·) along any curve
in ∆depends only on its endpoints, hence −Hu(·) is conservative.
We next proceed to the proof of the theorem.
Proof of Theorem 5
Proof. Let ϵn = γnℓ(p(n)), then the algorithm in (5) can be written as
p(n+1) = π∆
 
p(n) + ϵn
G(n)
ℓ(p(n))
!
= π∆
 
p(n) + ϵn
HG(n)
ℓ(p(n))
!
,
(18)
where the second equality is due to Lemma 11. Note that ℓ(p) ≥1, thus P∞
n=1 ϵn ≥P∞
n=1 γn = ∞,
in accordance with Equation (1.1) of [50, Ch. 5.1]. Assumption A1 implies that ℓ(p) ≤M < ∞
for all p ∈∆, hence by Assumption A4 and the compactness of ∆we have that P∞
n=1 ϵ2
n ≤
M2 P∞
n=1 γ2
n < ∞almost surely. Therefore, condition (2.14) of Theorem 2.4 in [50, Ch. 5.2] is
satisfied.
Next observe that the iterate p(n) in (18) is confined to the simplex, which is a compact and non-
empty polyhedron. Therefore, Assumption (A4.3.2) of [50, Ch. 5.2] is satisfied. Assumptions A3
and A2 imply Assumptions (A2.1), (A2.3) of [50, Ch. 5.2].
By Lemma 4 and the linearity of
expectation we have that
Ep
"
HG(n)
ℓ(p(n))
#
= Hu(p(n)),
hence Assumption (A2.7) of [50, Ch. 5.2] is satisfied.
Combining the above yields the conclusion of Theorem 2.4 in [50, Ch. 5.2] that p(n) as defined in
(18) converges to a set of limit points in L, and together with Assumption A3 we have, by Lemma
12, that all points in L are equilibria, which concludes the proof of the theorem.
B.3
Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. Assume without loss that u is non-negative in all its coordinates and that minp∈∆∥u(p)∥>
0. This is possible since ∥u(·)∥∞admits a minimum on ∆, and shifting all coordinates of u by the
same constant neither affects the game nor the algorithm’s progression. We first note that if u is
37

Lipschitz, then u(p)′p, as a function of p, is also (locally) Lipschitz on ∆: Let Ku be a Lipschitz
constant for u and let Mu be an upper bound on ∥u(·)∥over ∆. Then for all p, q ∈∆
|u(p)′p −u(q)′q| = |(u(p) −u(q))′p + u(q)′(p −q)|
≤∥u(p) −u(q)∥· ∥p∥+ ∥u(q)∥· ∥p −q∥
≤∥u(p) −u(q)∥+ Mu∥p −q∥
≤(Ku + Mu)∥p −q∥.
Thus, K = Ku + Mu is a Lipschitz constant for both u(p)′p and u(p). Note that u∗is strongly
convex, therefore there exists a unique equilibrium pe. Furthermore, pe is a best response to itself,
i.e., pe
i = 0 for any i such that ui(pe) < ∥u(pe)∥∞, therefore u(pe)′pe = ∥u(pe)∥∞. Thus, for all
p ∈∆,
∥u(pe)∥∞−u(p)′p = u(pe)′pe −u(p)′p ≤|u(pe)′pe −u(p)′p| ≤K∥p −pe∥,
hence, ∥u(pe)∥∞−K∥p −pe∥≤u(p)′p. For all x ∈Rk, ∥x∥∞≤∥x∥, and using the triangle
inequality together with the above yields, for all p, q ∈∆,
u(p)′q ≤∥u(p)∥∞= ∥u(p) −u(pe) + u(pe)∥∞≤∥u(pe)∥∞+ ∥u(p) −u(pe)∥∞
≤∥u(pe)∥∞+ ∥u(p) −u(pe)∥≤∥u(pe)∥∞+ K∥p −pe∥
= ∥u(pe)∥∞−K∥p −pe∥+ 2K∥p −pe∥≤u(p)′p + 2K∥p −pe∥.
(19)
Following Assumptions A1, for all p ∈∆, by Lemma 4, EpG = ℓ(p)u(p). Since ℓis a positive
real function and ∥u(·)∥is bounded away from 0, using Jensen’s inequality,
ℓ(p) = ∥EpG∥
∥u(p)∥≤Ep∥G∥
∥u(p)∥≤
Ep∥G∥
minq∈∆∥u(q)∥.
Therefore, by Assumption A2, we can choose constants M0, M1 > 0 such that Ep∥G∥2 ≤M2
0
and ℓ(p) ≤M1 for all p ∈∆. Setting γn = η/n, we rewrite the iterate p(n) as in (18) with the
corresponding step size ηℓ(p(n))/n, where we note that HG(n)/ℓ(p(n)) is unbiased for Hu(p(n)) and
that ηℓ(p(n))/n ≥η/n (almost surely). Suppose that η > 1/(2C), then under the strong convexity
assumption (11), we can invoke the result in [62, Eq. (2.8)], by which we have for all n ≥1 that
E∥p(n+1) −pe∥2 ≤
 
1 −ηℓ(p(n))
n
· 2C
!
2E∥p(n) −pe∥2 +
 
ηℓ(p(n))
n
· M0
!2
≤

1 −2Cη
n

2E∥p(n) −pe∥2 +
ηM0M1
n
2
.
Define Mη = max{(ηM0M1)2/(2Cη −1), 1}. Then, similarly to [62, Eq. (2.9)], by induction we
have for all n ≥1 that
E∥p(n) −pe∥2 ≤Mη
n .
For any δ ∈(0, 1), using Markov’s inequality we then get
P

2K∥p(n) −pe∥>
√
n−δ

= P

∥p(n) −pe∥2 > n−δ
4K2

≤4K2E∥p(n) −pe∥2
n−δ
≤4K2Mη · nδ−1.
38

From (19), for all q ∈∆,
u(p(n))′p(n) ≥u(p(n))′q −2K∥p(n) −pe∥,
hence, if 2K∥p(n) −pe∥≤
√
n−δ, then p(n) is a
√
n−δ-equilibrium, and we conclude that
P

u(p(n))′p(n) ≥max
q∈∆u(p(n))′q −
√
n−δ

≥1 −4 · K2Mη · nδ−1,
which completes the proof.
Appendix C
Proofs for applications and examples
C.1
Proof of Lemma 1
Recall that 1/µm is the expected service time in queue m and that µ2 ≥µ1. For any strategy
p = (p1, p2, p3) the arrival rate to queue m = 1, 2 is λpi. Let wm(pm) denote the expected stationary
waiting time (service inclusive) in queue m = 1, 2 when strategy p = (p1, p2, p3) is played by
all customers, where we define wm(pm) = ∞for any strategy such that λpm > µm. Clearly, if
R −C/µ2 < 0 then in equilibrium no customer will join either queue, hence pe = (0, 0, 1) is the
unique Nash equilibrium.
If R −C/µ2 > 0 > R −C/µ1, then in equilibrium, customers never join queue 1, but a positive
fraction of them join queue 2. The function w2(p2) is continuous and increasing with respect to p2
(see [75]) such that w2(0) = 1/µ2. Therefore, if R −Cw2(1) ≥0 then pe = (0, 1, 0) is the unique
equilibrium, and if R −Cw2(1) < 0 then there exists some p2 ∈(0, 1) such that R −Cw2(p2) = 0,
i.e., pe = (0, p2, 1 −p2) is the unique equilibrium.
Finally, we address the case R −C/µ2 > R −C/µ1 > 0.
If R −C/w2(1) > R −C/µ1,
then in equilibrium all customers join queue 2 and pe = (0, 1, 0) is the unique equilibrium.
If
R−C/w2(1) ≤R−C/µ1 then an equilibrium strategy must satisfy p1, p2 > 0 and w1(p1) = w2(p2).
As before, wm(pm) is continuous and increasing in pm, m = 1, 2, hence there are two possible
cases, (a) There exists a pair p1 + p2 < 1 such that R −C/w2(p2) = R −Cw1(p1) = 0 and
pe = (p1, p2, 1 −p1 −p2) is the unique Nash equilibrium; (b) There exists a pair p1 + p2 = 1 such
that R −C/w2(p2) = R −Cw1(p1) > 0 and pe = (p1, p2, 0). This solution is unique because of
the monotonicity of the waiting times implies that there is at most one solution p1 to the equation
w1(p1) = w2(1 −p1).
C.2
Proof of Proposition 8
Proof. In light of Theorem 5, to prove our Proposition 8, it suffices to verify that Assumptions
A1–A3 are satisfied in the underlying model.
First, we note that u(p) is a separable function, in the sense that ui(p) is only a function of pi
for every i = 1, . . . , k. By [75], u(·) is continuous, and can be further expressed as the gradient of
the sum of the antiderivatives,
u(p) = ∇p
 k
X
i=1
Z
ui(pi)dpi
!
.
Thus, Assumption A3 holds. In what follows, we verify that Assumptions A1 and A2 also hold. To
this aim, we construct a coupling between the original system and a single-server queue, which we
describe next.
39

Given a strategy p = (p1, . . . , pk), consider a single-server, FCFS queue, which we call the coupled
system, with identical arrival process {Tn}n≥1 as in the original system. Consider the j-th arriving
customer, whose arrival time (in both the original and the coupled systems) is Tj. We assume that
if this customer chooses to join queue m in original system (which occurs with probability pm) with
service demand Ym, then customer j in the coupled system with equal service demand Ym joins at
the same time. If customer j in the original system balks, then we say that in the coupled system,
customer j joins with 0 service demand.
Recall our notation Xj(p) = (X[1]
j (p), . . . , X[k−1]
j
(p)) for the vector of workloads in the original
system observed by customer j, and let the (univariate) r.v. ˜Xj(p) represent its coupled counterpart,
namely the workload observed by the j-th arriving customer in the coupled system. We assume both
the original and the coupled system start empty, X[m]
1
(p) = ˜X1(p) = 0 for all m ∈{1, . . . , k −1}.
It can be seen from the construction that X[m]
j
(p) ≤˜Xj(p) with probability one, for all m ∈
{1, . . . , k −1} and j ≥0. Furthermore, recall that L(p) = inf{n ≥1 :
Xn+1(p) = 0k−1(p)}
denotes the length of a random regenerative cycle in the original system and let ˜L(p) = inf{n ≥1 :
˜Xn+1(p) = 0} be its coupled counterpart. Then L(p) ≤˜L(p) with probability one. Denoting by
τ(p) the departure time of the L(p)-th customer in the original system and by ˜τ(p) the departure
time of the ˜L(p)-th customer in the coupled system, it is immediate that the busy period in the
original system, B(p) = τ(p) −T1, and the busy period in the coupled system, ˜B(p) = ˜τ(p) −T1,
satisfy B(p) ≤˜B(p) almost surely. Since for all m ∈{1, . . . , k −1} and j ∈{1, . . . , L(p)} we know
that X[m]
j
(p) ≤B(p), we conclude that X[m]
j
(p) ≤˜B(p) with probability one.
For convenience, assume without loss that µ1 ≤µ2 ≤· · · ≤µk−1.
For any strategy p =
(p1, . . . , pk), let ˜Y (p) be a random variable that with probability pm is a random draw from the
distribution Fm, m ∈{1, . . . , k −1}, and with probability pk takes the value 0. Hence, given p,
the coupled system forms a GI/G/1 queue in which service time is distributed similarly to ˜Y (p).
Moreover, this queue is stable due to λ < µ1. By assumption, E[Y 4
m] < ∞, and it follows that
E[ ˜Y (p)4] < ∞. It is known (see [73]) that this implies Ep ˜L(p)4 < ∞as well as Ep ˜B(p)4 < ∞.
Thus, ℓ2(p) ≤Ep ˜L(p)2 < ∞and Assumption A1 follows.
Let κ > 0 be a constant such that νm is κ-Lipschitz for all m ∈{1, . . . , k −1}, and let ξ =
maxm=1,...,k−1 νm(0) + κE[Ym]. We have, for every m ∈{1, . . . , k −1} and j ∈{1, . . . , L(p)},
vm(Xj(p)) = E[νm(X[m]
j
(p) + Ym) | X[m]
j
(p)]
≤νm(0) + κX[m]
j
(p) + κE[Ym] ≤ξ + κX[m]
j
(p) ≤ξ + κ ˜B(p)
almost surely. Thus,
∥G∥2 =

L(p)
X
j=1
v(Xj(p))

2
≤

L(p)
X
j=1
(ξ + κ ˜B(p))e

2
= k · L(p)2(ξ + κ ˜B)2 ≤k · ˜L(p)2(ξ + κ ˜B(p))2,
and together with Hölder’s inequality,
Ep∥G∥2 ≤kEp[˜L(p)2(ξ + κ ˜B(p))2] ≤k · (Ep[˜L(p)4])
1
2 (Ep[(ξ + κ ˜B(p))4])
1
2 < ∞,
where the last inequality follows from the finiteness of the first four moments of ˜L(p) and ˜B(p).
To prove that Assumption A2 holds, it suffices to show that the first four moments of ˜L(p) and
˜B(p) are continuous functions of p, which will imply that Ep∥G∥2 is uniformly bounded on ∆. The
remainder of the proof is therefore dedicated to proving the continuity of the moments.
Let p(n) be a convergent sequence of strategies, and denote p = limn→∞p(n). Our goal is to
prove Ep(n) ˜L(p(n))r →Ep ˜L(p)r and Ep(n) ˜B(p(n))r →Ep ˜B(p)r for r ≤4. The convergence of
40

p(n) to p implies that ˜Y (p(n)) →d
˜Y (p) as n →∞. Since the cycle length and busy period are
continuous maps of the queue-length process and workload process, respectively, and since H is a
continuous distribution, we have by [75] that ˜L(p(n))r →d ˜L(p)r and ˜B(p(n))r →d ˜B(p)r. To show
convergence of the means we shall use the dominated-convergence theorem based on the following
construction:
Define Z = maxm∈{1,...,k−1} Ym. Since EY 4
m < ∞, we have EZ4 < ∞, and clearly, EZ > 1/µ1
(note that Y1, . . . Yk−1 are independent). For every ϵ ∈(0, 1) there exists some Nϵ such that for all
n ≥Nϵ and i ∈{1, . . . , k}
p(n)
i
≤(1 −ϵ)pi + ϵ.
Assume ϵ < (1/λ −1/µ1)/(EZ −1/µ1). Define ¯Y (p) as a random variable taking the value ˜Y (p)
w.p. 1 −ϵ and Z otherwise. Hence E ¯Y (p)4 < ∞, and
E ¯Y (p) = (1 −ϵ)E ˜Y (p) + ϵEZ ≤(1 −ϵ) 1
µ1
+ ϵEZ = ϵ · (EZ −1/µ1) + 1/µ1 < 1/λ.
Furthermore, for n ≥Nϵ and i ∈{1, . . . , k −1}, we note that ˜Y (p(n)) takes the (random) value
Yi with probability p(n)
i
, whereas ¯Y (p) takes a value equal or larger than Yi with probability (1 −
ϵ)pi + ϵ ≥p(n)
i
. Hence,
˜Y (p(n)) ≤st ¯Y (p).
Define ¯L and ¯B as the cycle length and busy period of a GI/G/1 queue with interarrival distribution
H and service distribution similar to that of ¯Y (p). Thus, ˜L(p(n)) ≤st ¯L and ˜B(p(n)) ≤st ¯B. Because
E ¯Y (p) < 1/λ and E ¯Y (p)4 < ∞, it follows that E¯Lr < ∞and E ¯Br < ∞for any integer r ≤4. Since
for all n ≥Nϵ, ˜L(p(n))r ≤st ¯Lr and ˜B(p(n))r ≤st ¯Br, we conclude, using the dominated-convergence
theorem, that
lim
n→∞Ep(n) ˜L(p(n))r = Ep ˜L(p)r
and
lim
n→∞Ep(n) ˜B(p(n))r = Ep ˜B(p)r,
hence, we have proven that Ep ˜L(p)r and Ep ˜B(p)r are continuous in p.
C.3
Proof of Proposition 9
Proof. As a special case of the model in 4.2, by setting p = e2, we have that all customers join the
queue of server 2, hence it can be modeled as an M/G/1 queue, which is stable due to λ < µ. Then,
by a coupling argument, for every p ∈∆, the total workload process X[1](t) + X[2](t) is dominated
by that of the corresponding M/G/1 queue of p = e2, which, under the assumption E[Y 4] < ∞, has
finite cycle-length second moment, as explained in Example 1 in Section 3.2. Hence, Assumption
A1 holds. Following an explanation similar to that in Example 1 in Section 3.2, we conclude that
Assumption A2 is satisfied. Furthermore, we have in this example that k = 2, hence Assumption
A3 holds, and together with the step size assumption A4 the conclusion of Theorem 5 follows.
Appendix D
Unknown stability region
In strategic-queueing literature, it is often claimed, in a rather loose sense, that customer rationality
imposes system stability, even when some strategies in the strategy space force the system out of
its stability region. However, the current literature is lacking a rigorous mathematical formulation
of a queueing game that reifies this intuitive argument. The framework presented in Section 2 does
not formally cover models in which some strategies induce system instability, because customer
41

utility is not well defined when the system is non-regenerative. In this section we suggest a heuristic
modification of the algorithm that attempts to deal with cases where some strategies render the
system unstable, and the stability region of the system is not known a-priori. While we believe this
method to be useful in practice, some important theoretical questions revolving stability in queueing
games are left unsettled. Hopefully the results presented in this paper will motivate future research
on this subject.
Suppose that the underlying system is positive recurrent only for strategies in some non-empty
connected subset of the strategy space S ⊂∆. For the sake of the discussion here we will assume
that S itself is unknown, but that ∆\S is compact, and that S contains an equilibrium point. Note
that when S ̸= ∆, the existence of an equilibrium in S does not follow directly from our Assumption
A3. This can be easily seen through a degenerate variation of the Unobservable M/G/1 in Example
1, by setting λ > µ, hence S = {p = (p, 1−p) | p ∈[0, µ/λ)}, and letting C < 0 (namely, customers
profit from waiting). Then, although Hu is a smooth conservative vector field on S, any strategy
in S must prescribe balking with some positive probability, while its best response is to join with
probability 1. Furthermore, S is non-compact (as is often the case for stability regions of queueing
systems), and in this example an equilibrium does not exist even if customers are restricted to
choose a strategy in S.
For our Definition 2 of an equilibrium strategy to be valid, u has to be defined in the extended
sense as
u(p) = lim
n→∞E

v(Xn(p))

for all p ∈∆, including those strategies in ∆\ S. Moreover, this definition has to coincide with the
stationary utility whenever a limiting distribution exists, i.e., v has to be a function such that for
all p ∈S, if there exists a random variable X(p) such that Xn(p) →d X(p) as n →∞, then it
must also hold that
u(p) = lim
n→∞E

v(Xn(p))

= E

v(X(p))

.
Furthermore, to use our method, appropriate assumptions have to be introduced on the primitives
that rule out the existence of equilibria in ∆\ S, and prevent the iterate from “drifting” outside S.
Such conditions should imply that after finitely many iterations, the iterate is absorbed in a compact
subset ˜S of S containing an equilibrium point. Rigorously formulating such conditions exceeds the
scope of this paper. However, we conjecture that the following condition, which indeed holds in
Example 1 (with strictly positive waiting cost), is sufficient: For all p /∈S, u(p)′p = −∞and,
additionally, for any sequence {pm}m≥1 such that minq∈∆\S ∥pm −q∥→0, limm→∞u(pm)′pm =
−∞. We next present a modified version of the SA algorithm that terminates busy cycles when
they exceed a threshold that increases as the number of iteration grows.
At iteration n ≥1, given a strategy p(n), let
˜G(n) =
L∧βn
X
j=1
v(Xj),
(20)
where L ∧β = min{L, β} and {βn}n≥1 is an increasing sequence of integers such that limn→∞βn =
∞. The modified SA algorithm is defined as
p(n+1) = π∆

p(n) + γn ˜G(n)
.
(21)
Clearly ˜G(n) is in general not an unbiased estimator of g(p(n)), even if p(n) ∈S. However, we next
argue that by carefully choosing the threshold sequence {βn}, ˜G(n) can be made asymptotically
42

unbiased to g(p(n)). Note that the number of summands in (20) is finite for all n, thus, under
natural conditions on v, ˜G(n) is integrable for all p ∈∆, and we define gn(p) = Ep ˜G(n).
Our goal therefore is to find an appropriate threshold sequence {βn}. In our suggested heuristic
we attempt to choose {βn} such that for every p ∈S, the sequence {gn(p)}n≥1 converges sufficiently
fast to g(p) as n →∞. Note that for all p ∈S, gn(p) can be written as
gn(p) = Ep ˜G(n) = Ep


L
X
j=1
v(Xj)

−Ep


L
X
j=βn+1
v(Xj)1{L>βn}


= g(p) −Ep


L
X
j=βn+1
v(Xj)1{L>βn}


= g(p) −Pp(L > βn) ·
L
X
j=βn+1
Ep

v(Xj) | L > βn

= g(p) −ξn(p),
where
ξn(p) = Pp(L > βn) ·
L
X
j=βn+1
Ep

v(Xj) | L > βn

.
Assume that Hu is continuous and conservative on S (as in A3) and that {γn}n≥1 satisfies A4. Let
˜S ⊂S be a compact subset of S in which an equilibrium lies, such that supp∈S Ep∥G∥2 < ∞(as
in A2), and in addition, for all p ∈˜S,
∞
X
n=1
γnℓ(p) · |ξn(p)| < ∞.
(22)
If for all sufficiently large n, the iterate remains (with probability 1) in ˜S ⊂S, then, we conjecture
that the conclusion of Theorem 5 holds. Rigorous results for iteration-dependent functions can be
found in [50, Ch. 6].
Noticeably, there is an inherent trade-off in the choice of the sequence {βn}n≥1: if {βn}n≥1
diverges too slowly, |ξn(p)| diminishes slowly and may fail to satisfy the condition in (22), whereas
if {βn}n≥1 diverges very fast, there is a risk that the algorithm will spend long periods of time
simulating arrivals to an unstable system. A reasonable choice for βn should satisfy, as an example,
for all sufficiently large n and p ∈S,
Pp(L > βn) ≤z(p)n ,
(23)
for some function z : S →(0, 1). If z is bounded over the compact set ˜S, then this choice of {βn}n≥1,
by the Borel-Cantelli lemma, ensures that the cycle length hits the threshold βn only finitely many
times. This can be done, for example, if the cycle-length distribution has a light tail, i.e., if for all
p ∈˜S there exists an α such that P(L > x) ≤αx (the latter is implied, for example, in the M/G/1
queue, assuming that the service-time distribution is light tailed; see [25]). Then taking βn = κn
for some constant κ > 0 yields Pp(L > βn) ≤ακn.
In Figure 5 below we present results from a simulation of the Unobservable M/G/1 queue of
Example 1, which demonstrate the convergence of the iterate to the true equilibrium depicted
by the red dashed line.
In this example, service-time are exponentially distributed with mean
1/µ = 1 (thus, the queue is an M/M/1), and the (potential) arrival rate λ is 2, hence, λ > µ and
S = {p = (p, 1 −p) | p ∈[0, 1/2)}. The utility parameters are R = 5 and C = 1, implying that
43

the equilibrium joining probability is given by pe = 0.4. We implement the modified algorithm, for
n = 1, . . . , 106, using ˜G(n) as the estimator at iteration n, with βn = n, step size γn = 1/n and
initial strategy p(1) = (1/2, 1/2). In our experimentation, over the simulation horizon, the cycle
length hits the threshold βn a few dozens times, with n = 6, 175 being the last iteration index for
which the threshold was hit. The last iteration n for which the the iterate exists the stability region
is n = 5, 059, where we have p(n) = (0.53, 0.47) /∈S. This provides a strong empirical evidence that
the iterate is absorbed in a compact set in the domain of attraction of the equilibrium point pe.
Figure 5: Convergence of the modified SA algorithm as n →∞. The first coordinate of p(n) =
(p(n), 1 −p(n)), i.e., the joining probability at stage n, is plotted (in blued) vs. n on a square-root
scale. The red dashed line depicts the correct equilibrium joining probability, which is given by
pe = 0.4.
Appendix E
Extension to games with state information
In this section we extend our concept of the surrogate best-response function to the model with
state information. Theorem 10 follows directly from this construction.
First, we redefine the surrogate best-response function as
f(p) = arg min
q∈P
X
s∈I
∥p(s) + ξp(s) · Hu(p | s) −q(s)∥2 .
(24)
Similar to (14), the optimization problem in (24) is also separable, motivating the following defini-
tion, for all s ∈I:
f(p | s) = π∆(p(s) + ξp(s) · Hu(p | s)) = π∆(p(s) + ξp(s) · u(p | s))
(25)
which is a real function from ∆to itself. The second transition in (25) follows Lemma 11. We
can therefore think of f as a vector valued function, f : P →P (as opposed to BR, which is a
correspondence, BR : P →2P), and in addition, p = f(p) if and only if p(s) = f(p | s) for all
s ∈I.
44

Lemma 13. Suppose for every s ∈I, ξp(s) · Hu(p | s) is continuous on P (as a function of p).
Then f(·) is continuous on P, and therefore admits a fixed point. In addition, any strategy is a fixed
point for f if and only if it is an equilibrium, i.e., p = f(p) if and only if p ∈BR(p), hence, an
equilibrium exists.
Proof. Under the conditions of Lemma 13, the objective function in the LHS of (24) is continuous in
(p, q) on the product space P ×P, and P is compact, thus by the maximum theorem f is continuous
over P. As a result, by Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem, f admits a fixed point in P. The rest of the
proof is similar to that of Lemma 2:
Suppose p is an equilibrium, i.e., p ∈BR(p). Then for all s ∈I, the expression ξp(s)u(p | s)′r
is maximized at r = p(s), hence ξp(s)u(p | s)′(p(s) −q(s)) ≥0 for all q ∈P. Consider a strategy
q ̸= p, thus, for any s ∈I such that q(s) ̸= p(s),
∥p(s) + ξp(s)u(p | s) −q(s)∥2 = ∥p(s) −q(s)∥2 + 2ξp(s)u(p | s)′(p(s) −q(s)) + ∥ξp(s)u(p | s)∥2
> ∥ξp(s)u(p | s)∥2 = ∥p(s) + ξp(s)u(p | s) −p(s)∥2.
Hence, p(s) = f(p | s), meaning that p = f(p). Assume on the contrary that p is not an equilibrium,
thus we can choose q ∈P and s ∈I(p), ξp(s) > 0, such that u(p | s)′q(s) > u(p | s)′p(s). Then a
parameter θ ∈(0, 1) can be chosen such that
θ < min
2ξp(s)u(p | s)′(q(s) −p(s))
∥q(s) −p(s)∥2
, 1

,
noting from the assumptions that the right-hand side is strictly positive.
We then define ˜q =
p + θ(q −p) to obtain, after rearrangement,
∥p(s) + ξp(s) · u(p | s) −˜q(s)∥2
= θ
 ∥q(s) −p(s)∥2 + 2ξp(s)u(p | s)′(q(s) −p(s))

+ ∥ξp(s)u(p | s)∥2
< ∥ξp(s)u(p | s)∥2 = ∥p(s) + ξp(s) · u(p | s) −p(s)∥2 ,
and therefore p(s) ̸= f(p | s), implying that p ̸= f(p).
Proof of Theorem 10
Proof. Denote |I| = l. With slight abuse of notation, we treat a strategy p ∈P hereafter as a real
k×l matrix, whose s-th column, (p1,s, . . . pk,s), is given by the vector p(s) defined previously. Define
the mapping ¯u : P →Rk×l such that ¯u(p) is a matrix whose s-th column, (¯u1,s(p), . . . , ¯uk,s(p)),
is given by ξp(s)Hu(p | s). Note that the strategy space P is the product space of l copies of ∆,
hence it is a compact polyhedron in Rk×l. Furthermore, the projection of an element in x ∈Rk×l
onto P is computed simply by projecting each column of x onto ∆. Then the corresponding ODE
for the algorithm in (16) is
˙p = ¯u(p) + z,
−(z1,s(t), . . . zk,s(t)) ∈C((p1,s(t), . . . pk,s(t))), ∀t ≥0, 1 ≤s ≤l,
(26)
where (z1,s(t), . . . zk,s(t)) is the s-th column vector of z, and C is the set-valued map defined in
Section B.2. Let u∗: P →Rl be the potential function, and let ∇u∗(p) be its gradient at p, i.e., a
real k×l matrix whose element at the i-th row and s-th column is (∂/∂pi,s)u∗(p). Then Assumption
B3 implies that ∇u∗(p) = −¯u(p). By repeating the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 12, we
have that each point p in the limit set of (26) is stationary, i.e., satisfies p = πP(p + ¯u(p)), and
therefore is an equilibrium strategy.
45

Similarly to the proof of Theorem 5, we define ϵn = γnℓ(p(n)), observing that P∞
n=1 ϵn = ∞and
P∞
n=1 ϵ2
n < ∞due to Assumptions B1 and A4. The algorithm in (16) can be therefore written as
p(n+1) = πP
 
p(n) + ϵn
HG(n)
ℓ(p(n))
!
,
(27)
where G is a k × l matrix with G(s) as its s-th column. From (15) we have that
Ep
"
HG(n)
ℓ(p(n))
#
= ¯u(p(n)).
Thus, as in the proof of Theorem 5, we invoke Theorem 2.4 in [50, Ch. 5.2], to conclude that p(n)
converges to a set of limit points of (26), and since every limit point is an equilibrium strategy, we
obtain the result.
Appendix F
Multiple customer types
Many of our results can be easily extended to queueing games with heterogeneous types of customers
interacting in the same system. Below we explain, through a representative example, how to utilize
our framework to approximate an equilibrium strategy with two types of customers. The model we
consider in this section is a natural extention of the Unobservable M/G/1 presented in Example 1;
We assume customers arrive to the system according to a Poisson process with rate λ, and services
are iid with mean 1
µ. We consider two customer types, 1 and 2, indexed by θ ∈{1, 2}, and assume
that each customer’s type is drawn independently of the system state. Similarly to the single-type
model, we denote by Rθ and Cθ the service evaluation and waiting cost rate for type θ ∈{1, 2}. As
before, we let Xj represent the virtual workload upon the j-th arrival instant. We redefine v(Xj)
as a mapping of a possible system state to a matrix in R2×2, with one conditional expected utility
vector for each type,
v(Xj) =

v1(Xj)
v2(Xj)

=




R1 −C1 · (Xj + 1/µ)
R2 −C2 · (Xj + 1/µ)
0
0



,
and the vector of expected utilities is again expressed by u(p) = Ep

v(X(p))

. Knowing their type,
each customer chooses whether to join or balk without observing the system state. Thus, a strategy
profile, p ∈∆2, is now represented by a pair of point distributions over actions, p = (p1
p2) ∈∆2.
For a matrix m ∈R2×2, let (m)θ denote its θ-th column, θ ∈{1, 2}. An equilibrium is then defined
as a strategy profile pe ∈∆2 such that for every θ ∈{1, 2},
(pe)θ ∈arg max
q∈∆
(u(pe))′
θq.
Since customer types are independent of the system state, we can consider an arrival of an
arbitrary customer (of any type) to an idling server as a time point of system regeneration. Each
iteration of the SA algorithm includes a simulation of a single regeneration cycle and adaptation
46

of the strategy profile. By indexing customers of a single regeneration cycle by j ∈{1, 2, . . . , L}
(where L is the cycle length) and denoting by Xj the system state upon arrival of the j-th customer,
we can construct our utility estimator,
G =
L
X
j=1
v(Xj).
Consistent with the notation in previous sections, we let p(n), G(n), and γn denote the strategy
profile, utility estimator, and step size, respectively, at the n-th iteration of the algorithm. Setting
an arbitrary initial strategy p(1) ∈∆2, the update scheme is given by
p(n+1) = π∆2

p(n) + γnG(n)
, n ≥1.
(28)
Figure 6 below depicts the convergence of the iterate to the (unique) equilibrium for an M/M/1
queue with proportion α = 0.3 of the customers being type 1 and the rest type 2. The arrival
process is Poisson with (total) rate of λ = 0.7 arrivals per unit time, and services are exponentially
distributed with parameter 1.
The cost and reward parameters for the two types are given by
R1 = 3, C1 = 1, R2 = 5 and C2 = 2. The blue curve corresponds to the joining probability of
type-1 customers (i.e., the first component of p(n)
1 ), while the green curve corresponds to the joining
probability of type-2 customers (i.e., the first component of p(n)
2 ), as functions of the iteration
number, n. In this example, R1
C1 > R2
C2 , implying that type-2 customers join the system only when
type-1 customers join with probability 1. In this specific example, the unique equilibrium strategy
profile can be easily calculated as we have that the joining probability of type-2 customers in
equilibrium (assuming all type-1 customers join) is equal to

µ −αλ −C2
R2

/((1 −α)λ), so that
(pe)1 =




1
0



,
(pe)2 =




0.796
0.204



.
For γn =
1
2n and initial joining probability of 0.5 for each type, after 106 iterations, we obtain an
approximation error of the order of 10−4.
47

Figure 6: Convergence as n →∞of the SA algorithm with multiple customer types. The joining
probability at stage n, for type-1 customer (in blue) and type-2 customers (in green), is plotted vs.
n on a square-root scale. The blue dashed line depicts the correct equilibrium joining probability
for type 1, which is given by 1, and the green dashed line depicts the correct equilibrium joining
probability for type 2, which is given by 0.796.
48