TITLE: From Proper Scoring Rules to Max-Min Optimal Forecast Aggregation
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2414
---

From Proper Scoring Rules to Max-Min Optimal Forecast
Aggregation
Eric Neyman, Tim Roughgarden
August 22, 2023
Abstract
This paper forges a strong connection between two seemingly unrelated forecasting problems:
incentive-compatible forecast elicitation and forecast aggregation. Proper scoring rules are the
well-known solution to the former problem. To each such rule s we associate a corresponding
method of aggregation, mapping expert forecasts and expert weights to a “consensus forecast,”
which we call quasi-arithmetic (QA) pooling with respect to s. We justify this correspondence
in several ways:
• QA pooling with respect to the two most well-studied scoring rules (quadratic and log-
arithmic) corresponds to the two most well-studied forecast aggregation methods (linear
and logarithmic).
• Given a scoring rule s used for payment, a forecaster agent who sub-contracts several
experts, paying them in proportion to their weights, is best off aggregating the experts’
reports using QA pooling with respect to s, meaning this strategy maximizes its worst-case
profit (over the possible outcomes).
• The score of an aggregator who uses QA pooling is concave in the experts’ weights. As a
consequence, online gradient descent can be used to learn appropriate expert weights from
repeated experiments with low regret.
• The class of all QA pooling methods is characterized by a natural set of axioms (general-
izing classical work by Kolmogorov on quasi-arithmetic means).
1
arXiv:2102.07081v2 [cs.GT] 19 Aug 2023

1.
Introduction and motivation
1.1.
Probabilistic opinion pooling
You are a meteorologist tasked with advising the governor of Florida on hurricane preparations. A
hurricane is threatening to make landfall in Miami, and the governor needs to decide whether to
order a mass evacuation. The governor asks you what the likelihood is of a direct hit, so you decide
to consult several weather models at your disposal. These models all give you different answers:
10%, 25%, 70%. You trust the models equally, but your job is to come up with one number for
the governor — your best guess, all things considered. What is the most sensible way for you to
aggregate these numbers?
This is one of many applications of probabilistic opinion pooling. The problem of probabilis-
tic opinion pooling (or forecast aggregation) asks: how should you aggregate several probabilities,
or probability distributions, into one? This question is relevant in nearly every domain involving
probabilities or risks: meteorology, national security, climate science, epidemiology, and economic
policy, to name a few.
For a different example of opinion pooling, suppose that you are a consultant tasked with
determining the likelihood of your party winning various races in the upcoming election, as part
of helping optimally allocate resources. There are many election forecasting models, such as those
produced by FiveThirtyEight and The Economist. Again, these models give somewhat different
probabilities; what is the most sensible way to aggregate these numbers into a single probability
for each race?
In some sense this example is isomorphic to the previous one, but there are domain-specific
considerations which might lead to different pooling methods being desirable in the two settings.
We will elaborate on this later.
As a third example, consider websites that rely on the “wisdom of crowds” to arrive at a reason-
able forecast. One such website is metaculus.com, which elicits probabilistic forecasts from users
on a variety of subjects. In this setting, the goal is to produce an aggregate forecast that reflects the
opinion of a large, moderately informed crowd, as opposed to a small, well-informed pool of experts.
All of these examples fall into the following framework: there are m experts, who report prob-
ability distributions p1, . . . , pm over n possible outcomes (we call these reports, or forecasts). Ad-
ditionally, each expert i has a non-negative weight wi (with weights adding to 1); this weight
represents the expert’s quality, i.e. how much the aggregator trusts the expert. A pooling method
takes these distributions and weights as input and outputs a single distribution p. (Where do these
weights come from? How can one learn weights for experts? More on this later.)
Linear pooling is arguably the simplest of all reasonable pooling methods: a weighted arith-
metic mean of the probability distributions.
p =
m
X
i=1
wipi
Linear pooling is the most frequently used opinion pooling method across a wide range of appli-
cations, including meteorology, economics, and medical diagnoses [RG10]. Indeed, linear pooling
1

frequently outperforms attempts at more sophisticated pooling methods, which often lead to over-
fitting [Win+18].
Logarithmic pooling (sometimes called log-linear or geometric pooling) consists of taking a
weighted geometric mean of the probabilities and scaling appropriately.
p(j) = c
m
Y
i=1
(pi(j))wi.
Here, p(j) denotes the probability of the j-th outcome and c is a normalizing constant to make the
probabilities add to 1. The logarithmic pool has a natural interpretation as an average the experts’
Bayesian evidence (see Appendix A for details).
The linear and logarithmic pooling methods are by far the two most studied ones, see e.g.
[GZ86], [PR00], [KR08]. This is because they are simple and follow certain natural rules, which
we briefly discuss in Section 2. Furthermore, they are each optimal according to some natural
optimality metrics, see e.g. [Abb09].
1.2.
Proper scoring rules
A seemingly unrelated topic within probabilistic forecasting is the truthful elicitation of forecasts:
how can a principal structure a contract so as to elicit an expert’s probability distribution in a way
that incentivizes truthful reporting? This is usually done using a proper scoring rule.
A scoring rule is a function s that takes as input (1) a probability distribution over n outcomes1
and (2) a particular outcome, and assigns a score, or reward. The interpretation is that if the expert
reports a distribution p and event j comes to pass, then the expert receives reward s(p; j) from
the principal. A scoring rule is called proper if the expert’s expected score is strictly maximized by
reporting their probability distribution truthfully. That is, s is proper if
n
X
j=1
p(j)s(p; j) ≥
n
X
j=1
p(j)s(x; j)
for all x, with equality only for x = p. It is worth noting that properness is preserved under positive
affine transformations. That is, if s is proper, then s′(p; j) := as(p; j) + b is proper if a > 0.
Quadratic scoring rule
One example of a proper scoring rule is Brier’s quadratic scoring rule,
introduced in [Bri50]. It is given by
squad(p; j) := 2p(j) −
n
X
k=1
p(k)2.
The quadratic scoring rule can be interpreted as penalizing the expert by an amount equal to the
squared distance from their report p to the “true answer” δj (i.e. the vector with a 1 in the j-th
position and zeros elsewhere).
1We specify the domain of s more precisely in Section 3.
2

Logarithmic scoring rule
Another example of a proper scoring rule is the logarithmic scoring
rule, introduced in [Goo52]. It is given by
slog(p; j) := ln p(j).
The logarithmic rule is the only proper scoring rule for which an expert’s score only depends on the
probability assigned to the eventual outcome and not other outcomes [SAM66]. The quadratic and
logarithmic scoring rules are by far the most studied and most frequently used ones in practice.
Choice of scoring rule as a value judgment
There are infinitely many proper scoring rules.
How might a principal go about deciding which one to use? To gain some intuition, we will take
a closer look at the quadratic and logarithmic scoring rules in the case of n = 2 outcomes. In
Figure 1, for both of these scoring rules, we show the difference between the expert’s reward if a
given outcome happens and their reward if it does not happen, as a function of the probability that
they assign to the outcome.2
Figure 1: Difference between expert’s reward if an outcome happens and if it does not happen, as a function of the
expert’s report, for the quadratic and logarithmic scoring rules. For example, if the expert reports a 70% probability
of an outcome, then under the quadratic rule they receive a score of 2·0.7−0.72 −0.32 = 0.82 if the outcome happens
and 2 · 0.3 −0.72 −0.32 = 0.02 if it does not: a difference of 0.8. If rewarded with the logarithmic rule, this difference
would be 0.61.
This difference scales linearly with the expert’s report for the quadratic rule. Meanwhile, for
the logarithmic rule, the difference changes more slowly than for the quadratic rule for probabilities
in the middle, but much more quickly at the extremes. Informally speaking, this means that the
logarithmic rule indicates a preference (of the elicitor) for high precision close to 0 and 1, while
the quadratic rule indicates a more even preference for precision across [0, 1]. Put another way, an
elicitor who chooses to use the logarithmic scoring rule renders a judgment that the probabilities
0.01 and 0.001 are quite different; one who uses the quadratic rule indicates that these probabilities
are very similar.
On its surface, the elicitation of forecasts has seemingly little to do with their aggregation.
However, given that the choice of scoring rule implies a subjective judgment about how different
probabilities compare to one another, it makes sense to apply this judgment to the aggregation of
forecasts as well.
2We scale down the logarithmic rule by a factor of 2 ln 2 to make the two rules comparable. The factor 2 ln 2 was
chosen to make the range of values taken on by the Savage representations of the two scoring rules the same (see
Section 1.3).
3

As an example, consider the setting of weather prediction, with models playing the role of
experts. In such contexts we often care about low-probability extreme events: a 0.1% chance of
an imminent major hurricane may not be worth preparing for; a 1% chance could mean significant
preparations, and a 10% chance could mean mandatory evacuations. The need to distinguish very
unlikely events from somewhat unlikely events has two consequences. First, as discussed above,
this is a reason to use the logarithmic scoring rule to assess the quality of weather models. Second,
we wish to avoid the failure mode in which an ill-informed forecaster assigns a high probability
due to lack of evidence and thereby drowns out a better-informed low-probability forecast. We
would expect to encounter this failure mode with linear pooling; for example, if the more informed
model predicts a 0.1% chance and the less informed model predicts a 20% chance, linear pooling
with equal weights3 would predict roughly a 10% chance. Logarithmic pooling, by contrast, assigns
roughly a 1.6% chance to the event, avoiding this failure mode. In general, a calibrated model that
predicts a very low probability must have good evidence, so it may make sense to give the model
more weight.
By contrast, a consultant whose job is to determine the closest races in an election may not
much care about the difference between a 0.1% and a 1% chance of victory. After all, attention and
resources are generally devoted to races with highly uncertain outcomes. As such, it might make
sense to assess the qualities of forecast models using the quadratic scoring rule. Similarly, without
a compelling reason to pay extra attention to extreme probabilities, it may make more sense to
simply take the average of the forecasts’ opinions.
In the case of extreme weather prediction, we have argued in favor of using the logarithmic
scoring rule to assess the models and the logarithmic pooling method to aggregate them, for similar
reasons. In the case of political prediction for targeting close races, we have argued in favor of
the quadratic scoring rule and linear pooling, also for similar reasons. Could there be a formal
connection between proper scoring rules and opinion pooling methods that captures this intuition?
This brings us to the main focus of our paper: namely, we prove a novel correspondence between
proper scoring rules and opinion pooling methods.
1.3.
Our definitions
Before introducing the aforementioned correspondence, we need to introduce the Savage represen-
tation of a proper scoring rule.
Savage representation
A proper scoring rule has a unique representation in terms of its ex-
pected reward function G, i.e.
the expected score on an expert who believes (and reports) a
distribution p:
G(p) := Ej←p [s(p; j)] =
n
X
j=1
p(j)s(p; j).
This representation of s, introduced in [Sav71], is known as the Savage representation, though we
will usually refer to it as the expected reward function. Given that s is proper, G is strictly convex;
and conversely, given a strictly convex function G, one can re-derive s with the formula
s(p; j) = G(p) + ⟨g(p), δj −p⟩,
(1)
3Assigning equal weights make sense when there is not enough information to predict in advance which model will
be less informed.
4

where g is the gradient4 of G [GR07]. Pictorially, draw the tangent plane to G at p; then the
expert’s score if outcome j is realized is the height of the plane at δj.
The Savage representation of the quadratic scoring rule is Gquad(p) = Pn
j=1 p(j)2. The Savage
representation of the logarithmic scoring rule is Glog(p) = Pn
j=1 p(j) ln p(j).
The function g, which will be central to our paper, describes the difference in the expert’s
score depending on which outcome happens. More precisely, the vector (s(p; j1), . . . , s(p; jn)) is
exactly the vector g(p), except possibly for a uniform translation in all coordinates. For example,
s(p; j1)−s(p; j2) = g1(p)−g2(p); this is precisely the quantity plotted in Figure 1 for the quadratic
and logarithmic scoring rules. This observation about the function g motivates the connection that
we will establish between proper scoring rules and opinion pooling methods.
Quasi-arithmetic opinion pooling
We can now define our correspondence between proper
scoring rules and opinion pooling methods.
Given a proper scoring rule s used for elicitation,
and given m probability distributions p1, . . . , pm and expert weights w1, . . . , wm, the aggregate
distribution p∗that we suggest is the one satisfying
g(p∗) =
m
X
i=1
wig(pi).
(In Section 3 we will define this notion more precisely using subgradients of G instead of gradients;
this will ensure that p∗is well defined, i.e. that it exists and is unique.) This definition of p∗can
be restated as the forecast that minimizes the weighted average Bregman divergence (with respect
to G) to all experts’ forecasts.
We refer to this pooling method as quasi-arithmetic pooling with respect to g (or the scoring
rule s), or QA pooling for short.5 To get a sense of QA pooling, let us determine what this method
looks like for the quadratic and logarithmic scoring rules.
QA pooling with respect to the quadratic scoring rule
We have gquad(x) = (2x1, . . . , 2xn),
so we are looking for the p∗such that
(2p∗(1), . . . , 2p∗(n)) =
m
X
i=1
wi(2pi(1), . . . , 2pi(n)).
This is p∗= Pm
i=1 wipi. Therefore, QA pooling for the quadratic scoring rule is precisely linear
pooling.
QA pooling with respect to the logarithmic scoring rule
We have glog(x) = (ln x1 +
1, . . . , ln xn + 1), so we are looking for the p∗such that
(ln p∗(1) + 1, . . . , ln p∗(n) + 1) =
m
X
i=1
wi(ln pi(1) + 1, . . . , ln pi(n) + 1).
By exponentiating the components on both sides, we find that p∗(j) = c Qn
i=1(pi(j))wi for all j, for
some proportionality constant c. This is precisely the definition of the logarithmic pooling method.
(The constant c comes from the fact that values of g(·) should be interpreted modulo translation
4Or a subgradient, if G is not differentiable.
5This term comes from the notion of quasi-arithmetic means: given a continuous, strictly increasing function f
and values x1, . . . , xm , the quasi-arithmetic mean with respect to f of these values is f −1(1/m P
i f(xi)).
5

by the all-ones vector; see Remark 3.12.)
The fact that this pooling scheme maps the two most well-studied scoring rules to the two
most well-studied opinion pooling methods has not been noted previously, to our knowledge. This
correspondence suggests that — beyond just our earlier informal justification — QA pooling with
respect to a given scoring rule may be a fundamental concept. The rest of this paper argues that
this is indeed the case.
This correspondence may have practical implications for forecasters. While the quadratic and
logarithmic scoring rules are both ubiquitous in practice, linear pooling is far more common than
logarithmic pooling [RG10].
This is despite empirical evidence that logarithmic pooling often
outperforms linear pooling [Sat+14b]. The connection that we establish between the logarithmic
scoring rule and logarithmic pooling provides further reason to think that logarithmic pooling has
been somewhat overlooked.
1.4.
Our results
(Section 4) Max-min optimality
Suppose that a principal asks you to issue a forecast and will
pay you according to s. You are not knowledgeable on the subject but know some experts whom
you trust on the matter (perhaps to varying degrees). You sub-contract the experts, promising
to pay each expert i according to wi · s. By using QA pooling according to s on the experts’
forecasts, you guarantee yourself a profit; in fact, this strategy maximizes your worst-case profit,
and is the unique such report. Furthermore, this profit is the same for all outcomes. This fact can
be interpreted to mean that you have, in a sense, pooled the forecasts “correctly”: you do not care
which outcome will come to pass, which means that you have correctly factored the expert opinions
into your forecast. We give an additional interpretation of this optimality notion as maximizing an
aggregator’s guaranteed improvement over choosing an expert at random.
(Section 5) Learning expert weights
Opinion pooling entails assigning weights to experts.
Where do these weights come from? How might one learn them from experience?
Suppose we have a fixed proper scoring rule s, and further consider fixing the reports of the
m experts as well as the eventual outcome. One can ask: what does the score of the aggregate
distribution (per QA pooling with respect to s) look like as a function of w, the vector of expert
weights? We prove that this function is concave. This is useful because it allows for online convex
optimization over expert weights.
Theorem (informal). Let s be a bounded proper scoring rule.6
For time steps t = 1 . . . T, m
experts report forecasts to an aggregator, who combines them into a forecast pt using QA pooling
with respect to s and suffers a loss of −s(pt; jt), where jt is the outcome at time step t. If the
aggregator updates the experts’ weights using online gradient descent, then the aggregator’s regret
compared to the best weights in hindsight is O(
√
T).
The aforementioned concavity property is a nontrivial fact that demonstrates an advantage of
QA pooling over e.g. linear and logarithmic pooling: these pooling methods satisfy the concavity
property for some proper scoring rules s but not others.
(Section 6) Natural axiomatization for QA pooling methods
[Kol30] and [Nag30] inde-
pendently came up with a simple axiomatization of quasi-arithmetic means.
We show how to
6For which QA pooling is well defined (we discuss this below).
6

change these axioms to allow for weighted means; the resulting axiomatization is a natural char-
acterization of all quasi-arithmetic pooling methods in the case of n = 2 outcomes. Furthermore,
although quasi-arithmetic means are typically defined for scalar-valued functions, we demonstrate
that these axioms can be extended to describe quasi-arithmetic means with respect to vector-valued
functions, as is necessary for our purposes if n > 2. This extension is nontrivial but natural, and
to our knowledge has not previously been described.7
2.
Related work
Opinion pooling
[CW07] categorize mathematical approaches to opinion pooling as either Bayesian
or axiomatic. A Bayesian approach to this problem is one that entails Bayes updating on each ex-
pert’s opinion.
While quite natural, Bayesian opinion pooling is difficult to apply and, in full
generality, computationally intractable. This is because the Bayes updates must fully account for
interdependencies between expert opinions.
By contrast, axiomatic approaches do not make assumptions about the structure of information
underlying the experts’ opinions; instead, they aim to come up with pooling methods that satisfy
certain axioms or desirable properties.
Such axioms include unanimity preservation, eventwise
independence, and external Bayesianality; see e.g. [DL14] for statements of these axioms. For
n > 2 outcomes, linear pooling is the only method that is both unanimity preserving and eventwise
independent [AW80]; however, it is not externally Bayesian. On the other hand, logarithmic pooling
is both unanimity preserving and externally Bayesian [Gen84]. It is not the only such method, but it
is arguably the most natural. Our approach has an axiomatic flavor (though it differs substantially
from previous axiomatic approaches).
The earliest comprehensive treatment of opinion pooling in a mathematical setting was by
Genest and Zidek [GZ86].
See [CW07] and [DL14] for more recent high-level overviews of the
subject, including discussion of both Bayesian and axiomatic approaches, as well as discussion of
the axioms we discussed in Section 1.1. Recent work on Bayesian opinion pooling includes [CL13],
[Sat+14a], [FCK15], and [ABS18]. Finally, see [FES20] for work on learning weights for linear
pooling under a quadratic loss function; this is an instance of our more general theory in Section 5.
For a more detailed discussion of axiomatic approaches, see [ACR12]. See also [Abb09] for a non-
Bayesian approach that is closely related to ours; our work generalizes [Abb09, Proposition 4].
Part of our work provides an alternative interpretation of prior work on pooling via minimizing
Bregman divergence, see e.g. [Ada14] and [Pet19]. (We define Bregman divergence in Section 3.)
Concretely, [Pet19, §4] defines a notion of pooling analogous to ours, though in a different context.
The main focus of their line of work is on connecting opinion pooling to Bregman divergence; our
approach connects opinion pooling to proper scoring rules, and a connection to Bregman divergence
falls naturally out of this pursuit.
Scoring rules
The literature on scoring rules is quite large; we recommend [GR07] for a thorough
but technical overview, or [Car16] for a less technical overview that focuses more on applications
(while still introducing the basic theory). Seminal work on the theory behind scoring rules includes
Brier’s paper introducing the quadratic rule [Bri50], Good’s paper introducing the logarithmic rule
[Goo52], and Savage’s work on the general theory of proper scoring rules [Sav71]. Additionally, see
[DM14] for an overview of various families of proper scoring rules.
7For n > 2, these axioms characterize the class of all QA pooling methods with respect proper scoring rules that
satisfy convex exposure, a natural condition that we introduce in Section 3.
7

Max-min optimality
Gr¨unwald and Dawid establish a connection between minimizing worst-
case expected loss and maximizing a generalized notion of entropy [GD04]. The application of
their quite general work to the domain of proper scoring rules states that a forecaster who seeks
to maximize their worst-case score (over outcomes) ought to report the minimizer of the expected
reward function of the scoring rule. Although they do not discuss opinion pooling, their work is
closely related to our Theorem 4.1; we discuss the connection in more detail in Section 4.
Dual averaging
One perspective on QA pooling is that, instead of directly averaging experts’
forecasts, QA pooling prescribes considering forecasts as elements in the dual space of gradients
(of the function G) and taking the average in this space before converting the result back to the
primal space of probabilities. Gradient methods in online machine learning often take the sum of
gradients of losses. Taking the average is of gradients is a less ubiquitous technique known as dual
averaging, which was introduced by Nesterov [Nes09] and generalized further by Xiao [Xia10]. The
contexts or QA pooling and dual averaging are quite different, and interpretations of QA pooling
in the context of dual averaging appear to be fairly unnatural.
Aggregation via prediction markets
One common way to aggregate probabilistic forecasts is
through prediction markets, some of which are based on scoring rules. [Han03] introduced market
scoring rules (MSRs), in which experts are sequentially presented with an opportunity to update
an aggregate forecast and are rewarded (or penalized) by the amount that their update changed the
aggregate prediction’s eventual score. [CP07] introduced cost-function markets, in which a market
maker sells n types of shares — one for each outcome — where the price of a share depends on
the number of shares sold thus far according to some cost function. They established a connection
between cost-function markets and MSRs, where a market with a given cost function will behave
the same way as a certain MSR. In particular, the cost function C of a cost function market is
the convex dual of the expected reward function G of the proper scoring rule associated with the
corresponding MSR [ACV13, §8.3].
Subsequent work explored this area further, tying cost-function market making to online learning
of probability distributions [CV10] [ACV13]. This work differs from ours in that the goal of their
online learning problem is to learn a probability distribution over outcomes, whereas our goal in
Section 5 is to learn expert weights.
QA pooling has a simple interpretation in terms of cost function markets: for the cost function
market corresponding to the scoring rule s, let qi be the quantity vector that implies each expert
i’s probability pi (or in other terms, i would buy a bundle qi of shares as the first participant in the
market). Then the QA pool with respect to s is the probability implied by the weighted average
quantity vector P
i wiqi.
This interpretation stands in contrast to most past work on MSRs and cost function markets.
Typically experts trade in series rather than in parallel, and incentives are set up so that an expert
brings the market into alignment with their own opinion, rather than an aggregate. Thus, in the
well-studied setting of traders whose beliefs do not depend on previous traders’ actions, the final
state of such a market reflects only the beliefs of the most recent trader, rather than an aggregate
of beliefs. One exception to this paradigm is [Hei+18], which studies traders who trade in series,
although in a completely different context.
Arbitrage from collusion
Part of our work can be viewed as a generalization of previous work
by Chun and Shachter done in a different context: namely, preventing colluding experts from
exploiting arbitrage opportunities [CS11]. The authors show that for the case of n = 2 outcomes,
8

if experts are rewarded with the same scoring rule s, preventing this is impossible: the experts can
successfully collude by all reporting what we are calling the QA pool of their reports with respect
to s. Our Theorem 4.1 recovers this result as a special case. See [Che+14] for related work in
the context of wagering mechanisms and [Fre+20] for follow-up work on preventing arbitrage from
colluding experts.
Prediction with expert advice
In Section 5 we discuss learning expert weights online. The
online learning literature is vast, but our approach fits into the framework of prediction with expert
advice. In this setting, at each time step each expert submits a report (in our context a probability
distribution). The agent then submits a report based on the experts’ submissions, and suffers a
loss depending on this report and the eventual outcome. See [CBL06] for a detailed account of this
setting; the authors prove a variety of no-regret bounds in this setting, ranging (depending form
the setting) from O(
√
T) to O(1). Our setting is an ambitious one: while typically one desires low
regret compared to the best expert in hindsight, we desire low regret compared to the best mixture
of experts in hindsight. In [CBL06, §3.3], the authors discuss this more ambitious goal, proving (in
our terminology) that for a certain class of losses — bounded exp-concave losses — it is possible
to achieve O(log T) regret in comparison with the best linear pool of experts in hindsight. This
setting is different from ours in two important ways: first, the losses that we consider are not in
general exp-concave (e.g. the quadratic loss); and second, the authors consider linear pooling for
any loss, whereas we consider QA pooling with respect to the loss function.
Quasi-arithmetic means
Our notion of quasi-arithmetic pooling is an adaptation (and exten-
sion to higher dimensions) of the existing notion of quasi-arithmetic means. These were originally
defined and axiomatized independently in [Kol30] and [Nag30]. Acz´el generalized this work to in-
clude weighted quasi-arithmetic means [Acz48], though these means have weights baked in rather
than taking them as inputs, which is different from our setting. See [Gra+11, §3.1] for an overview
of this topic.
3.
Preliminaries
Throughout this paper, we will let m be the number of experts and use the index i to refer to any
particular expert. We will let n be the number of outcomes and use the index j to refer to any
particular outcome. We will also let ∆n be the standard simplex in Rn, i.e. the one with vertices
δ1, . . . , δn. (Here, δj denotes the vector with a 1 in the j-th coordinate and zeros elsewhere.)
3.1.
Proper scoring rules
A scoring rule is a function s : ∆n × [n] →R ∪{−∞}. The interpretation of s is that an expert
receives reward s(p; j) if they report p and outcome j happens. A scoring rule s is proper if for all
p ∈∆n, we have
Ej←p [s(p; j)] ≥Ej←p [s(x; j)]
for all x ∈∆n, with equality only when x = p. (Here, j ←p means that j is drawn randomly from
the probability distribution p.)8 We will henceforth assume that s is regular, meaning that s(·; j)
is real-valued for all j, except possibly that s(p; j) = −∞if pj = 0 [GR07, Definition 2].
8Some authors refer to such scoring rules as strictly proper while others define “proper” to entail strictness; we
choose the latter convection.
9

We define the forecast domain D associated with s to be the set of forecasts p such that s(p; j)
is real-valued for all j. When discussing forecast aggregation, we will assume that all forecasts
belong to D.9
Given a proper scoring rule s, we define its expected reward function G : ∆n →R by
G(p) := Ej←p [s(p; j)] =
n
X
j=1
p(j)s(p; j).
We will frequently be relying on an alternative representation of s – sometimes known as the
Savage representation – in terms of G.
Proposition 3.1 ([GR07, Theorem 2]). A regular scoring rule s is proper if and only if
s(p; j) = G(p) + ⟨g(p), δj −p⟩,
(2)
for some convex function G : ∆n →R and subgradient function10 g of G. The function G is then
the expected reward function of s.
We will henceforth assume that s(·; j) is continuous on ∆n for all j, as is G(·); to our knowledge,
this is the case for all frequently-used proper scoring rules.11 By Equation 2, this means that g is
also continuous on ∆n.12 A convex function with a continuous finite subgradient is differentiable
[BC11, Proposition 17.41], which means that G is differentiable on the interior of ∆n, with gradient
g.
The important intuition to keep in mind for Equation 2 is that the score of an expert who
reports p is determined by drawing the tangent plane to G at p; the value of this plane at δj, where
j is the outcome that happens, is the expert’s score.
We refer to g as the exposure function of s. We borrow this term from finance, where exposure
refers to how much an agent stands to gain or lose from various possible outcomes — informally
speaking, how much the agent cares about which outcome will happen. If we view G(p)−⟨g(p), p⟩
as the agent’s “baseline profit,” then the j-th component of g(p) is the amount that the agent
stands to gain (or lose) on top of the baseline profit if outcome j happens.
Following e.g. [GR07], we give a geometric intuition for Proposition 3.1 to help explain why the
properness of s corresponds to the convexity of G; this intuition will be helpful for understanding
Bregman divergence (below) and the proofs in Section 4.
Consider Figure 2, which depicts some G in the n = 2 outcome case, with the x-axis corre-
sponding to the probability of Outcome 1 (see Remark 3.5 for formal details). Suppose that the
expert believes that the probability Outcome 1 is 0.7. If the expert reports p = 0.7, then their
reward in the cases of Outcome 1 and Outcome 2 are the y-values of the rightmost and leftmost
points on the red line, respectively. Thus, in expectation, the expert’s reward is the y-value of the
red point. If instead the expert lies and reports p = 0.4 (say), then the y-values of the rightmost
and leftmost points on the blue line represent the expert’s rewards in the cases of Outcome 1 and
9This choice removes from consideration cases such as two experts reporting (1, 0) and (0, 1) under the logarithmic
scoring rule; aggregating these forecasts using our method is tantamount to adding positive and negative infinity.
10That is, g satisfies G(y) ≥G(x) + ⟨g(x), y −x⟩for all x, y. Note that gi(x) may be −∞if xi = 0; see [Wag21]
for an examination of subgradients of functions to the extended reals.
11For s, continuity is with respect to the standard topology on R ∪{−∞}, i.e. the one that includes sets of the
form [−∞, r) as open sets.
12Continuity of each component gℓof g is (as with s) with respect to the standard topology on R ∪{−∞}. To see
that gℓis continuous at a given p, consider the limit of Equation 2 as x →p with j = ℓif pj = 0 and j ̸= ℓif pj ̸= 0.
10

Outcome 2, respectively. In this case, since Outcome 1 is still 70% likely, the expert’s expected
reward is the y-value of the blue point. Because G is strictly convex, the blue point is strictly below
the red point; that is, the expert is strictly better off reporting p = 0.7. This argument holds in
full generality: for any strictly convex function G in any number of dimensions.
Figure 2: A convex function G, with tangent lines drawn at x = 0.7 and x = 0.4. If an expert believes that the
probability of an event is 0.7, their expected score if they report p = 0.7 is the y-value of the red point; if they instead
report p = 0.4, their expected score is the y-value of the blue point. Because G is convex, the red point is guaranteed
to be above the blue point, so the expert is incentivized to be truthful.
We will find Bregman divergence to be a useful concept for some of our proofs.
Definition 3.2 (Bregman divergence). Given a differentiable, strictly convex function G : S →R
with gradient g, where S is a convex subset of Rn, and given p, q ∈S, the Bregman divergence
between p and q with respect to G is
DG(p ∥q) := G(p) −G(q) −⟨g(q), p −q⟩.
(Note that Bregman divergence is not symmetric.) A geometric interpretation of DG(p ∥q)
is: if you draw the tangent plane to G at q, how far below G(p) the value of that plane will
be at p. For example, the distance between the red and blue points in Figure 2 is the Bregman
divergence between the expert’s belief (0.7, 0.3) and their report (0.4, 0.6). This gives the following
interpretation of Bregman divergence in the context of proper scoring rules:
Remark 3.3. If G is the expected reward function of a proper scoring rule, then DG(p ∥q) is the
expected reward lost by reporting q when your belief is p. Put otherwise, DG(p ∥q) measures the
“wrongness” of the report q relative to a correct answer of p.
Proposition 3.4 (Well-known facts about Bregman divergence).
• DG(p ∥q) ≥0, with equality only when p = q.
• For any q, DG(x ∥q) is a strictly convex function of x.
Finally, we make a note about interpreting the n = 2 outcome case in one dimension.
Remark 3.5. Because ∆n is (n −1)-dimensional, we can think of the case of n = 2 outcomes
in one dimension. All probabilities in are of the form (p, 1 −p); we map ∆2 to [0, 1] via the first
coordinate. Thus, we let G(p) := G(p, 1 −p). We let g(p) := G′(p) = ⟨g(p, 1 −p), (1, −1)⟩. The
tangent line to G at p, e.g. as in Figure 2, will intersect the line x = 1 at s(p; 1) (i.e. the score if
Outcome 1 happens) and intersect the line x = 0 at s(p; 2) (i.e. the score if Outcome 2 happens).
This formulation will be helpful when discussing the two-outcome case, e.g. in Section 6.
11

3.2.
Quasi-arithmetic pooling
We now introduce the central concept of this paper, quasi-arithmetic pooling.
Definition 3.6 (quasi-arithmetic pooling). Let s be a proper scoring rule with expected reward
function G and exposure function g. Given forecasts p1, . . . , pm ∈D with non-negative weights
w1, . . . , wm adding to 1, the quasi-arithmetic (QA) pool of these forecasts with respect to s (or
with respect to g), denoted by
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi), is the unique p∗∈∆n such that Pm
i=1 wig(pi) is a
subgradient of G at p∗.
If the forecasts and weights are clear from context, we may simply write p∗to refer to their
quasi-arithmetic pool; or, if only the forecasts are clear, we may write p∗
w, where w is the vector of
weights.
Remark 3.7. Equivalently [Roc70b, Theorem 23.5], we can define
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi) := arg min
x G(x) −⟨x,
m
X
i=1
wig(pi)⟩.
(3)
Also equivalently, we can define
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi) := arg min
x
m
X
i=1
wiDG(x ∥pi).
This expression differs from the one in Equation 3 by a constant: namely, P
i wi(⟨pi, g(pi)⟩−G(pi)).
The QA-pool is well-defined, i.e. exists and is unique. It is unique because a strictly convex
function cannot have the same subgradient at two different points [Wag21, Lemma 3.11]. It exists
because G(x) −⟨x, P
i wig(pi)⟩is continuous and thus attains its minimum on the (compact)
domain ∆n.
In light of the fact that DG(p ∥q) is the expected reward lost by an expert who, believing
p, reports q (see Remark 3.3), the Bregman divergence formulation of QA pooling gives another
natural interpretation.
Remark 3.8. Consider a proper scoring rule s with forecasts p1, . . . , pm with weights w1, . . . , wm.
The QA pool of these forecasts is the forecast p∗that, if it is the correct answer (i.e. if the outcome
is drawn according to p∗), would minimize the expected loss of a randomly chosen (according to
w) expert relative to reporting p∗.
In this sense, QA pooling reflects a compromise between experts: it is the probability that, if
it were correct, would make the experts’ forecast least wrong overall.
Remark 3.9. Since the Bregman divergence is convex in its first argument, computing the QA
pool is a matter of convex optimization. In particular, given oracle access to g, the ellipsoid method
can be used to efficiently find the QA pool of a list of forecasts.
Note that although Definition 3.6 only specifies that p∗∈∆n, in fact it lies in D:
Claim 3.10. For any p1, . . . , pm and w1, . . . , wm, the QA pool p∗lies in D.
12

Proof. Let x ∈∆n \ D. We show that P
i wig(pi) is not a subgradient of G at x.
We have s(x; j) = −∞for some j (satisfying xj = 0), so ⟨g(x), δj −x⟩= −∞. Since g is
continuous, for sufficiently small ϵ, we have
⟨g(x + ϵ′(δj −x)), δj −x⟩< ⟨
X
i
wig(pi), δj −x⟩
for all ϵ′ ≤ϵ. This means that
G(x + ϵ(δj −x)) −G(x) < ⟨
X
i
wig(pi), ϵ(δj −x)⟩,
so P
i wig(pi) is not a subgradient of G at x, as desired.
While our max-min optimality result (Section 4) holds unconditionally, our results in Section 5
and 6 require that our proper scoring rule s satisfy a property that we term convex exposure.
Definition 3.11 (convex exposure). A proper scoring rule s with forecast domain D has convex
exposure if the range of its exposure function g on D is a convex set.
The key fact about proper scoring rules with convex exposure is that for all p1, . . . , pm and
w1, . . . , wm, P
i wig(pi) = g(x) for some x ∈D. This means that P
i wig(pi) is a subgradient of
G at x, so x is the weighted QA pool of the pi’s. In other words, we may write
g(p∗) =
X
i
wig(pi),
(4)
where p∗is the weighted QA pool of the given forecasts. The convex exposure property thus allows
us to write down relations between exposures of forecasts that would otherwise not necessarily be
true.
The quadratic and logarithmic scoring rules, as well as all proper scoring rules for binary
outcomes, have convex exposure. In Appendix D we explore in more depth the question of which
commonly used proper scoring rules have convex exposure property.
Remark 3.12. Because the domain of G is a subset of ∆n (and thus lies in a plane that is
orthogonal to the all-ones vector 1n), it makes the most sense to think of its gradient function g
as taking on values in Rn modulo translation by the all-ones vector 1n; we will denote this space
by Rn/T(1n). Sometimes we find it convenient to treat G as a function of n variables rather than
n −1 variables out of convenience, thus artificially extending the domain of G outside of the plane
containing ∆n. The component of the gradient of G that is parallel to 1n is not relevant.13
4.
QA pooling as a max-min optimal method
Our goal is to give a formal justification for quasi-arithmetic pooling. Remark 3.8 established that
the QA pool is optimizes (i.e. minimizes) the weighted average Bregman divergence to the experts’
forecasts. This section gives another justification for QA pooling in terms of max-min optimality.
We will give additional justifications in later sections.
13Formally, consider the change of coordinates given by zj = xn −xj for j ≤n −1 and zn = P
j xj, so that the
domain of G lies in the plane zn = 1. Then for j ≤n −1,
∂G
∂zj at a given point in the domain of G does not change
if 1 is substituted for zn; only
∂G
∂zn changes (to zero). Equivalently in terms of our original coordinates, the change
that g undergoes when we consider G to be a function only defined on D instead of Rn is precisely a projection of g
onto {x ∈Rn : P
i xi = 0}.
13

Theorem 4.1. Let s be a proper scoring rule and let g be the exposure function of s. Fix any
forecasts p1, . . . , pm ∈D with non-negative weights w1, . . . , wm adding to 1. Define
u(p; j) := s(p; j) −
m
X
i=1
wis(pi; j).
Then the quantity minj u(p; j) is uniquely maximized by setting p to p∗:=
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi). Further-
more, this minimum (across outcomes j) is achieved simultaneously by all j with p∗
j > 0. This
quantity is non-negative, and is positive unless all reports pi with positive weights are equal.
One interpretation for this theorem statement is as follows. Consider an agent who is tasked
with submitting a forecast, and who will be paid according to s. The agent decides to sub-contract
m experts to get their opinions, paying expert i the amount wis(pi; j) if the expert reports pi and
outcome j happens. (Perhaps experts whom the agent trusts more have higher wi’s.) Finally, the
agent reports some (any) forecast p. Then u(p; j) is precisely the agent’s profit (utility).
The quantity minj u(p; j) is the agent’s minimum possible profit over all outcomes. It is natural
to ask which report p maximizes this quantity. Theorem 4.1 states that this maximum is achieved
by the QA pool of the experts’ forecasts with respect to s, and that this is the unique maximizer.
A possible geometric intuition to keep in mind for the proof (below): for each expert i, draw
the plane tangent to G at pi. For any j, the value of this plane at δj is s(pi; j). Now take the
weighted average of all m planes; this is a new plane whose intersection with any δj is the total
reward received by the experts if j happens. Since G is convex, this plane lies below G. To figure
out which point maximizes the agent’s guaranteed profit, push the plane upward until it hits G. It
will hit G at p∗and the agent’s worst-case profit will be the vertical distance that the plane was
pushed.
Proof of Theorem 4.1. By Equation 3, computing the QA pool amounts to finding the minimizer
p∗of the function G(x) −⟨x, Pm
i=1 wig(pi)⟩over ∆n. If p∗is in the interior of ∆n, then this
expression is differentiable at p∗. If p∗is on the boundary, then the expression can be extended
to a differentiable function in a neighborhood around p∗.14 Thus, applying the KKT conditions
[BV04, §5.5.3] tells us that
g(p∗) =
m
X
i=1
wig(pi) + λ1n + µ
for some λ ∈R and µ ∈Rn such that µj ≥0 and µj = 0 if p∗
j > 0. We therefore have
u(p∗; j) = s(p∗; j) −
X
i
wis(pi; j)
= G(p∗) + ⟨g(p∗), δj −p∗⟩−
X
i
wi(G(pi) + ⟨g(pi), δj −pi⟩)
= G(p∗) −
X
i
wiG(pi) + ⟨
X
i
wig(pi) + λ1n + µ, δj −p∗⟩−
X
i
wi⟨g(pi), δj −pi⟩
= G(p∗) −
X
i
wiG(pi) +
X
i
wi⟨g(pi), pi −p∗⟩+ ⟨λ1n + µ, δj −p∗⟩
14This follows e.g. from [AM15, Theorem 1.8], where we take C in the theorem statement to be a compact subset
of ∆n containing p∗where G is differentiable. Here we use that p∗∈D; by continuity of g, such a subset necessarily
exists.
14

= G(p∗) −
X
i
wiG(pi) +
X
i
wi⟨g(pi), pi −p∗⟩+ µj
=
X
i
wiDG(p∗∥pi) + µj.
The second-to-last step follows from the fact that ⟨λ1n, δj −p∗⟩= 0 and ⟨µ, p∗⟩= 0, and the last
step follows by the definition of Bregman divergence. Since µj = 0 for every j such that p∗
j > 0
(of which there is at least one), the minimum of u(p∗; j) over j is achieved simultaneously for all j
with p∗
j > 0, and this minimum is equal to P
i wiDG(p∗∥pi). This quantity is non-negative, and
positive except when all pi’s with positive weights are equal.
Finally we show that x = p∗maximizes minj u(x; j). Suppose that for some report q we have
that minj u(q; j) ≥minj u(p∗; j). Then u(q; j) ≥u(p∗; j) for every j such that p∗
j > 0. But this
means that the expected score (according to s) of an expert who believes p∗is larger if the expert
reports q than if the expert reports p∗. This contradicts the fact that s is proper.
Remark 4.2. We can reformulate Theorem 4.1 as follows: suppose that an agent has access to
forecasts p1, . . . , pm and needs to issue a forecast, for which the agent will be rewarded using a
proper scoring rule s. The agent can improve upon selecting an expert at random according to
weights w1, . . . , wm, no matter the outcome j, by reporting p∗. This improvement is the same no
matter the outcome – so long as the outcome is assigned positive probability by p∗– and is a strict
improvement unless all forecasts with positive weights are the same.
Remark 4.3. Theorem 4.1 is closely related to work by Gr¨unwald and Dawid that establishes
a connection between entropy maximization and worst-case expected loss minimization [GD04].
Their work studies a generalized notion of entropy functions that, for the case of a proper scoring
rule s, is equal to the negative of the expected reward function G. They show that the forecast x
that maximizes entropy (minimizes G) also maximizes an expert’s worst-case score (over outcomes
j). Considering instead the entropy function ⟨x, P
i wig(pi)⟩−G(x) yields results that are very
similar to our Theorem 4.1.
In particular, if D is a closed set or an open set, then the max-
min result in Theorem 4.1 can be derived from [GD04, Theorem 5.2] and [GD04, Theorem 6.2],
respectively. However, our proof below captures cases that their results do not address. See also
[CHL19, Lemma 1], from which (upon considering the scoring rule with expected reward function
G(x) −⟨x, P
i wig(pi)⟩) yields the simultaneity result of Theorem 4.1 if p∗lies in the interior of
∆n.
5.
Convex losses and learning expert weights
Thus far, when discussing QA pooling, we have regarded expert weights as given. Where do these
weights come from? As demonstrated by the results in this section, if the proper scoring rule s has
convex exposure (see Definition 3.11), these weights can be learned from experience. This learning
property for weights falls out of the following key observation, which states that an agent’s score is
a concave function of the weights it uses for the experts.
Theorem 5.1. Let s be a proper scoring rule with convex exposure and forecast domain D, and fix
any p1, . . . , pm ∈D. Given a weight vector w = (w1, . . . , wm) ∈∆m, define the weight-score of w
for an outcome j as
WSj(w) := s


m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi); j

.
15

Then for every j ∈[n], WSj(w) a concave function of w.
We defer the proof, along with related commentary and results, to Appendix B. The basic idea
of the proof is that for any two weight vectors v and w and any c ∈[0, 1], the quantity
WSj(cv + (1 −c)w) −cWSj(v) −(1 −c)WSj(w)
can be expressed as a sum of Bregman divergences, and is therefore non-negative.
Remark 5.2. Theorem 5.1 would not hold if the pooling operator in the definition of WS were
replaced by linear pooling or by logarithmic pooling.15 This is an advantage of QA pooling over
using the linear or logarithmic method irrespective of the scoring rule.
We now state the no-regret result that we have alluded to. The algorithm referenced in the
statement is an application of the standard online gradient descent algorithm (see e.g. [Haz19,
Theorem 3.1]) to our particular setting. We defer both the algorithm and the proof of Theorem 5.3
to Appendix B.
Theorem 5.3. Let s be a bounded proper scoring rule with convex exposure and forecast domain
D. For time steps t = 1 . . . T, an agent chooses a weight vector wt ∈∆m. The agent then receives
a score of
s


m
M
g
i=1
(pt
i, wt
i); jt

,
where pt
1, . . . , pt
m ∈D and jt ∈[n] are chosen adversarially. By choosing wt according to Algo-
rithm B.3 (online gradient descent on the experts’ weights), the agent achieves O(
√
T) regret in
comparison with the best weight vector in hindsight. In particular, if M is an upper bound16 on
∥g∥2, then for every w∗∈∆m we have
T
X
t=1
s


m
M
g
i=1
(pt
i, w∗
i ); jt

−s


m
M
g
i=1
(pt
i, wt
i); jt

≤3√mM
√
T.
This result is quite strong in that it does not merely achieve low regret compared to the best
expert, but in fact compared to the best possible weighted pool of experts in hindsight. This is a
substantial distinction, as it is possible for a mixture of experts to substantially outperform any
individual expert.
6.
Axiomatization of QA pooling
In this section, we aim to show that the class of all quasi-arithmetic pooling operators is a natural
one, by showing that these operators are precisely those which satisfy a natural set of axioms.
[Kol30] and [Nag30] independently considered the class of quasi-arithmetic means. Given an
interval I ⊆R and a continuous, injective function f : I →R, the quasi-arithmetic mean with
15For a counterexample to logarithmic pooling, consider n = 2, let s be the quadratic scoring rule, p1 = (0.1, 0.9),
p2 = (0.5, 0.5), j = 1, v = (1, 0), w = (0, 1), and c = 1
2. For a counterexample to linear pooling, consider n = 2, let
s be given by G(p1, p2) =
p
p2
1 + p2
2 (this is known as the spherical scoring rule), p1 = (0, 1), p2 = (0.2, 0.8), j = 1,
v = (1, 0), w = (0, 1), and c = 1
2.
16This bound M exists because s is bounded by assumption, and so g is also bounded (this follows from Equation 2).
16

respect to f, or f-mean, is the function Mf that takes as input x1, . . . , xm ∈I (for any m ≥1) and
outputs
Mf(x1, . . . , xm) := f−1
f(x1) + · · · + f(xm)
m

.
For example, the arithmetic mean corresponds to f(x) = x; the quadratic to f(x) = x2; the
geometric to f(x) = log x; and the harmonic to f(x) = −1
x .
Kolmogorov proved that the class of quasi-arithmetic means is precisely the class of functions
M : S∞
m=1 Im →I satisfying the following natural properties:17
(1) M(x1, . . . , xm) is continuous and strictly increasing in each variable.
(2) M is symmetric in its arguments.
(3) M(x, x, . . . , x) = x.
(4) M(x1, . . . , xk, xk+1, . . . , xm) = M(y, . . . , y, xk+1, . . . , xm), where y := M(x1, . . . , xk) appears
k times on the right-hand side. Informally, a subset of arguments to the mean function can
be replaced with their mean.
The four properties listed above can be viewed as an axiomatization of quasi-arithmetic means.
Our notion of quasi-arithmetic pooling is exactly that of a quasi-arithmetic mean, except that
it is more general in two ways. First, it allows for weights to accompany the arguments to the
mean. Second, we are considering quasi-arithmetic means with respect to vector-valued functions
g. In the n = 2 outcome case, g can be considered a scalar-valued function since it is defined
on a one-dimensional space (see Remark 3.5 for details); but in general we cannot treat g as
scalar-valued.18
Our goal is to extend the above axiomatization of quasi-arithmetic means in these two ways:
first (in Section 6.1) to include weights as arguments, and second (in Section 6.2) to general n
(while still allowing arbitrary weights).
6.1.
Generalizing to include weights as arguments
The objects that we will be studying in this section are ones of the form (p, w), where w ≥0 and
p ∈D. In this subsection, D is a two-outcome forecast domain, whose elements we will identify
with by the probability of the first outcome (see Remark 3.5).19
We will fix the set D for the
remainder of the subsection. Our results generalize to any interval of R (as in Kolmogorov’s work),
but we focus on forecast domains since that is our application.
Definition 6.1. A weighted forecast is an element of D ×R>0: a probability and a positive weight.
Given a weighted forecast Π = (p, w) we define pr(Π) := p and wt(Π) := w.
We will thinking of the output of pooling operators as weighted forecasts. This is a simple
extension of our earlier definition of quasi-arithmetic pooling (Definition 3.6), which only output a
probability.
17Nagumo also provided a characterization, though with slightly different properties.
18Another difference is that in the n = 2 case, we are restricting D to be an interval from 0 to 1, though this is not
a fundamental difference for the purposes of this section.
19Proper scoring rules for two outcomes can have four possible forecast domains: [0, 1], [0, 1), (0, 1], and (0, 1).
17

Definition 6.2 (Quasi-arithmetic pooling with arbitrary weights (n = 2)). Given a continuous,
strictly increasing function g : D →R, and weighted forecasts Π1 = (p1, w1), . . . , Πm = (pm, wm),
define the quasi-arithmetic pool of Π1, . . . , Πm with respect to g as
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi) :=
 
g−1
P
i wig(pi)
P
i wi

,
X
i
wi
!
.
Remark 6.3. The equivalence of this notion to our earlier one uses the fact that all (continuous)
proper scoring rules for binary outcomes have convex exposure (Proposition D.1), so the relationship
between g(p∗) and g(p) may be written as in Equation 4.
In the case that P
i wi = 1, Definition 6.2 reduces to Definition 3.6. In general, by linearly
scaling the weights in Definition 6.2 to add to 1, we recover quasi-arithmetic pooling as previously
defined.
We find the following fact useful.
Proposition 6.4. Given two continuous, strictly increasing functions g1 and g2, ⊕g1 and ⊕g2 are
the same if and only if g2 = ag1 + b for some a > 0 and b ∈R.
Proof. Clearly if g2 = ag1 + b for some a > 0 and b ∈R then ⊕g1 and ⊕g2 are the same. For the
converse, suppose that no such a and b exist. Let x < y be such that g1 and g2 are not equal (even
up to positive affine transformation) on [x, y]. Let g′
2 be the positive affine transformation of g2 that
makes it equal to g1 at x and y, and let z ∈(x, y) be such that g1(z) ̸= g′
2(z). Let α be such that
g1(z) = αg1(x) + (1 −α)g1(y). Then (x, α) ⊕g1 (y, 1 −α) = (z, 1), but (x, α) ⊕g2 (y, 1 −α) ̸= (z, 1),
so ⊕g1 and ⊕g2 are different.
We now define properties (i.e. axioms) of a pooling operator ⊕, such that these properties are
satisfied if and only if ⊕is ⊕g for some g. Our axiomatization will look somewhat different from
Kolmogorov’s, in part because we choose to define ⊕as a binary operator that (if it satisfies the
associativity axiom) extends to the m-ary case. This is a simpler domain and will simplify notation.
In Appendix C we exhibit an equivalent set of axioms that more closely resembles Kolmogorov’s.
Definition 6.5 (Axioms for pooling operators (n = 2)). For a pooling operator ⊕on D (i.e. a
binary operator on weighted forecasts), we define the following axioms.
1. Weight additivity: wt(Π1 ⊕Π2) = wt(Π1) + wt(Π2) for every Π1, Π2.
2. Commutativity: Π1 ⊕Π2 = Π2 ⊕Π1 for every Π1, Π2.
3. Associativity: Π1 ⊕(Π2 ⊕Π3) = (Π1 ⊕Π2) ⊕Π3 for every Π1, Π2, Π3.
4. Continuity: For every p1, p2, the quantity20 pr((p1, w1) ⊕(p2, w2)) is a continuous function
of (w1, w2) on R2
≥0 \ {(0, 0)}.
5. Idempotence: For every Π1, Π2, if pr(Π1) = pr(Π2) then pr(Π1 ⊕Π2) = pr(Π1).
6. Monotonicity: Let w > 0 and let p1 > p2 ∈D. Then for x ∈(0, w), the quantity pr((p1, x)⊕
(p2, w −x)) is a strictly increasing function of x.
20We allow one weight to be 0 by defining (p, w) ⊕(q, 0) = (q, 0) ⊕(p, w) = (p, w).
18

The motivation for the weight additivity axiom is that the weight of a weighted forecast can
be thought of as the amount of evidence for its prediction. When pooling weighted forecasts, the
weight of an individual forecast can be thought of as the strength of its vote in the aggregate.
The monotonicity axiom essentially states that if one pools two forecasts with different proba-
bilities and a fixed total weight, then the larger the share of the weight belonging to the larger of
the two probabilities, the larger the aggregate probability.
We now state and prove this section’s main result: these axioms describe the class of QA pooling
operators.
Theorem 6.6. A pooling operator is a QA pooling operator (as in Definition 6.2) with respect to
some g if and only if it satisfies the axioms in Definition 6.5.21
We will use ⊕(without a g subscript) to denote an arbitrary pooling operator that satisfies the
axioms in Definition 6.5. Before presenting the proof of Theorem 6.6, we will note a few important
facts about weighted forecasts and pooling operators. First, we find it natural to define a notion
of multiplying a weighted forecast pair by a positive constant.
Definition 6.7. Given a weighted forecast Π = (p, w) and c > 0, define cΠ := (p, cw).
Note that mΠ = Lm
i=1 Π for any positive integer m, by idempotence; this definition is a natural
extension to all c > 0. We note the following (quite obvious) fact.
Proposition 6.8. For every weighted forecast Π and c1, c2 > 0, we have c1(c2Π) = (c1c2)Π.
A natural property that is not listed in Definition 6.5 is scale invariance, i.e. that pr((p1, w1) ⊕
(p2, w2)) = pr((p1, cw1)⊕(p2, cw2)) for any positive c; or, equivalently, that c(Π1⊕Π2) = cΠ1⊕cΠ2.
This in fact follows from the listed axioms.
Proposition 6.9 (Distributive property/scale invariance). For every Π1, Π2 and any operator ⊕
satisfying the axioms in Definition 6.5, we have c(Π1 ⊕Π2) = cΠ1 ⊕cΠ2.
Proof. First suppose c is an integer. Then
cΠ1 ⊕cΠ2 =
c
M
i=1
Π1 ⊕
c
M
i=1
Π2 =
c
M
i=1
(Π1 ⊕Π2) = c(Π1 ⊕Π2).
Here, the first and last steps follow by weight additivity and idempotence. Now suppose that c = k
ℓ
is a rational number. Let Π′
1 = 1
ℓΠ1 and Π′
2 = 1
ℓΠ2. We have
k
ℓ(Π1 ⊕Π2) = k
ℓ(ℓΠ′
1 ⊕ℓΠ′
2) = k
ℓ· ℓ(Π′
1 ⊕Π′
2) = k(Π′
1 ⊕Π′
2) = kΠ′
1 ⊕kΠ′
2 = k
ℓΠ1 ⊕k
ℓΠ2.
Here, the second and second-to-last steps follow from the fact that the distributive property holds
for integers.
Finally, make use of the continuity axiom to extend our proof to all positive real numbers c. In
particular, it suffices to show that pr(Π1 ⊕Π2) = pr(cΠ1 ⊕cΠ2). Let p be the former quantity; note
that pr(rΠ1 ⊕rΠ2) = p for positive rational numbers r. Since the rationals are dense among the
reals, it follows that for every ϵ > 0, we have |pr(cΠ1 ⊕cΠ2) −p| ≤ϵ. Therefore, pr(cΠ1⊕cΠ2) = p.
This completes the proof.
21As we mentioned, for an associative pooling operator ⊕, Π1⊕Π2 · · ·⊕Πm is a well-specified quantity, even without
indicating parenthesization. This lets us use the notation Lm
i=1 Πi. This is why the statement of Theorem 6.6 makes
sense despite pooling operators not being m-ary by default.
19

Armed with these facts, we present a proof of Theorem 6.6.
Proof of Theorem 6.6. We first prove that any QA pooling operator ⊕g satisfies the axioms in
Definition 6.5. Weight additivity, commutativity, and idempotence are trivial. Associativity is also
clear: given Π1 = (p1, w1) and likewise Π2, Π3, we have
g(pr((Π1 ⊕g Π2) ⊕g Π3)) = (w1 + w2)g(pr(Π1 ⊕g Π2)) + w3g(p3)
(w1 + w2) + w3
=
(w1 + w2)w1g(p1)+w2(p2)
w1+w2
+ w3g(p3)
w1 + w2 + w3
= w1g(p1) + w2g(p2) + w3g(p3)
w1 + w2 + w3
and likewise for g(pr(Π1 ⊕g (Π2 ⊕g Π3))), so pr((Π1 ⊕g Π2) ⊕g Π3) = pr(Π1 ⊕g (Π2 ⊕g Π3)) (since g
is strictly increasing and therefore injective). The fact that the weights are also the same is trivial.
Continuity follows from the fact that
pr(Π1 ⊕g Π2) = g−1
w1g(p1) + w2g(p2)
w1 + w2

is continuous in (w1, w2) (when w1, w2 are not both zero). Here we are using the fact that g is
strictly increasing, which means that g−1 is continuous.
Finally, regarding the monotonicity axiom, for any fixed w and p1 > p2 (as in the axiom
statement), we have
g(pr((p1, x) ⊕g (p2, w −x))) = xg(p1) + (w −x)g(p2)
x + w −x
= xg(p1) + (w −x)g(p2)
w
.
Since p1 > p2, we have g(p1) > g(p2), so the right-hand side strictly increases with x. Since g−1 is
also strictly increasing, it follows that pr((p1, x) ⊕g (p2, w −x)) strictly increases with x.
The converse — that every pooling operator satisfying the axioms in Definition 6.5 is ⊕g for
some g — works by constructing g by fixing it at two points and constructing g at all other points.
Right now we show how to do this when the forecast domain is [0, 1]; see the proof of Theorem C.7
for the argument in full generality.
Let ⊕be a pooling operator that satisfies our axioms. Define g as follows: let g(0) = 0 and
g(1) = 1. For 0 < p < 1, define g(p) = w where (1, w) ⊕(0, 1 −w) = (p, 1). (This w exists by
continuity and the intermediate value theorem; it is unique by the “strictly” increasing stipulation
of monotonicity.) Note that g is continuous and increasing by monotonicity.22
We wish to show that for any Π1 = (p1, w1) and Π2 = (p2, w2), we have that Π1⊕Π2 = Π1⊕gΠ2.
Clearly the weight of both sides is w1 + w2, so we wish to show that the probabilities on each side
are the same. We have23
pr(Π1 ⊕Π2) = pr(w1(p1, 1) ⊕w2(p2, 1))
= pr(w1((1, g(p1)) ⊕(0, 1 −g(p1))) ⊕w2((1, g(p2)) ⊕(0, 1 −g(p2))))
= pr(w1(1, g(p1)) ⊕w1(0, 1 −g(p1)) ⊕w2(1, g(p2)) ⊕w2(0, 1 −g(p2)))
22As a matter of fact, g is strictly increasing because it is impossible for g(p1) to equal g(p2) for p1 ̸= p2, as that
would mean that (1, g(p1)) ⊕(0, 1 −g(p1)) = (p1, 1) = (p2, 1). Another way to look at this is that it comes from the
fact that (1, w) ⊕(0, 1 −w) is continuous in w by the continuity axiom. In a sense, the continuity of g corresponds to
the strictness of increase in the monotonicity axiom and the strictness of increase of g corresponds to the continuity
axiom.
23Steps 3 and 7 uses the distributive property (Proposition 6.9).
20

= pr((1, w1g(p1)) ⊕(0, w1(1 −g(p1))) ⊕(1, w2g(p2)) ⊕(0, w2(1 −g(p2))))
= pr((1, w1g(p1) + w2g(p2)) ⊕(0, w1(1 −g(p1)) + w2(1 −g(p2))))
= pr

1
w1 + w2
((1, w1g(p1) + w2g(p2)) ⊕(0, w1(1 −g(p1)) + w2(1 −g(p2))))

= pr

1, w1g(p1) + w2g(p2)
w1 + w2

⊕

0, w1(1 −g(p1)) + w2(1 −g(p2))
w1 + w2

,
which by definition of g is equal to the probability p such that g(p) = g(p1)w1+g(p2)w2
w1+w2
. That is,
pr(Π1 ⊕Π2) = pr(Π1 ⊕g Π2).
Showing that ⊕and ⊕g are equivalent for more than two arguments is now trivial:
m
M
g
i=1
Πi = Π1 ⊕g Π2 ⊕g Π3 · · · ⊕g Πm = Π1 ⊕Π2 ⊕g Π3 · · · ⊕g Πm = · · · =
m
M
i=1
Πi.
(Here we are implicitly using the fact that ⊕g is associative, as we proved earlier.) This completes
the proof.
6.2.
Generalizing to higher dimensions
In Appendix C.1, we generalize our axioms from n = 2 outcomes to arbitrary values of n. An impor-
tant challenge is extending the monotonicity axiom: in higher dimensions, what is the appropriate
generalization of an increasing function? We show that the correct notion is cyclical monotonicity,
which we define and discuss. We then present our axiomatization (Definition C.2) and prove that
the axioms constitute a characterization of the class of QA pooling operators (Theorem C.7). On a
high level, the proof is not dissimilar to that of Theorem 6.6, though the details are fairly different
and more technical.
In conclusion, in Definition 6.5 we made a list of natural properties that a pooling operator
may satisfy. Theorem 6.6 shows that the pooling operators satisfying these properties are exactly
the QA pooling operators. In Appendix C.1, we generalize this theorem to higher dimensions, thus
fully axiomatizing QA pooling. This result gives us an additional important reason to believe that
QA pooling with respect to a proper scoring rule is a fundamental notion.
7.
Conclusions and future work
While in this work we have focused on scoring rules for probability distributions over outcomes,
scoring rules can be used to elicit various other properties, such as the expectation or the median
of a random variable [Sav71] [GR07] [LPS08]. The topic of property elicitation studies such scoring
rules. The representation of a proper scoring rule in terms of its expected reward function ([GR07,
Theorem 2], our Proposition 3.1) generalizes to arbitrary linear properties [FK15, Theorem 11].
That is, consider a random variable (or n-tuple of random variables) X and a convex function G
whose domain is (a superset of) the possible values of X. If p is an expert’s forecast for E [X] and
x is the realized outcome, then the scoring rule s(p; x) := G(p)+⟨g(p), x−p⟩is proper.24 Modulo
a fairly straightforward generalization, all proper scoring rules for E [X] take this form.
24In the setting of this paper, X is the vector of random variables, where the j-th variable is 1 if outcome j happens
and 0 otherwise; and x = δj where j is the outcome that happens.
21

Our definition of QA pooling extends verbatim to the setting of eliciting linear properties. In
this more general setting, for any proper scoring rule that has convex exposure (see Definition 3.11),
it remains the case g(p∗) = P
i wig(pi); as a consequence, Theorems 4.1, 5.1, and 5.3 generalize.
There are several other interesting directions for generalization and future work:
• As mentioned in Section 2, QA pooling can be interpreted in terms of cost function markets:
if qi denotes the quantity of shares that each expert would buy in order to bring a market
into line with the experts’ probabilities, then the QA pool is the probability corresponding to
the quantity vector q∗:= P
i wiqi. This follows from [ACV13, Eq. 22]; the underlying reason
is the convex duality between an expected reward function G and the corresponding cost
function C. Exploring this connection further may yield insights into forecast aggregation
through market mechanisms.
• While idempotence is a fairly natural axiom, Bayesian approaches to aggregation often violate
this axiom: for example, an aggregator who receives two independent estimates with the same
probability should act differently than an aggregator who only received one of the estimates.
It would be interesting to explore whether our results and techniques are applicable to notions
of pooling that do not satisfy idempotence, or to other (perhaps Bayesian) settings.
• As we discussed in Section 2, there is a fair amount of work on aggregating forecasts with
prediction markets — often ones that are based on proper scoring rules. Is there a natural
trading-based interpretation of QA pooling?
• Although our proof of Theorem 5.1 (that the QA pool of forecasts is concave in the experts’
weights) relies on the convex exposure property, we have not ruled out the possibility that
the result holds even without this assumption. Is this the case? Even if not, are no-regret
algorithms for learning weights still possible?
• Our no-regret algorithm for learning weights relies on s being bounded, because this allows
us to place a concrete upper bound on
∇Lt(·)

2. If s is unbounded, in a fully adversarial
setting it is impossible to achieve a no-regret guarantee. On the other hand, [NR22] show
that if experts are assumed to be calibrated, then learning the optimal weights for logarithmic
pooling is possible when using the log scoring rule. Does this result generalize to learning
optimal weights for QA pooling with respect to other unbounded proper scoring rules?
• We have presented a list of axioms characterizing QA pooling operators. Is there an alternative
axiomatization that uses equally natural but fewer axioms?
• Do our results extend to probability distributions over infinitely many outcomes (e.g. for
experts who wish to forecast a real number)?
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the NSF under CCF-1813188 and DGE-2036197 and by the
ARO under W911NF1910294.
22

References
[Abb09]
Ali E. Abbas. “A Kullback-Leibler View of Linear and Log-Linear Pools”. In: Decision
Analysis 6.1 (Mar. 2009), pp. 25–37. doi: 10.1287/deca.1080.0133. url: https:
//ideas.repec.org/a/inm/ordeca/v6y2009i1p25-37.html.
[ABS18]
Itai Arieli, Yakov Babichenko, and Rann Smorodinsky. “Robust forecast aggregation”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115.52 (2018), E12135–E12143.
issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1813934115. url: https://www.pnas.org/
content/115/52/E12135.
[ACR12]
D Allard, A Comunian, and Philippe Renard. “Probability aggregation methods in
geoscience”. In: Mathematical Geosciences 44.5 (2012), pp. 545–581.
[ACV13]
Jacob D. Abernethy, Yiling Chen, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. “Efficient Mar-
ket Making via Convex Optimization, and a Connection to Online Learning”. In:
ACM Trans. Economics and Comput. 1.2 (2013), 12:1–12:39. doi: 10.1145/2465769.
2465777.
[Acz48]
J. Acz´el. “On mean values”. In: Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 54.4 (Apr. 1948), pp. 392–400.
url: https://projecteuclid.org:443/euclid.bams/1183511892.
[Ada14]
M. Adamˇc´ık. “Collective reasoning under uncertainty and inconsistency”. PhD thesis.
University of Manchester, 2014.
[AK14]
Aaron Archer and Robert Kleinberg. “Truthful germs are contagious: A local-to-global
characterization of truthfulness”. In: Games and Economic Behavior 86.C (2014),
pp. 340–366. url: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:gamebe:v:86:
y:2014:i:c:p:340-366.
[AM15]
D. Azagra and Carlos Mudarra. “Whitney extension theorems for convex functions
of the classes C1 and C1,ω”. In: Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 114
(2015).
[Ash+10]
Itai Ashlagi, Mark Braverman, Avinatan Hassidim, and Dov Monderer. “Monotonicity
and Implementability”. In: Econometrica 78.5 (2010), pp. 1749–1772. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.3982/ECTA8882. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.3982/ECTA8882.
[AW80]
J. Acz´el and C. Wagner. “A Characterization of Weighted Arithmetic Means”. In:
SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete Methods 1.3 (1980), pp. 259–260. doi: 10.1137/
0601029.
[BB20]
Shalev Ben-David and Eric Blais. “A New Minimax Theorem for Randomized Algo-
rithms (Extended Abstract)”. In: 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020. Ed. by
Sandy Irani. IEEE, 2020, pp. 403–411. doi: 10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00045. url:
https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00045.
[BC11]
Heinz H. Bauschke and Patrick L. Combettes. Convex Analysis and Monotone Operator
Theory in Hilbert Spaces. 1st. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2011. isbn:
1441994661.
[Bri50]
G. W. Brier. “Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability”. In: Monthly
Weather Review 78 (1950), pp. 1–3.
23

[BV04]
Stephen P. Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2004. isbn: 978-0-521-83378-3. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511804441. url:
https://web.stanford.edu/\%7Eboyd/cvxbook/.
[Car16]
Arthur Carvalho. “An Overview of Applications of Proper Scoring Rules”. In: Decision
Analysis 13 (Nov. 2016). doi: 10.1287/deca.2016.0337.
[CBL06]
Nicol`o Cesa-Bianchi and G´abor Lugosi. Prediction, Learning, and Games. Jan. 2006.
isbn: 978-0-521-84108-5. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511546921.
[Che+14]
Yiling Chen, Nikhil R. Devanur, David M. Pennock, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
“Removing arbitrage from wagering mechanisms”. In: ACM Conference on Economics
and Computation, EC ’14, Stanford , CA, USA, June 8-12, 2014. Ed. by Moshe
Babaioff, Vincent Conitzer, and David A. Easley. ACM, 2014, pp. 377–394. doi: 10.
1145/2600057.2602876.
[CHL19]
Christopher P. Chambers, Paul J. Healy, and Nicolas S. Lambert. “Proper scoring rules
with general preferences: A dual characterization of optimal reports”. In: Games and
Economic Behavior 117 (2019), pp. 322–341. issn: 0899-8256. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.geb.2019.07.012. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0899825619301101.
[CL13]
Arthur Carvalho and Kate Larson. “A Consensual Linear Opinion Pool”. In: IJCAI
2013, Proceedings of the 23rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing, China, August 3-9, 2013. Ed. by Francesca Rossi. IJCAI/AAAI, 2013, pp. 2518–
2524. url: http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IJCAI/IJCAI13/paper/view/
6447.
[CP07]
Yiling Chen and David M. Pennock. “A Utility Framework for Bounded-Loss Market
Makers”. In: UAI 2007, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 19-22, 2007. Ed. by Ronald Parr
and Linda C. van der Gaag. AUAI Press, 2007, pp. 49–56. url: https://dl.acm.
org/doi/abs/10.5555/3020488.3020495.
[CS11]
SangIn Chun and Ross D. Shachter. “Strictly Proper Mechanisms with Cooperating
Players”. In: UAI 2011, Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence, Barcelona, Spain, July 14-17, 2011. Ed. by F´abio Gagliardi
Cozman and Avi Pfeffer. AUAI Press, 2011, pp. 125–134. url: https://dslpitt.
org/uai/displayArticleDetails.jsp?mmnu=1\&smnu=2\&article\_id=2168\
&proceeding\_id=27.
[CV10]
Yiling Chen and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. “A new understanding of prediction
markets via no-regret learning”. In: Proceedings 11th ACM Conference on Electronic
Commerce (EC-2010), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, June 7-11, 2010. Ed. by David
C. Parkes, Chrysanthos Dellarocas, and Moshe Tennenholtz. ACM, 2010, pp. 189–198.
doi: 10.1145/1807342.1807372.
[CW07]
R.T. Clemen and R.L. Winkler. “Aggregating probability distributions”. In: Advances
in Decision Analysis: From Foundations to Applications (Jan. 2007), pp. 154–176. doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511611308.010.
[Daw+95]
A. Dawid, M. DeGroot, J. Mortera, R. Cooke, S. French, C. Genest, M. Schervish, D.
Lindley, K. McConway, and R. Winkler. “Coherent combination of experts’ opinions”.
In: Test 4 (2 1995), pp. 263–313.
24

[DL14]
Franz Dietrich and Christian List. Probabilistic Opinion Pooling. Oct. 2014. url: http:
//philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11349/.
[DM14]
Alexander Dawid and Monica Musio. “Theory and Applications of Proper Scoring
Rules”. In: METRON 72 (Jan. 2014). doi: 10.1007/s40300-014-0039-y.
[FCK15]
Rafael M. Frongillo, Yiling Chen, and Ian A. Kash. “Elicitation for Aggregation”. In:
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, January
25-30, 2015, Austin, Texas, USA. Ed. by Blai Bonet and Sven Koenig. AAAI Press,
2015, pp. 900–906. url: http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/
paper/view/9770.
[FES20]
Christian Feldbacher-Escamilla and Gerhard Schurz. “Optimal probability aggregation
based on generalized brier scoring”. In: Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelli-
gence 88 (July 2020). doi: 10.1007/s10472-019-09648-4.
[FK14]
Rafael Frongillo and Ian Kash. “General Truthfulness Characterizations via Convex
Analysis”. In: Web and Internet Economics. Ed. by Tie-Yan Liu, Qi Qi, and Yinyu Ye.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 354–370. isbn: 978-3-319-13129-0.
[FK15]
Rafael M. Frongillo and Ian A. Kash. “Vector-Valued Property Elicitation”. In: Pro-
ceedings of The 28th Conference on Learning Theory, COLT 2015, Paris, France, July
3-6, 2015. Ed. by Peter Gr¨unwald, Elad Hazan, and Satyen Kale. Vol. 40. JMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings. JMLR.org, 2015, pp. 710–727. url: http:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v40/Frongillo15.html.
[Fre+20]
Rupert Freeman, David M. Pennock, Dominik Peters, and Bo Waggoner. “Preventing
Arbitrage from Collusion When Eliciting Probabilities”. In: The Thirty-Fourth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Appli-
cations of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium
on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA,
February 7-12, 2020. AAAI Press, 2020, pp. 1958–1965. url: https://aaai.org/ojs/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/5566.
[GD04]
Peter D. Gr¨unwald and A. Philip Dawid. “Game theory, maximum entropy, minimum
discrepancy and robust Bayesian decision theory”. In: The Annals of Statistics 32.4
(2004), pp. 1367 –1433. doi: 10.1214/009053604000000553. url: https://doi.org/
10.1214/009053604000000553.
[Gen84]
Christian Genest. “A Characterization Theorem for Externally Bayesian Groups”. In:
Ann. Statist. 12.3 (Sept. 1984), pp. 1100–1105. doi: 10.1214/aos/1176346726.
[Goo52]
I. J. Good. “Rational Decisions”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological) 14.1 (1952), pp. 107–114. issn: 00359246. url: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/2984087.
[GR07]
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. “Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction,
and estimation”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 102.477 (2007),
pp. 359–378.
[Gra+11]
Michel Grabisch, Jean-Luc Marichal, Radko Mesiar, and Endre Pap. “Aggregation
functions: Means”. In: Information Sciences 181.1 (2011), pp. 1 –22. issn: 0020-0255.
doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ins . 2010 . 08 . 043. url: http : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002002551000424X.
25

[GZ86]
Christian Genest and James V. Zidek. “Combining Probability Distributions: A Cri-
tique and an Annotated Bibliography”. In: Statistical Science 1.1 (1986), pp. 114–135.
issn: 08834237. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2245510.
[Han03]
Robin Hanson. “Combinatorial Information Market Design”. In: Information Systems
Frontiers 5.1 (Jan. 2003), pp. 107–119. doi: 10.1023/A:1022058209073. url: https:
//ideas.repec.org/a/spr/infosf/v5y2003i1d10.1023_a1022058209073.html.
[Haz19]
Elad Hazan. “Introduction to Online Convex Optimization”. In: CoRR abs/1909.05207
(2019). arXiv: 1909.05207. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05207.
[Hei+18]
Hoda Heidari, S´ebastien Lahaie, David M. Pennock, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan.
“Integrating Market Makers, Limit Orders, and Continuous Trade in Prediction Mar-
kets”. In: ACM Trans. Econ. Comput. 6.3–4 (Oct. 2018). issn: 2167-8375. doi: 10.
1145/3274643. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3274643.
[Kol30]
A.N. Kolmogorov. Sur la notion de la moyenne. G. Bardi, tip. della R. Accad. dei
Lincei, 1930. url: https://books.google.com/books?id=iUqLnQEACAAJ.
[KR08]
Christian Kascha and Francesco Ravazzolo. Combining inflation density forecasts. Work-
ing Paper 2008/22. Norges Bank, Dec. 2008. url: https://ideas.repec.org/p/bno/
worpap/2008_22.html.
[LPS08]
Nicolas S. Lambert, David M. Pennock, and Yoav Shoham. “Eliciting properties of
probability distributions”. In: Proceedings 9th ACM Conference on Electronic Com-
merce (EC-2008), Chicago, IL, USA, June 8-12, 2008. Ed. by Lance Fortnow, John
Riedl, and Tuomas Sandholm. ACM, 2008, pp. 129–138. doi: 10.1145/1386790.
1386813. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/1386790.1386813.
[LS07]
Ron Lavi and Chaitanya Swamy. “Truthful Mechanism Design for Multi-Dimensional
Scheduling via Cycle Monotonicity”. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on
Electronic Commerce. EC ’07. San Diego, California, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2007, 252–261. isbn: 9781595936530. doi: 10.1145/1250910.1250947.
[Nag30]
Mitio Nagumo. “¨Uber eine Klasse der Mittelwerte”. In: Japanese journal of mathemat-
ics :transactions and abstracts 7 (1930), pp. 71–79. doi: 10.4099/jjm1924.7.0_71.
[Nes09]
Yurii E. Nesterov. “Primal-dual subgradient methods for convex problems”. In: Math.
Program. 120.1 (2009), pp. 221–259. doi: 10.1007/s10107-007-0149-x. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10107-007-0149-x.
[NR22]
Eric Neyman and Tim Roughgarden. “No-Regret Learning with Unbounded Losses:
The Case of Logarithmic Pooling”. In: CoRR abs/2202.11219 (2022). arXiv: 2202.
11219. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.11219.
[Pet19]
Richard Pettigrew. “Aggregating incoherent agents who disagree”. In: Synthese 196
(July 2019). doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1613-7.
[PR00]
David Poole and Adrian E. Raftery. “Inference for Deterministic Simulation Models:
The Bayesian Melding Approach”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association
95.452 (2000), pp. 1244–1255. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2000.10474324. url: https:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01621459.2000.10474324.
[RG10]
Roopesh Ranjan and Tilmann Gneiting. “Combining Probability Forecasts”. In: Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Statistical Methodology) 72.1 (2010),
pp. 71–91. issn: 13697412, 14679868. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40541575.
26

[Roc70a]
R. T. Rockafellar. “On the maximal monotonicity of subdifferential mappings.” In:
Pacific J. Math. 33.1 (1970), pp. 209–216. url: https://projecteuclid.org:443/
euclid.pjm/1102977253.
[Roc70b]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar. Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press, 1970. isbn: 9780691015866.
url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt14bs1ff.
[SAM66]
Emir Shuford, Arthur Albert, and H. Edward Massengill. “Admissible probability mea-
surement procedures”. In: Psychometrika 31.2 (1966), pp. 125–145. url: https://
EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:spr:psycho:v:31:y:1966:i:2:p:125-145.
[Sat+14a]
Ville Satop¨a¨a, Jonathan Baron, Dean Foster, Barbara Mellers, Philip Tetlock, and
Lyle Ungar. “Combining multiple probability predictions using a simple logit model”.
In: International Journal of Forecasting 30 (Apr. 2014), 344–356. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijforecast.2013.09.009.
[Sat+14b]
Ville A. Satop¨a¨a, Jonathan Baron, Dean P. Foster, Barbara A. Mellers, Philip E. Tet-
lock, and Lyle H. Ungar. “Combining multiple probability predictions using a simple
logit model”. In: International Journal of Forecasting 30.2 (2014), pp. 344–356. issn:
0169-2070. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2013.09.009. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169207013001635.
[Sav71]
Leonard J. Savage. “Elicitation of Personal Probabilities and Expectations”. In: Journal
of the American Statistical Association 66.336 (1971), pp. 783–801. issn: 01621459.
url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2284229.
[SY05]
Michael Saks and Lan Yu. “Weak monotonicity suffices for truthfulness on convex
domains”. In: Jan. 2005, pp. 286–293. doi: 10.1145/1064009.1064040.
[Tsa88]
Constantino Tsallis. “Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics”. In: Jour-
nal of Statistical Physics 52 (July 1988), pp. 479–487. doi: 10.1007/BF01016429.
[Voh07]
Rakesh V. Vohra. Paths, Cycles and Mechanism Design. 2007.
[Wag21]
Bo Waggoner. “Linear functions to the extended reals”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09552
(2021).
[Wik18]
Wikipedia contributors. Mahler’s inequality — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [On-
line; accessed 07-February-2021]. 2018. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Mahler\%27s\_inequality.
[Win+18]
R. L. Winkler, Y. Grushka-Cockayne, K. C. Lichtendahl, and V. R. Jose. “Averaging
Probability Forecasts: Back to the Future”. In: 2018.
[Xia10]
Lin Xiao. “Dual Averaging Methods for Regularized Stochastic Learning and Online
Optimization”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11 (2010), pp. 2543–2596. url: http://
portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1953017.
A.
Details omitted from Section 1
Logarithmic pooling as averaging Bayesian evidence
We discuss for simplicity the binary
outcome case, though this discussion holds in general. Suppose that an expert assigns a probability
to an event X occurring by updating on some prior (50%, say, though this does not matter).
Suppose that the expert receives evidence E. Bayesian updating works as such:
Pr [X | E]
Pr [¬X | E] = Pr [X]
Pr [¬X] · Pr [E | X]
Pr [E | ¬X].
27

That is, the expert multiplies their odds of X (i.e. the probability of X divided by the probability of
¬X) by the relative likelihood that E would be the case conditioned on X versus ¬X. Equivalently,
we can take the log of both sides; this tells us that the posterior log odds of X is equal to the prior
log odds plus log Pr[E|X]
Pr[E|¬X]. For every piece of evidence Ek that the expert receives, they make this
update (assuming that the Ek’s are mutually independent conditioned on X).
This means that for any Ek, we can view the quantity log Pr[Ek|X]
Pr[Ek|¬X] as the strength of evidence
that Ek gives in favor of X. We call this the “Bayesian evidence” in favor of X given by Ek. The
total Bayesian evidence that the expert has in favor of X (i.e. the sum of these values over all Ek)
is the expert’s log odds of X (i.e. log Pr[X]
Pr[¬X]).
Logarithmic pooling takes the average of experts’ log odds of X. As we have shown, if the experts
are Bayesian, this amounts to taking the average of all experts’ amounts of Bayesian evidence in
favor of X.
B.
Details omitted from Section 5
Proof of Theorem 5.1. Let v and w be two weight vectors. We wish to show that for any c ∈[0, 1],
we have
WSj(cv + (1 −c)w) −cWSj(v) −(1 −c)WSj(w) ≥0.
Recall the notation p∗
w from Definition 3.6. Note that
g(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) =
m
X
i=1
(cvi + (1 −c)wi)g(pi) = cg(p∗
v) + (1 −c)g(p∗
w).
(5)
We have
WSj(cv + (1 −c)w) −cWSj(v) −(1 −c)WSj(w)
= s(p∗
cv+(1−c)w; j) −cs(p∗
v; j) −(1 −c)s(p∗
w; j)
= G(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) + ⟨g(p∗
cv+(1−c)w), δj −p∗
cv+(1−c)w⟩
−c(G(p∗
v) + ⟨g(p∗
v), δj −p∗
v⟩) −(1 −c)(G(p∗
w) + ⟨g(p∗
w), δj −p∗
w⟩)
= G(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) −⟨g(p∗
cv+(1−c)w), p∗
cv+(1−c)w⟩
−c(G(p∗
v) −⟨g(p∗
v), p∗
v⟩) −(1 −c)(G(p∗
w) −⟨g(p∗
w), p∗
w⟩)
Step 1 follows from the definition of WS. Step 2 follows from Equation 2. Step 3 follows from
Equation 5, and specifically that the inner product of each side with δj is the same (so the δj terms
cancel out, leaving a quantity that does not depend on j). Continuing where we left off:
WSj(cv + (1 −c)w) −cWSj(v) −(1 −c)WSj(w)
= G(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) −c⟨g(p∗
v), p∗
cv+(1−c)w⟩−(1 −c)⟨g(p∗
w), p∗
cv+(1−c)w⟩
−c(G(p∗
v) −⟨g(p∗
v), p∗
v⟩) −(1 −c)(G(p∗
w) −⟨g(p∗
w), p∗
w⟩)
= c(G(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) −G(p∗
v) −⟨g(p∗
v), p∗
cv+(1−c)w −p∗
v⟩)
+ (1 −c)(G(p∗
cv+(1−c)w) −G(p∗
w) −⟨g(p∗
w), p∗
cv+(1−c)w −p∗
w⟩)
= cDG(p∗
cv+(1−c)w ∥p∗
v) + (1 −c)DG(p∗
cv+(1−c)w ∥p∗
w) ≥0.
28

Step 4 again follows from Equation 5. Step 5 is a rearrangement of terms. Finally, step 6 follows
from the definition of Bregman divergence, and step 7 follows from the fact that Bregman divergence
is always non-negative. This completes the proof.
Remark B.1. Theorem 5.1 can be stated in more generality: s need not have convex exposure; it
suffices to have that for the particular p1, . . . , pm, the QA pool of these forecasts exists for every
weight vector.
Beyond Theorem 5.1’s instrumental use for no-regret online learning of expert weights (Theo-
rem 5.3 below), the result is interesting in its own right. For example, the following fact — loosely
speaking, that QA pooling cannot benefit from weight randomization — follows as a corollary.
(Recall the definition of p∗
w from Definition 3.6.)
Corollary B.2. Consider a randomized algorithm A with the following specifications:
• Input: a proper scoring rule s with convex exposure, expert forecasts p1, . . . , pm.
• Output: a weight vector w ∈∆m.
For any input s, p1, . . . , pm and for every j, we have
s(p∗
EA[w]; j) ≥EA [s(p∗
w; j)] ,
where p∗
x denotes the QA pool of p1, . . . , pm with weight vector x.
Algorithm B.3 (Online gradient descent algorithm for Theorem 5.3). We proceed as follows:
• For t ≥1, define ηt :=
1
M
√
mt.
• Start with an arbitrary guess w1 ∈∆m.
• At each time step t from 1 to T:
– Play wt and observe loss Lt(wt).
– Let ˜wt+1 = wt −ηt∇Lt(wt). If ˜wt+1 ∈∆m, let wt+1 = ˜wt+1. Otherwise, let wt+1 be
the orthogonal projection of ˜wt+1 onto ∆m.
The above algorithm is an adaptation of the online gradient descent algorithm (as presented
in [Haz19, §3.1]) for the setting of Theorem 5.3.
In our context, the loss function is Lt(w) =
−WSjt(w), where WS is as in Theorem 5.1, relative to forecasts pt
1, . . . , pt
m.
Below, we prove that Theorem 5.3, i.e. that Algorithm B.3 satisfies the details of Theorem 5.3.
The proof amounts to applying the standard bounds for online gradient descent, though with an
extra step: we use the bound M on ∥g∥to bound the gradient of the loss as a function of expert
weights.
Proof of Theorem 5.3. We apply [Haz19, Theorem 3.1]; this theorem tells us that in order to prove
the stated bound, it suffices to show that for all t and w,
∇Lt(w)

2 ≤
√
2mM.
Let L be an arbitrary loss function, i.e. L(w) = −WSj(w) for some j, p1, . . . , pm. Let p∗(w) =
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi). We claim that
∇L(w) =



g(p1)
...
g(pm)


(p∗(w) −δj),
(6)
29

where this m-dimensional vector should be interpreted modulo translation by 1m (see Remark 3.12).
To see this, observe that
∇L(w) = −∇WSj(w) = −∇ws(p∗(w); j) = −∇w(G(p∗(w)) + ⟨g(p∗(w)), δj −p∗(w)⟩),
where ∇w denotes the gradient with respect to change in the weight vector w (as opposed to change
in the probability vector). Now, by the chain rule for gradients, we have
∇wG(p∗(w)) = (Jp∗(w))⊤g(p∗(w)),
where Jp∗denotes the Jacobian matrix of the function p∗(w). Also, we have
g(p∗(w)) =
m
X
i=1
wig(pi),
so (again by the chain rule) we have
∇w(⟨g(p∗(w)), δj −p∗(w)⟩) =



g(p1)
...
g(pm)


(δj −p∗(w)) −(Jp∗(w))⊤g(p∗(w)).
This gives us Equation 6.25
Now, for any i, we have
|⟨g(pi), p∗(w) −δj⟩| ≤∥g(pi)∥2 ∥p∗(w) −δj∥2 ≤
√
2M.
Therefore,
∥∇L(w)∥2 ≤
q
m · (
√
2M)2 =
√
2mM,
completing the proof.
C.
Details omitted from Section 6
We claim that our axioms in Definition 6.2 can be restated equivalently in a form similar to that
of Kolmogorov introduced at the top of Section 6 (though with weights.)
Claim C.1. Given a pooling operator ⊕on D satisfying Definition 6.2, the function M defined on
arbitrary tuples of weighted forecasts defined by M(Π1, . . . , Πm) := Lm
i=1 Πi satisfies the following
axioms:
(1) M(Π1, . . . , Πm) is strictly increasing in each pr(Πi) and continuous in its inputs.26
(2) M is symmetric in its arguments.
(3) M((p, w1), . . . , (p, wm)) = (p, P
i wi).
25Note that the cancellation of the Jacobian terms stems not from the specific relationship between p∗and w
but from the nature of proper scoring rules. We obtain the same cancellation if we consider ∇s(p; j), where after
differentiating G(p) + ⟨g(p), δj −p⟩we find that the g(p) terms cancel.
26That is, it is a continuous function of its input in Dm × (Rm
≥0 \ 0), where weighted forecasts with weight 0 are
ignored when computing M.
30

(4) M(Π1, . . . , Πk, Πk+1, . . . , Πm) = M(Π′, Πk+1, . . . , Πm), where y := M(Π1, . . . , Πk).
(5) M((p1, w1), . . . , (pm, wm)) has weight w1 + · · · + wm.
Additionally, given any M defined on arbitrary tuples of weighted forecasts, the operator ⊕defined
by Π1 ⊕Π2 := M(Π1, Π2) satisfies Definition 6.2.
Proof. We first prove that given ⊕satisfying Definition 6.2, M satisfies the stated axioms. The
last four axioms are clear, so we prove the first one. The fact that M is strictly increasing in
each probability follows immediately by considering the continuous, strictly increasing function g
such that ⊕= ⊕g, which exists by Theorem 6.6. Continuity likewise follows, since the quantity in
Definition 6.2 is continuous.
We now prove that given M satisfying the stated axioms, ⊕satisfies Definition 6.2. Weight
additivity, commutativity, continuity, and idempotence are clear. To prove associativity, note that
Π1 ⊕(Π2 ⊕Π3) = M(Π1, M(Π2, Π3)) = M(Π1, Π2, Π3) = M(M(Π1, Π2), Π3) = (Π1 ⊕Π2) ⊕Π3.
To prove monotonicity, let p1 > p2 and w > x > y. We wish to prove that pr((p1, x)⊕(p2, w−x)) >
pr((p1, y) ⊕(p2, w −y)). We have
pr((p1, x) ⊕(p2, w −x)) = pr(M((p1, x), (p2, w −x))) = pr(M((p1, y), (p1, x −y), (p2, w −x)))
> pr(M((p1, y), (p2, x −y), (p2, w −x))) = pr(M((p1, y), (p2, w −y)))
= pr((p1, y) ⊕(p2, w −y)).
C.1.
Extending the results of Section 6 to n > 2 outcomes
We now discuss extending our axiomatization to arbitrary values of n in a way that, again, describes
the class of QA pooling operators. Just as we fixed a two-outcome forecast domain D in Section 6,
we now fix an n-outcome forecast domain D for any n ≥2. Our definition of weighted forecasts
remains the same (except that now pr(Π) is a vector). Our definition of quasi-arithmetic pooling,
however, needs to change to make g vector-valued. This raises the question: what is the analogue
of “increasing” for vector-valued functions? It turns out that the relevant notion for us is cyclical
monotonicity, introduced by Rockafellar [Roc70a] (see also [Roc70b, §27]).
We will define this
notion shortly, but first we give the definition of quasi-arithmetic pooling with arbitrary weights
(analogous to Definition 6.2) for this setting. Throughout this section, we will use the notation
Hn(c) := {x ∈Rn : P
i xi = c}. Recall from Remark 3.12 that the range of the gradient of a
function defined on D is a subset of Hn(0).
Definition C.2 (Quasi-arithmetic pooling with arbitrary weights). Given a continuous, strictly
cyclically monotone vector-valued function g : D →Hn(0) whose range is a convex set, and weighted
forecasts Π1 = (p1, w1), . . . , Πm = (pm, wm), define the quasi-arithmetic pool of Π1, . . . , Πm with
respect to g as
m
M
g
i=1
(pi, wi) :=
 
g−1
P
i wig(pi)
P
i wi

,
X
i
wi
!
.
Note that QA pooling as defined in Definition 3.6 can be written in the form of Definition C.2 if
and only if the scoring rule has convex exposure; if it does not, then for some choices of parameters,
P
i wig(pi) will be equal to a subgradient – but not the gradient – of G at some point.
31

Definition C.3 (Cyclical monotonicity). A function g : U ⊆Rn →Rn is cyclically monotone if
for every list of points x0, x1, . . . , xk−1, xk = x0 ∈U, we have
k
X
i=1
⟨g(xi), xi −xi−1⟩≥0.
We also say that g is strictly cyclically monotone if the inequality is strict except when x0 = · · · =
xk−1.
To gain an intuition for this notion, consider the case of k = 2; then this condition says that
⟨g(x1) −g(x0), x1 −x0⟩≥0. In other words, the change in g from x0 to x1 is in the same general
direction as the direction from x0 to x1. This property is called 2-cycle (or weak) monotonicity.
Cyclical monotonicity is a stronger notion, which may be familiar to the reader for its appli-
cations in mechanism design and revealed preference theory, see e.g. [LS07], [Ash+10], [FK14],
[Voh07, §2.1]. In such settings, it is usually the case that two-cycle and cyclical monotonicity are
equivalent. Indeed, Saks and Yu showed that these conditions are equivalent in settings where the
set of outcomes (i.e. the range of g) is finite [SY05]. However, cyclical monotonicity is substantially
stronger than two-cycle monotonicity when the range of g is infinitely large, as in our setting. In
fact, the difference between these two conditions is that a two-cycle monotone function is cyclically
monotone if and only if it is also vortex-free [AK14, Theorem 3.9]. Vortex-freeness means that the
path integral of g along any triangle vanishes. See [AK14] for a deteailed comparison of these two
notions.
The immediately relevant fact for us is that cyclically monotone functions are gradients of
convex functions (and vice versa). Speaking more precisely:
Theorem C.4. A vector-valued function g is continuous and strictly cyclically monotone if and
only if it is the gradient of a differentiable, strictly convex function G.
Proof of Theorem C.4. Per a theorem of Rockafellar ([Roc70a], see also Theorem 24.8 in [Roc70b]),
a function g is cyclically monotone if and only if it is a subgradient of a convex function G. The
proof of this fact shows just as easily that a function is strictly cyclically monotone if and only if
it is a subgradient of a strictly convex function.
Consider a differentiable, strictly convex function G. Its gradient is continuous (see [Roc70b,
Theorem 25.5]). Conversely, consider a continuous, strictly cyclically monotone vector-valued func-
tion g. As we just discussed, it is a subgradient of some strictly convex function G. A convex
function with a continuous subgradient is differentiable [BC11, Proposition 17.41].
This means that the conditions on g in Definition C.2 are precisely those necessary to let g be
any function that it could be in our original definition of quasi-arithmetic pooling (Definition 3.6).
Our new definition is thus equivalent to the old one (after normalizing weights to add to 1).
We now discuss our axioms for pooling operators that will again capture the class of QA pooling
operators. We will keep the weight additivity, commutativity, associativity, and idempotence ver-
batim from our discussion of the n = 2 case. We will slightly strengthen the continuity argument
(see below).
We will also add a new axiom, subtraction, which states that if Π1⊕Π2 = Π1⊕Π3 then Π2 = Π3.
Subtraction in the n = 2 case follows from monotonicity; in this case, however, we the subtraction
axiom will help us state the monotonicity axiom. In particular, it allows us to make the following
definition, which essentially extends the notion of pooling to allow for negative weights.
32

Definition C.5. Let ⊕be a pooling operator satisfying weight additivity, commutativity, associa-
tivity, and subtraction. Fix p1, . . . , pk ∈D. Define a function p : ∆k →D (with p1, . . . , pk serving
as implicit arguments) defined by
p(w1, . . . , wk) = pr
 k
M
i=1
(pi, wi)
!
.
We extend the definition of p to a partial function on Hk(1), as follows: given input (w1, . . . , wk),
let S ⊆[k] be the set of indices i such that wi < 0 and T ⊆[k] be the set of indices i such that
wi > 0. We define p(w1, . . . , wk) to be the q ∈D such that
(q, 1) ⊕
 M
i∈S
(pi, −wi)
!
=
M
i∈T
(pi, wi).
Note that q is not guaranteed to exist, which is why we call p a partial function. However, if q
exists then it is unique, by the subtraction axiom.
We can now state the full axiomatization, including the monotonicity axiom.
Definition C.6 (Axioms for pooling operators). For a pooling operator ⊕on D, we define the
following axioms.
1. Weight additivity: wt(Π1 ⊕Π2) = wt(Π1) + wt(Π2) for every Π1, Π2.
2. Commutativity: Π1 ⊕Π2 = Π2 ⊕Π1 for every Π1, Π2.
3. Associativity: Π1 ⊕(Π2 ⊕Π3) = (Π1 ⊕Π2) ⊕Π3 for every Π1, Π2, Π3.
4. Continuity: For every positive integer k and p1, . . . , pk, the quantity27
pr
 k
M
i=1
(pi, wi)
!
is a continuous function of (w1, . . . , wk) on Rk
≥0 \ {0}.
5. Idempotence: For every Π1 and Π2, if pr(Π1) = pr(Π2) then pr(Π1 ⊕Π2) = pr(Π1).
6. Subtraction: If Π1 ⊕Π2 = Π1 ⊕Π3 then Π2 = Π3.
7. Monotonicity: There exist vectors p1, . . . , pn ∈D such that p (as in Definition C.5) is a
strictly cyclically monotone function from its domain to Rn.
This monotonicity axiom essentially extends our previous monotonicity axiom (in Definition 6.5)
to a multi-dimensional setting. It states that there are n “anchor points” in D such that the func-
tion p from weight vectors to D that pools the anchor points with the weights given as input obeys
a notion of monotonicity (namely cyclical monotonicity). Informally, this means that the vector
of weights that one would need to give to the anchor points in order to arrive at a forecast p
“correlates” with the forecast p itself.
We now state the main theorem of our axiomatization.
27The continuity axiom is only well-defined conditioned on ⊕being associative, which is fine for our purposes. We
allow a proper subset of weights to be zero by defining the aggregate to ignore forecasts with weight zero.
33

Theorem C.7. A pooling operator satisfies the axioms in Definition C.6 if and only if it is a QA
pooling operator as in Definition C.2.28.
Proof. We begin by noting the following fact, which follows from results in [Roc70b, §26].
Proposition C.8. A strictly cyclically monotone function g : D →Rn is injective, and its inverse
g−1 is strictly cyclically monotone and continuous.29
We provide a partial proof below; it relies on the following observation.
Remark C.9. We can instead write the condition as
k
X
i=1
(g(xi) −g(xi−1)) · xi ≥0.
This is equivalent to the condition in Definition C.3, because it is the same statement (with rear-
ranged terms) when the xi’s are listed in reverse order.
Proof. First, suppose that g(x) = g(y). Then
g(x)(x −y) + g(y)(y −x) = 0.
Since g is strictly cyclically monotone, this implies that x = y. (Note that we only use two-cycle
monotonicity.)
We now show that g−1 is strictly cyclically monotone. That is, we wish to show that
k
X
i=1
xi · (g−1(xi) −g−1(xi−1)) > 0
for any x1, . . . , xk = x0 that are not all the same. (See Remark C.9.) By the cyclical monotonicity
of g, we have that
k
X
i=1
g(pi) · (pi −pi−1) > 0
(the strictness of the inequality follows by the injectivity of g: if xi ̸= xj then pi ̸= pj). This
means that
k
X
i=1
xi · (g−1(xi) −g−1(xi−1)) > 0,
as desired. As for continuity, we defer to [Roc70b, Theorem 26.5].
28Recall that Definition C.2 is narrower than Definition 3.6, since it excludes QA pools with respect to scoring
rules that do not have convex exposure. Without convex exposure, the associativity, subtraction, and monotonicity
axioms may be violated. For example, consider Πi = (δi, 1) for i = 1, 2, 3, for the scoring rule with expected reward
function G(x) = x4
1 +x4
2 +x4
3. We have that (Π1 ⊕g Π2)⊕g Π3 = ((1/2, 1/2, 0), 2)⊕g (δ3, 1) ≈((0.182, 0.182, 0.635), 3),
whereas Π1 ⊕g (Π2 ⊕g Π3) = ((0.635, 0.182, 0.182), 3)
29Why can’t we apply this result again to g−1 to conclude that g is continuous, even though we did not assume it
to be? The reason is that the proof of continuity relies on the convexity of D; if g is discontinuous then the domain
of g−1 may not be convex (or even connected), so we cannot apply the result to g−1.
34

Back to the proof of Theorem C.7, we first prove that any such ⊕g satisfies the stated axioms.
Weight additivity, commutativity, associativity, and idempotence are clear. Continuity follows from
the formula
pr((p1, w1) ⊕g (p2, w2)) = g−1
w1g(p1) + w2g(p2)
w1 + w2

,
noting that g−1 is continuous by Proposition C.8. Likewise, subtraction follows from the fact that
g is injective (by Proposition C.8), as is g−1 (likewise). Monotonicity remains.
The range of g contains an open subset30 of Hn(0), so in particular it contains the vertices of
some translated and dilated copy of the standard simplex. That is, there are n points x1, . . . , xn in
the range of g for which there is a positive scalar a and vector b such that aδi + b = xi for every
i. (Here δi is the i-th standard basis vector in Rn.) We will let pi be the pre-image of xi under g,
so that g(pi) = aδi + b.
Observe that for any w in the domain of p, we have
g(p(w)) =
n
X
i=1
wig(pi) =
n
X
i=1
wi(aδi + b) = aw + b,
so
p(w) = g−1(aw + b).
We have that g−1 is strictly cyclically monotone (by Proposition C.8), and it is easy to verify that
for any strictly cyclically monotone function f and any a > 0 and b, f(ax+b) is a strictly cyclically
monotone function of x. Therefore, p(w) = g−1(aw+b) is strictly cyclically monotone, as desired.
Now we prove the converse. Assume that we have a pooling operator ⊕satisfying the axioms
in Definition C.6. We wish to show that ⊕is ⊕g for some g : D →Hn(0).
For the remainder of this proof, let p1, . . . , pn be vectors certifying the monotonicity of ⊕, and
let p(·) be as in Definition C.5.
For any q ∈D, let g(q) := w −1
n1n, where w ∈Hn(1) is such that p(w) = q and 1n is the
all-ones vector. This raises the question of well-definedness: does this w necessarily exist, and if
so, is it unique? The following claim shows that this is indeed the case.
Claim C.10. The function p, from the subset of Hn(1) where it is defined to D, is bijective.
Proof. The fact that p is injective follows from the fact that it is strictly cyclically monotone (see
Proposition C.8). We now show that p is surjective.
Let q ∈D. Define the function ˜p : ∆n+1 →D by
˜p(w1, . . . , wn+1) := pr
 n
M
i=1
(pi, wi)
!
⊕(q, wn+1)
!
.
Since ˜p is a continuous map31 from ∆n+1 (an n-dimensional manifold) to D (an (n−1)-dimensional
manifold), ˜p is not injective.32 So in particular, let w1 ̸= w2 ∈∆n+1 be such that ˜p(w1) = ˜p(w2).
That is, we have
30This follows from the invariance of domain theorem, which states that the image of an open subset of a manifold
under an injective continuous map is open.
31By the continuity axiom; here we use the more generalized form we stated earlier.
32This follows e.g. from the Borsuk-Ulam theorem.
35

 n
M
i=1
(pi, w1,i)
!
⊕(q, w1,n+1) =
 n
M
i=1
(pi, w2,i)
!
⊕(q, w2,n+1).
(7)
Observe that w1,n+1 ̸= w2,n+2; for otherwise it would follows from the subtraction axiom that
two different combinations of the pi’s would give the same probability, contradicting the fact that p
is injective. Without loss of generality, assume that w1,n+1 > w2,n+1. We can rearrange the terms
in Equation 7 to look as follows.
(q, w1,n+1 −w2,n+1) ⊕
 M
i∈S
(pi, vi)
!
=
M
i∈T⊆[n]\S
(pi, vi)
for some positive v1, . . . , vn. By the distributive property, we may multiply all weights by
1
w1,n+1−w2,n+1 .
The result will be an equation as in Definition C.5, certifying that q is in the range of the function
p, as desired.
We return to our main proof, now that we have shown that our function g(q) := w−1
n1, where
w ∈Hn(1) is such that p(w) = q, is well-defined. In fact, we can simply write g(q) = p−1(q)−1
n1.
(The vector 1
n1 is fairly arbitrary; it only serves the purpose of forcing the range of g to lie in Hn(0)
instead of Hn(1).)
We first show that the equation that defines ⊕g holds – that is, that if (q1, v1) ⊕(q2, v2) =
(q, v1 + v2) (with v1, v2 ≥0, not both zero), then
g(q) = v1g(q1) + v2g(q2)
v1 + v2
.
Let w1, w2 ∈Hn(1) be such that q1 = p(w1) and q2 = p(w2).
It is intuitive that q =
p

v1w1+v2w2
v1+v2

, but we show this formally.
Claim C.11. Given q1, q2 ∈D with q1 = p(w1), q2 = p(w2), and 0 ≤α ≤1, we have
p(αw1 + (1 −α)w2) = (q1, α) ⊕(q2, 1 −α).
Proof. Note that
(q1, 1) ⊕

M
i:w1,i<0
(pi, w1,i)

=
M
i:w1,i>0
(pi, w1,i)
(q2, 1) ⊕

M
i:w2,i<0
(pi, w2,i)

=
M
i:w2,i>0
(pi, w2,i).
Applying the distributive property to the two above equations with constants α and 1 −α, respec-
tively, and adding them, we get that
(q1, α) ⊕(q2, 1 −α) ⊕

M
i:w1,i<0
(pi, αw1,i)

⊕

M
i:w2,i<0
(pi, (1 −α)w2,i)


=

M
i:w1,i>0
(pi, αw1,i)

⊕

M
i:w2,i>0
(pi, (1 −α)w2,i)

.
36

We have that (q1, α)⊕(q2, 1 −α) = (q, 1). It follows (after rearranging terms, from Definition C.5)
that q = p

v1w1+v2w2
v1+v2

.
Applying Claim C.11 with α =
v1
v1+v2 , we find that
g(q) = v1w1 + v2w2
v1 + v2
−1
n1 = v1
 g(q1) + 1
n1

+ v2
 g(q2) + 1
n1

v1 + v2
−1
n1 = v1g(q1) + v2g(q2)
v1 + v2
,
as desired.
It remains to show that g is continuous, strictly cyclically monotone, and has convex range. By
the monotonicity axiom, p is strictly cyclically monotone. It follows by Proposition C.8 that its
inverse its continuous and strictly cyclically monotone. Therefore, g is continuous and cyclically
monotone (as it is simply a translation of p−1(q) by 1
n1).
Finally, to show that g has convex range, we wish to show that p−1 has convex range; or, in other
words, that the domain on which p is defined is convex. And indeed, this follows straightforwardly
from Claim C.11. Let w1, w2 be in the domain of p, with p(w1) = q1, p(w2) = q2. Then for any
0 ≤α ≤1, we have that
p(αw1 + (1 −α)w2) = (q1, α) ⊕(q2, 1 −α),
so in particular αw1 + (1 −α)w2 is in the domain of p. This concludes the proof.
D.
The convex exposure property
Several of our results have been contingent on the convex exposure property. In this e-companion,
we consider when the convex exposure property holds. Our first result is that it always holds in
the case of a binary outcome (i.e. n = 2).
Proposition D.1. If n = 2, every (continuous) proper scoring rule has convex exposure.
Proof. Consider a proper scoring rule s with forecast domain D. Since D is connected and g is
continuous on D, the range of g over D is connected. In the n = 2 outcome case, the range of g
lies on the line {(x1, x2) : x1 + x2 = 0}, and a connected subset of a line is convex.
As we shall see, the convex exposure property holds for nearly all of the most commonly used
scoring rules even in higher dimensions.
(A note on notation: in this section we use pj instead of p(j) to refer to the j-th coordinate of
a probability distribution p.)
We now show that scoring rules that — like the logarithmic scoring rule — “go off to infinity”
have convex exposure.
Proposition D.2. Let s be a proper scoring rule whose forecast domain is the interior of ∆n,
such that for any point x on the boundary of ∆n, and for any sequence x1, x2, . . . converging to x,
limk→∞∥g(xk)∥2 = ∞.33 Then s has convex exposure.
33[ACV13] say that G is a pseudo-barrier function if this condition is satisfied.
37

This is a statement of convex analysis — namely that if ∥g∥2 approaches ∞on the boundary
of a convex set, then the range of g is convex (assuming g is the gradient of a differentiable convex
function). We refer the reader to [Roc70b, Theorem 26.5] for the proof. In non-pathological cases,
the basic intuition is that every v ∈{x : P
i xi = 0} is the gradient of G at some point. In these
cases, ∇G(x) = v where x minimizes G(v)−v ·x; the limk→∞∥g(xk)∥2 = ∞condition means that
this minimum does not occur on the boundary of ∆n.
Corollary D.3. The following scoring rules have convex exposure:
• The logarithmic scoring rule.
• The scoring rule given by G(p) = −P
j pγ
j for γ ∈(0, 1).
• The scoring rule given by G(p) = −P
j ln pj, which can be thought of as the limit of the G
in the previous bullet point as γ →0.34
• The scoring rule hs given by Ghs(p) = −Q
j p1/n
j
.
The hs scoring rule
The last of these scoring rules is a generalization of the scoring rule hs(q) =
1 −
q
1−q
q
used in [BB20] as part of proving their minimax theorem for randomized algorithms.35
The authors used this scoring rule as a key ingredient in their minimax theorem for randomized
algorithms.
The key property of the scoring rule was a result about its amplification [BB20,
Lemma 3.10]. The authors define a forecasting algorithm to be a generalization of a randomized
algorithm that outputs an estimated probability that an output should be accepted. Then, roughly
speaking, the authors show that given a forecasting algorithm R, it is possible to create a forecasting
algorithm R′ that has a much larger expected score from the scoring rule hs by combining running R
a small number of times and combining the outputs. This is an important new result in theoretical
computer science and suggests that hs deserves more attention.
Since additive and multiplicative constants are irrelevant, we may treat hs(q) = −1
2
q
1−q
q .
Observe that (in the case of two outcomes), the expected score Ghs on a report of q is
Ghs(q) = q

−1
2
r1 −q
q

+ (1 −q)

−1
2
r1 −q
q

= −
p
q(1 −q).
That is, Ghs is precisely negative the geometric mean of q and 1−q. This motivates us to generalize
hs to a setting with n outcomes by setting
Ghs(p) := −
n
Y
i=1
p1/n
i
.
It should not be obvious that this function is convex, but it turns out to be; this is the precise
statement of an inequality known as Mahler’s inequality [Wik18].
Next we note that the quadratic scoring rule has convex exposure, since its exposure function
g(p) = 2p (modulo 1n as discussed in Remark 3.12 of the main article) maps any convex set to a
convex set.
Proposition D.4. The quadratic scoring rule has convex exposure.
34This is a natural way to think of this scoring rule because ∇G(p) = −(p−1
1 , . . . , p−1
n ).
35Here we are using the shorthand notation for the n = 2 outcome case discussed in Remark 3.5 of the main article.
38

Spherical scoring rules — the third most studied proper scoring rules, after the quadratic and
logarithmic rules — also have convex exposure.
Definition D.5 (Spherical scoring rules). [GR07, Example 2] For any α > 1, define the spherical
scoring rule with parameter α to be the scoring rule given by
Gsph,α(p) :=
 n
X
i=1
pα
i
!1/α
.
If the “spherical scoring rule” is referenced with no parameter α given, α is presumed to equal 2.
Proposition D.6. For any α > 1, the spherical scoring rule with parameter α has convex exposure.
Proof. Fix α > 1. We will write G in place of Gsph,α. We have36
g(p) =


n
X
j=1
pα
j


(1/α)−1
(pα−1
1
, . . . , pα−1
n
).
(8)
Now, define the n-dimensional unit β-sphere, i.e. {x : P
j xβ
j = 1}, and define the n-dimensional
unit β-ball correspondingly (i.e. with ≤in place of =). The range of g is precisely the part of the
n-dimensional unit
α
α−1-sphere with all non-negative coordinates. Indeed, on the one hand, for any
p we have
X
j
gj(p)α/(α−1) =

X
j
pα
j


−1
·
X
j
pα
j = 1
(where gj(p) denotes the j-th coordinate of g(p) as in Equation 8). On the other hand, given a
point x on the unit
α
α−1-sphere with all non-negative coordinates,
p =

X
j
x1/(α−1)
j


−1 
x1/(α−1)
1
, . . . , x1/(α−1)
n

lies in ∆n and satisfies g(p) = x.
The crucial point for us is that for β > 1, the unit β-ball is convex. This means that for any such
β, the convex combination of any number of points on the unit β-sphere will lie in the unit β-ball.
Since
α
α−1 > 1 for α > 1, we have that for arbitrary p, q ∈∆n and w ∈[0, 1], wg(p) + (1 −w)g(q)
lies in the unit β-ball — in fact, in the part with all non-negative coordinates. Now, consider
casting a ray from this convex combination point in the positive 1n direction. All points on this
ray are equivalent to this point modulo T(1n), and this ray will intersect the unit β-sphere at some
point x with all non-negative coordinates. The point p ∈∆n with g(p) = x satisfies
g(p) = g(p) + (1 −w)g(q).
This completes the proof.
Remark D.7. The above proof gives a geometric interpretation of the QA pooling with respect
to the spherical scoring rule, particularly for α = 2. In the α = 2 case, pooling amounts to taking
the following steps:
36As discussed in Remark 3.12 of the main article, the range of g should be thought of as modulo T(1n). However,
we find it convenient for this proof to think of it as lying in Rn and project later.
39

(1) Scale each forecast so it lies on the unit sphere.
(2) Take the weighted average of the resulting points in Rn.
(3) Shift the resulting point in the positive 1n direction to the unique point in that direction that
lies on the unit sphere.
(4) Scale this point so that its coordinates add to 1.
Finally we consider the parametrized family known as Tsallis scoring rules, defined in [Tsa88].
Definition D.8 (Tsallis scoring rules). For γ > 1, the Tsallis scoring rule with parameter γ is the
rule given by
GTsa,γ(p) =
m
X
j=1
pγ
j .
Setting γ = 2 above yields the quadratic scoring rule. Note also that we have already addressed
the scoring rule given by G(p) = ± P
j pγ
j for γ ≤1 (except γ = 0, 1, which are degenerate), with
the sign chosen to make G convex: these scoring rules have convex exposure by Proposition D.2.
The following proposition completes our analysis for this natural class of scoring rules.
Proposition D.9. For γ ≤2, the Tsallis scoring rule with parameter γ has convex exposure. For
γ > 2, this is not the case if n > 2.
Proof of Proposition D.9. Fix γ > 1. We will write G in place of GTsa,γ. Up to a multiplicative
factor of γ that we are free to ignore, we have
g(p) = (pγ−1
1
, . . . , pγ−1
n
).
Let p, q ∈∆n and w ∈[0, 1]. We wish to find an x ∈∆n such that g(x) = wg(p) + (1 −w)g(q),
i.e.
wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
+ c = xγ−1
j
,
for all j ∈[n], for some c. Since P
j xj = 1, this c must satisfy
X
j
(wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
+ c)1/(γ−1) = 1.
(9)
Let h(x) := P
j(wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
+ x)1/(γ−1). Note that h is increasing in x.
First consider the case that γ ≤2. By concavity, we have that wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
≤(wpj +
(1 −w)qj)γ−1. This means that
h(0) =
X
j
(wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
)1/(γ−1) ≤
X
j
(wpj + (1 −w)qj) = 1.
On the other hand, limx→∞h(x) = ∞. Since h is continuous, there must be some x ∈[0, ∞) such
that h(x) = 1; call this value c. Then let
xj = (wpγ−1
j
+ (1 −w)qγ−1
j
+ c)1/(γ−1).
Then every xj is nonnegative and P
j xj = 1, so we have succeeded.
40

Now consider the case that γ > 2, and consider as a counterexample p = (1, 0, . . . , 0), q =
(0, 1, 0, . . . , 0), and w = 1
2. To satisfy Equation 9, we are looking for c such that
h(c) = 2
1
2 + c
1/(γ−1)
+ (n −2)c1/(γ−1) = 1.
Note that h(0) = 2 · 2−1/(γ−1) = 2(γ−2)/(γ−1) > 1, so c < 0 (as h is increasing). But in that case
xγ−1
j
< 0 for any j ≥3, a contradiction (assuming n > 2).
Note that because ∇GTsa,γ(p) = (pγ−1
1
, . . . , pγ−1
n
) (up to a constant factor), QA pooling with
respect to the Tsallis scoring rule can be thought of as an appropriately scaled coordinate-wise
(γ −1)-power mean. For γ = 2 it is the coordinate-wise arithmetic average. For γ = 3 it is the
coordinate-wise root mean square, but with the average of the squares scaled by an appropriate
additive constant so that, upon taking the square roots, the probabilities add to 1. (However, as
the Tsallis score with parameter 3 does not have convex exposure, this is not always well-defined.)
In Corollary D.3 we mentioned that the scoring rule given by G(p) = −P
j ln pj can be thought
of as an extension to γ = 0 of (what we are now calling) the Tsallis score, because the derivative of
ln x is x−1. QA pooling with respect to this scoring rule is, correspondingly, the −1-power mean,
i.e. the harmonic mean. This pooling method is appropriately referred to as harmonic pooling, see
e.g. [Daw+95, §4.2].
Finally, we note that the logarithmic scoring rule can likewise be thought of as an extension of
the Tsallis score to γ = 1, in that the second derivative of x ln x is x−1. It is likewise natural to call
the geometric mean the 0-power mean; notice that logarithmic pooling is precisely an appropriately
scaled coordinate-wise geometric mean.
41