TITLE: Customized Dynamic Pricing When Customers Develop a Habit or Satiation
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2412
---

University of Southern Denmark
Customized dynamic pricing when customers develop a habit or satiation
Chen, Wen; He, Ying; Bansal, Saurabh
Published in:
Operations Research
DOI:
10.1287/opre.2022.2412
Publication date:
2023
Document version:
Accepted manuscript
Citation for pulished version (APA):
Chen, W., He, Y., & Bansal, S. (2023). Customized dynamic pricing when customers develop a habit or
satiation. Operations Research, 71(6), 2158-2174. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2412
Go to publication entry in University of Southern Denmark's Research Portal
Terms of use
This work is brought to you by the University of Southern Denmark.
Unless otherwise specified it has been shared according to the terms for self-archiving.
If no other license is stated, these terms apply:
 • You may download this work for personal use only.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying this open access version
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Please direct all enquiries to puresupport@bib.sdu.dk
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Customized Dynamic Pricing when Customers
Develop a Habit or Satiation
Wen Chen
Providence Business School, Providence College,
Providence, RI, USA, 02908,
wchen@providence.edu
Ying He
Department of buisness and management, University of Southern Denmark,
Campusvej 55, 5230, Odense, Denmark,
yinghe@sam.sdu.dk
Saurabh Bansal
Smeal College of Business, The Pennsylvania State University,
State College, PA, USA, 16803,
sub32@psu.edu
Forthcoming at Operations Research
We study a dynamic pricing problem in which a firm chooses prices over multiple periods when consumers
are state dependent, i.e., they develop a habit or satiation from their past consumption. We first derive an
inter-temporal demand function to capture how demand in one period depends on the price in that period
and consumption in previous periods through habit or satiation. Subsequently, we formulate the optimal
price setting problem for a firm over a multi-period horizon. We establish that this problem is jointly concave
in prices and then characterize the temporal trends in the optimal prices. These trends in optimal prices are a
net outcome of two opposite effects: (i) the progressive build up of habit or satiation from consumption, and
(ii) the progressive deterioration of the habit or satiation developed in prior periods. Based on the relative
strengths of these two effects, the optimal prices follow either a penetration policy (prices increase over
time), or a skimming policy (prices decrease over time), or a skimming-penetration policy (U-shaped prices),
or a penetration-skimming policy (Inverse-U-shaped prices). Subsequently, we provide several extensions
including bounds on prices and optimal profit and non-stationary state dependence. Numerical studies show
that ignoring habit and satiation effects in customers can be significantly costly for a firm.
Key words : behavioral pricing, dynamic pricing, habit and satiation, state dependent pricing
1

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
1
1. Introduction
The availability of digital records for business transactions today has enabled firms to engage repeat
customers with a customized experience. Almost all large customer-facing businesses in the U.S.
encourage customers to join a shoppers’ program (Bell and Lal, 2002). Once a customer (she) joins
the program the firm has information for her demographics and purchase behavior. Some firms
use the customers’ contact details available through these programs to communicate new prod-
uct arrivals (Liebermann, 1999). Many others exploit this information to track the consumption
history of a specific customer and then offer her a customized price (or a discount) for the next
purchase (Rossi et al., 1996; Chen and Iyer, 2002; Zhang and Wedel, 2009). For instance, produce
grocery chains often give their members discounts on specific items based on their prior purchases.
Surplus/seasonal clothing brands such as Kohl’s send coupons to its members of either 15%, 20%
or 30% discounts for selected product categories based on prior purchases. Such discounts are also
common in the restaurant industry. We focus on the revenue management aspect of such programs.
Specifically, we focus on a firm that sends discounts to individual customers based on their
prior purchases. These discounts are for products or experiences that cannot be stockpiled by the
customer (e.g., perishable food, fast fashion, outside dining). The prior consumption of a customer
influences her willingness to pay via (i) habit, or, (ii) satiation. Habit formation means that prior
consumption leads a customer to develop a habit or ritual for consuming a product (or a product
category) which makes her less price-sensitive during a subsequent purchase (Read et al., 1999).
Satiation means that prior consumption leads a customer to feel that she has had her fill of the
product, which makes her less inclined for a repeat purchase (Loewenstein and Angner, 2003).
Prior literature has shown that these effects are prominent in customers’ thought process for repeat
purchase decisions (Duesenberry, 1952; Becker and Murphy, 1988; Wathieu, 1997).
We investigate how the firm should set prices (or discounts) when customer decisions are driven
by these effects, under the following dynamics. In Period 1, the firm chooses a price to offer to a
customer. The customer makes a purchase decision at this price and then uses the product. In the
subsequent Period 2, she may have developed either a habit of using the product or satiation from
using the product in Period 1. This habit or satiation will impact the price the firm should offer to
this customer in Period 2. The customer now makes a purchase based on the price offered and her
habit or satiation. In Period 3, her updated habit or satiation level is based on her immediate prior
consumption in Period 2 as well as lingering effects of habit or satiation in Period 2. The firm now
offers an updated price or discount to the customer. This trend continues for the future periods.
In this dynamics, the pricing problem faced by the firm has the following tradeoff. Consider
a customer who is prone to developing a habit for the product. In Period 2, the firm can offer

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
2
;
either a high discount or a low discount to this customer (we use a fully quantitative model in our
analysis later). At a high discount (or equivalently a lower price), the customer will purchase a
large amount. The firm will earn a low revenue per unit on the amount bought by the customer in
this period. But this large purchase will also create a stronger habit in the customer that the firm
can exploit in the future periods. At a low discount, the customer will purchase a lesser amount
in Period 2. The firm will earn a higher per unit revenue in this period. But the lower purchase
quantity will also result in a weaker habit in the customer for the future periods. This tradeoff
exists in every period. These effects are reversed for a satiation prone customer. A high discount
in Period 2 will result in a higher purchase in Period 2, but it will also exacerbate the satiation in
the customer in the future periods; to counter this acute satiation the firm will need to offer higher
discounts in the future periods. A low discount in Period 2 will lead to a low sale in this period,
but will contain the satiation build up in the future periods.
Using an analytical model, we determine the optimal profit-maximizing dynamic prices that a
firm should offer to a customer based on:(i) the habit or satiation she develops from purchases in the
prior periods, and (ii) accounting for the implications for the prices in future periods. These results
are robust for various specifications for habit formation, and yet in each specification they are
obtainable tractably. The optimal prices are an outcome of two opposite effects: (i) the progressive
build up of habit or satiation over time, and (ii) the progressive deterioration of the habit or
satiation at the time of initial enrollment. Based on the relative strengths of these two effects, the
optimal prices follow either a penetration policy (in which prices increase over time), or a skimming
policy (in which prices decrease over time), or a skimming-penetration policy (U-shaped prices),
or a penetration-skimming policy (Inverse-U-shaped prices). We also provide comparative statics,
various bounds and extensions to our models and results. Numerical studies show a significant
benefit for the firm from incorporating customers’ habit and satiation into pricing decisions. Our
primary focus is on a finite horizon, consistent with seasonal products and experiences (we discuss
the extensive literature on finite horizon plans for marketing and operational decision making in the
next section). We also discuss how these two effects provide pricing trends for an infinite horizon.
1.1. Literature Review
Prior literature provides extensive documentation that firms change prices over a multi-period
planning horizon in order to optimize profit. The reasons for adopting dynamic pricing policies
can be categorized into (i) firm/macro level factors, and (ii) customers’ behavioral factors. The
literature on firm/macro level factors suggests that mark downs are useful for a firm to clear
inventory (e.g., end of season or perishable products), manage uncertainty about which product

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
3
will become popular, and manage capacity and yields. Exhaustive reviews of this literature include
Talluri and van Ryzin (2004) and Strauss et al. (2018).
Customers’ behavioral factors also induce firms to change prices over time. For durable products
(e.g., mattress) discounts separate price-sensitive customers from non price-sensitive customers
(Putler, 1992). For products with infrequent purchase incidents premium pricing (or mark up
pricing) helps with price discrimination, e.g., between business travel and leisure travel in the airline
industry (Dresner, 2006). For many product categories, customers could engage in stockpiling
which systematically affects the firm’s pricing (Su, 2010). In contrast, our focus is on customers’
behavioral factors for products with repeat purchases when stockpiling is not possible. Specifically,
we focus on personalized or customized pricing in which the firm offers a customer a price that
is specific to her, based on her characteristics and prior consumption. Starting with Acquisti and
Varian (2005), prior descriptive literature documents that firms do engage in such individual specific
pricing. Prescriptive literature investigates the implications of this pricing from inventory (Aydin
and Ziya, 2009), channel performance (Liu and Zhang, 2006), and quality (Choudhary et al., 2005)
perspectives, for various types of products and experiential goods (Dub´e et al., 2017; Elmachtoub
et al., 2021).
We focus on the effect of prior purchases on the subsequent purchase decision of a customer.
Prior research on repeat purchases describes two regimes for such decisions (Rao, 2009, pp 179-
239). A customer’s purchase decision today may be affected by her prior purchases through (i)
state dependence, or (ii) reference prices. The state dependence regime is applicable when a cus-
tomer’s purchase (and consumption) in one period either induces a stronger propensity to buy the
same product in the next period or she become less enthusiastic about the product. The stronger
propensity to buy is often termed as “inertia”. The loss of enthusiasm is attributed to variety
seeking behavior. In the reference price regime, a customer’s purchase price in a period provides a
mental anchor or reference for price in the subsequent period. The customer’s purchase in the next
period is saliently based on a comparison between this reference price and the price offered to the
customer in this later period. Of these two regimes, our focus is on the first regime, where inertia
(or habit) and variety seeking (or satiation) due to past consumption impact a customer’s future
purchases.
Empirical studies have documented the presence of state dependence and reference price effects
for different types of products. Dub´e et al. (2010) and Havranek et al. (2017) among many others
document and quantify the extent of state dependence in customers. Reference price effects also
have been quantified and documented in the prior literature including Greenleaf (1995). Prior
analytical research has focused more on the reference price effects as opposed to state dependence

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
4
;
effects with an emphasis to develop prescriptions for how a firm should set (changing) prices in the
presence of reference price effects. Most noticeable in this literature, Kopalle et al. (1996) consider
that a customer’s reference price evolves as: Ref. Pricet = βRef. Pricet−1 +(1−β)Pricet−1. That is,
the customer’s mental reference price in a period t is a linear combination of the reference price
and the actual price in the previous period. The parameter β denotes the strength of the mental
anchor on previous price and takes a strictly non-negative value. A customer derives an additional
utility when she can buy a product at a price that is lower than the reference price and a disutility
when the price is higher than the reference price. With this setup, they study the optimal dynamic
pricing policy for a firm. In a later paper, Popescu and Wu (2007) derive several additional results
for this model with a wider set of utility functions such as loss seeking customers, and provide
algebraic proofs for several trends observed in the numerical studies of Kopalle et al. (1996).
The models and the insights obtained using the models with reference price effects are not, in
general, directly applicable to the state dependence regime where habit and satiation effects are
salient in customers. As an illustration, as noted above, a central part of reference price regime is
that a customer’s reference price follows: Ref. Pricet = βRef. Pricet−1+(1−β)Pricet−1. An outcome
of this dynamics is that when a firm charges a constant price over a long duration, this reference
price will become constant for a customer; and we would expect the customer to buy the product
in the same amount over multiple periods. However, under state dependence a satiation prone
customer will progressively buy a lower quantity when offered a constant price; and a habit prone
customer will buy a progressively higher amount. Our analysis is applicable to such settings with
habit or/and satiation.
In particular, we study how a firm should respond to habit and satiation in its customers from
prior purchases by adjusting price dynamically. While prior descriptive literature has documented
these effects and developed measurement scales to quantify them (Kristeller and Rodin, 1989;
Verplanken et al., 1994; Verplanken, 2006), how a firm should optimize its prices in the presence of
these behavioral features has not been studied. A related stream of research studies a customer’s
forward looking mental calculus where her purchase decisions in a current period are informed by
the likely prices in the future periods (see, e.g., Aviv and Pazgal, 2008; Gangwar, 2009; Gangwar
et al., 2021, among others). We do not consider these effects in our development.
The existing literature discusses three motivations for a firm to consider a finite horizon in
determining prices. From an operations and marketing interface perspective, inventory may have
an expiration date, e.g., perishable food items. In many other instances the product may be highly
seasonal and the firm needs to optimize its revenue from the product over the selling season, e.g,
sales from fresh berries and figs. The marketing literature also extensively discusses Customer

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
5
Lifetime Value (CLV), which corresponds to the value of an individual customer for a firm. The
CLV is typically determined over a finite horizon, at the end of which the customer disengages with
a product. A strong stream of literature has focused on identifying ways to reengage the customer
with a focal product. Psychology driven literature has extensively discussed and documented the
Habit Discontinuity Hypothesis which states that habit discontinuity occurs saliently when there
are environment changes or interventions. Several experimental studies in different contexts confirm
this hypothesis, including commuters’ habit of using different transportation modes, university
students’ reading and exercising habits, as well as energy-related behaviors. Interested readers are
referred to Verplanken et al. (2018) for a comprehensive review. As noted earlier, finite horizon
is also commonly adopted to study optimal pricing for seasonal goods, fashion goods, travel and
leisure industry services (Gallego and van Ryzin, 1994; Mantrala and Rao, 2001; Aviv and Pazgal,
2008; Soysal and Krishnamurthi, 2012; Mak et al., 2014). The seasonality of such goods creates
a natural intervention of habit, consistent with the Habit Discontinuity Hypothesis. For these
reasons, we first focus on a finite horizon followed by the results for an infinite horizon.
1.2. Analysis Overview and Contributions
We use an analytical modeling framework to obtain these optimal prices in a tractable manner,
study trends in these prices, and show that these trends are robust. Mathematically, our analytical
development has three parts: (i) representing how state dependence of habit or satiation evolves
over time, (ii) deducing the demand faced by the firm as a result of this state dependence, (iii)
given this demand, formulating the firm’s pricing problem and solving it. We start with expressions
for how a customer’s satiation and habit in one period depends on her habit or satiation level and
consumption in previous periods. This dynamics is modeled after the literature on axiomization
and modeling of these two behavioral effects (e.g., Baucells and Sarin, 2010; He et al., 2013;
Baucells and Zhao, 2020). Subsequently, we obtain a customer’s purchase quantity decision from
solving the customer’s utility maximization problem in each period given a price. This utility-
optimization approach to obtain demand uses the standard microeconomic paradigm described in
Varian (1992) and Mas-Colell et al. (1995). We then solve the firm’s profit maximization problem
by choosing optimal prices, given the demand function. The optimal prices show specific trends
(penetration policy, or skimming policy, or skimming-penetration policy, or penetration-skimming
policy) in different partitions of two parameters of state dependence: the initial habit or satiation
in a customer, and the propensity of a customer to develop habit or satiation from consumption.
From a technical perspective, we show that for a commonly used utility function, the firm’s
problem is jointly concave in prices and these prices are obtainable from a set of linear equations.
We also show that the state space partitions and pricing trends obtained for these partitions are

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
6
;
robust to specifications of habit. Managerially, our development provides managers a framework to
segment a market when habit and satiation are salient and adopt segment specific pricing policies.
2. Models for Customer and Firm Decisions
Our modeling development has two agents: an individual customer and a firm that sells a product
over multiple periods. In each period, the customer chooses a consumption level given the price
offered by the firm in this period and her habit or satiation from previous periods. The firm
anticipates this response and selects the price to offer to the customer. As is customary with
problems of sequential decision making, we first model the customer’s consumption problem (§2.1)
and then tackle the firm’s optimal pricing problem (§2.2).
2.1. Demand based on Price, Prior Consumption, and Habit and Satiation
We model an individual customer’s utility maximization problem based on satiation or habit, and
deduce the customer’s demand as a function of the prices set by the firm. Consider a customer
who chooses between two goods, i.e., X and Y, where X is the product sold by the firm and Y is
an outside option comprised of all other alternatives. The customer has a total disposal income
of w to buy X and Y in each period t. Without a loss of generality, we assume that the per unit
price of Y is one. She purchases xt and yt units of the two goods respectively. Consistent with
Varian (1992) and Mas-Colell et al. (1995), we consider the customer’s utility over xt and yt to be
quasilinear, i.e. U(xt,yt) = u(xt)+Cyt. We next adapt this utility function to incorporate satiation
and habit. The customer’s satiation level at the beginning of period t is denoted by st, with the
following functional form that is consistent with Baucells and Sarin (2010):
st = γ(xt−1 −ht−1 + st−1)
(1)
where ht denotes the habit level in period t, t = {1,2,...,T} and T is the firm’s planning horizon.
As shown in (1) the customer’s satiation level in period t is proportional to the consumption
less the habit level in the previous period (xt−1 −ht−1) plus the satiation level in the previous
period. The difference (xt−1 −ht−1) can be interpreted as the effective consumption based on
habit in period t −1. The complete term (xt−1 −ht−1 + st−1) is then equal to the net effective
consumption in period t −1 (consistent with the terminology in Hoch and Loewenstein, 1991; He
et al., 2013). The proportionality factor γ represents the impact of the net effective consumption in
period t −1 on producing the satiation in period t. An upshot of the satiation model in (1) is that
satiation in period t depends on the consumption in all previous periods, i.e., st = st(x1,··· ,xt−1),
through the recursion: st = γ(xt−1 −ht−1 + st−1), st = γ(xt−1 −ht−1 + (γ(xt−2 −ht−2 + st−2))),
st = γ(xt−1 −ht−1 + (γ(xt−2 −ht−2 + γ(xt−3 −ht−3 + st−3)))), and so on.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
7
Multiple specifications can be considered for habit formation. In the simplest model: ht = µxt−1,
the habit ht in period t depends on the consumption in immediate prior period t −1, through the
proportionality constant µ. This simplest formulation is convenient for analysis. Nevertheless, it is
deficient in that it is asymmetric to the satiation model in (1) and the habit in a period t does
not directly depend on the consumptions in all prior periods (which is typically the motivation
for accounting for habit in consumption models). Some prior literature including Wathieu (1997)
considers the functional form of: ht = µxt−1 + (1 −µ)ht−1. In this functional form, the habit ht
depends on all prior consumptions, through the recursion similar to st above: ht = µxt−1 + (1 −
µ)ht−1; ht = µxt−1 + (1 −µ)(µxt−2 + (1 −µ)ht−2); and so on. Nevertheless, when combined with
the specification (1) for satiation, it implies that habit evolves on its own and then affects satiation
through (1).
A third representation for habit is:
ht = µ(xt−1 + ht−1 −st−1)
(2)
This representation is symmetric to (1) for satiation. The habit in period t depends on all prior
consumptions with ht = ht(x1,··· ,xt−1) (i.e., the recursion shown for satiation applies here too),
and together (1) and (2) imply that satiation and habit evolve together and affect each other.
In the remainder of this article, we use the form in (2) to represent habit, with proofs of results
in Online Appendix A. The results we report are robust. We have replicated all results (with
appropriate scaling of constants) for the habit formulation ht = µxt−1 with proofs in Appendix B,
and for the habit formulation ht = µxt−1 + (1 −µ)ht−1 with proofs in Appendix C.
We also note the evolving state of research on the coexistence of habit and satiation. The research
streams on habit and satiation evolved separately. Baucells and Sarin (2010) developed the first
formulation with these effects together. As such the satiation and habit dynamics in (1) and (2) can
accommodate various instances considered in the literature. Consistent with most prior literature
we typically anticipate a customer to be prone to either habit formation or satiation. If the customer
is prone to satiation only, then the parameter µ would take the value of 0 resulting in ht = 0;∀t.
Similarly a customer who is prone to habit only is represented by γ = 0 which implies st = 0;∀t.
Nevertheless, there do exist situations where both these phenomenon may coexist, especially where
a customer’s experience has multiple attributes and some of these attributes are prone to habit and
some others are prone to satiation. For example, individuals may be prone to the habit of eating
lunch outside (at a restaurant), but prone to satiation from the same ethnic cuisine. In a grocery
store context customers may be habituated to the physical aspects of shopping (store layout, store
size) but may seek a variety among the assortment of fresh produce available. A similar dynamics

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
8
;
is also present at fast fashion stores that frequently rotate assortments. Our development is general
and the results we report are applicable to those instances when these effects may coexist but also
straightforward to extend to the streams of literature that focus on satiation only, µ = 0, or habit
only, γ = 0.
In each period t and given ht and st from previous consumption, the customer solves her utility
maximization problem as below.
max
xt,yt U(xt,yt) = [u(xt + st −ht) −u(st)] + Cyt
s.t.
xtpt + yt ≤w
xt,yt ≥0
(3)
The utility difference in the bracket in the objective function is the utility derived from consuming
xt in period t at satiation and habit levels of st and ht respectively. Consistent with prior literature
(Varian, 1992; Mas-Colell et al., 1995; Bergemann and Morris, 2005; Ghose and Huang, 2009;
Varian, 2010, among others), we use a quasilinear utility function to exclude wealth effects on
demand and focus on the behavioral effects of habit and satiation on demand. The results reported
are applicable more broadly, e.g, the trends reported in subsequent results hold for the power
utility function after a first order Taylor series approximation. The first constraint is the budget
constraint with pt denoting the price in period t; and the second is a non-negativity constraint.
This formulation has three aspects each of which is consistent with prior research. The paradigm
of representing consumers’ purchase decisions as outcomes of their utility maximization is used
extensively in the microeconomics literature, including Varian (1992) and Mas-Colell et al. (1995).
The feature that each consumer solves this problem in each period under a budget constraint is
also grounded in this literature. Caro and de Alb´eniz (2012) use this paradigm to study consumers’
shopping patterns at fast fashion outlets such as Zara. They also note that a similar dynamics is
also present for experiential goods such as restaurants for which stockpiling is not typically possible
and consumers’ prior consumption affect their satiation and/or habit behavior. Many behavioral
economists such as Thaler (1999) suggest that budget constraints are present for spend decisions by
most individuals/households. Among others, Park and Jang (2014), and Bellos and Kavadias (2021)
study such decisions in the restaurant sector, music industry, and service operations, respectively.
The presence of habit and/or satiation effects in a customer’s utility function, specifically the
difference in utility [u(xt + st −ht) −u(st)] has been used in the prior literature, e.g., in Baucells
and Sarin (2010) for theory development, and Caro and de Alb´eniz (2012) to study the role of
satiation on assortment planning.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
9
Proposition 1. (Demand under habit formation and satiation) The customer’s purchase
quantity, and equivalently, the firm’s demand obtained from solving (3) is given by
xt = d(pt) + ht −st
(4)
where d(pt) is the base demand function without satiation and habit formation effects.
As this Proposition shows, the consumption xt by the customer in period t depends on the price
in that period through the price response demand function d(pt) as well as the habit and satiation
effects ht and st at the beginning of that period; both st and ht depend on prior consumption
levels, x1,··· ,xt−1 through (1) and (2), which further depend on prior prices, p1,p2,··· ,pt−1. Using
the demand function (4), we also infer insights about how satiation or habit formation influence
the customer’s demand level in each period. In particular, as expected the habit level ht increases
the customer’s demand in a period and satiation st decreases the demand. Overall, this demand
function confirms the intuition that when the firm makes the pricing decision in period t, the effect
of the current consumption by a customer on the future habit formation or satiation must be
considered in order to choose the prices offered to this customer.
We can further substitute (4) in expressions (1) and (2) to state satiation and habit effects as
direct functions of previous prices as
st = γd(pt−1)
ht = µ(d(pt−1) −2st−1 + 2ht−1)
(5)
An alternate form of the second equation is ht = µd(pt−1) + 2µ(ht−1 −st−1). This rewritten form
shows that a value of the parameter µ ≥1/2 can lead to habit ht unboundedly. Accordingly, we
restrict our attention to µ < 1/2. For symmetry, we restrict γ < 1/2. The price-based description of
the two effects in (5) feeds into the firm’s problem, as we discuss shortly. Before this next step, we
connect the functional form of u(xt) with a customer’s demand function d(pt). While our results
are directionally preserved for a range of utility functions, in this paper, we assume a quadratic
utility over x, i.e., u(x) = Ax−B
2 x2;A > 0,B > 0 for analytical tractability as well as its widespread
use in business applications (see, e.g., Tirole, 1988; Amir et al., 2017).
Lemma 1. (Linear demand under habit formation and satiation) For the utility u(x) =
Ax −B
2 x2, the demand function (4) can be rewritten as
xt = a −bpt + ht −st
(6)
where a = A/B,b = C/B.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
10
;
The quadratic utility has a desirable feature that we observe in (5): the customer’s demand
is a linear function of price. Linear demand functions are extensively used in the prior literature
(Araman and Caldentey, 2009; Ferreira et al., 2018; Feng and Shanthikumar, 2018). Prior analytical
research on reference pricing such as Kopalle et al. (1996) and Popescu and Wu (2007) considers
that the customer’s response (demand) function is deterministic and known to the firm, consistent
with (6).
2.2. Firm’s Optimal Pricing Problem
2.2.1. Firm’s Problem:
In anticipation of the customer’s demand in each period t as stated
in (6), the firm seeks to maximize the total discounted profit from selling the product over the plan-
ning horizon of duration T by choosing the optimal values of non-negative prices ⃗p = (p1,··· ,pT) ≥
⃗0. Denoting the time-discounting factor by ρ and per unit cost by c, the firm’s problem is repre-
sented by the following dynamic program:
max
pt≥0 Jt(st,ht,pt) = (pt −c)[d(pt) + ht −st] + ρVt+1(γd(pt),µ(d(pt) −2st + 2ht))
where the carry forward function is
Vt+1(s,h) = max
pt+1 Jt+1(s,h,pt+1),
and the terminal condition is
VT +1(s,h) = 0,∀s,h.
For practical considerations, we impose the constraint that the demand is non-negative, i.e.,
d(pt) + ht −st ≥0. Together with the non-negativity constraint on price, it follows that pt ∈
[0, a+ht−st
b
]. This formulation further underscores that the optimal prices, demand, and habit and
satiation levels across various time periods are inter-connected. We next take advantage of the
structure in the problem to recast it as a simultaneous optimization problem.
Proposition 2. The firm’s price optimization problem is equivalently written as:
V1(s1,h1) =
max
pt∈[0, a+ht−st
b
]
π(⃗p)
(7)
s.t. π(⃗p) =
T
X
t=1

ρt−1(pt −c)

a −bpt + ht −st

st = γ(a −bpt−1)
∀t = 2,··· ,T
ht = µ(a −bpt−1 −2st−1 + 2ht−1) ∀t = 2,··· ,T

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
11
The objective function π(⃗p) in (7) represents the sum of discounted profit from all T periods,
with the term in the large square bracket equal to the demand from (5); the subsequent two
equations show relationships between satiation and habit levels in period t to the prior period t−1
obtained from using Lemma 1 in equation (5). We next parameterize the problem to state the
objective function in more tractable form.
2.2.2. Restating the Problem in terms of Prices:
We define two parameters. The first
parameter is defined in Definition 1 below and it helps us characterize the optimal prices by
reformulating the dynamic program in (7) with a reduced dimension of state space. The second
parameter defined in Definition 2 characterizes whether a customer has a propensity to develop
satiation or to develop habit.
Definition 1. The habit or satiation stock (H/S stock) in period t is equal to the net of habit and
satiation levels in that period, and is defined as It := ht −st, ∀t.
Definition 2. The propensity parameter α := µ −γ with range α ∈(−1
2, 1
2

denotes the net effect
from the habit and satiation. The cases α > 0 and α < 0 represent propensity in a customer to
develop habit and to develop satiation, respectively.
Using Definitions 1-2 and equation (5), we express It in terms of the prices ⃗p = (p1,··· ,pT) as
I1 = h1 −s1
(8)
It = ht −st = αd(pt−1) + 2µ(ht−1 −st−1) = α(a −bpt−1) + 2µIt−1, ∀2 < t ≤T.
(9)
The H/S stock in period 1 as shown in (8), I1, denotes the initial habit/satiation state of a customer
when the firm starts offering customized prices to him. In general, I1 is not necessarily zero and
may take any real value. A positive value represents an initial or endowed habit from consumption
prior to the period when the firm started offering customized prices (Gomes and Michaelides, 2003;
Polkovnichenko, 2007; Yu, 2015). A negative value represents satiation from prior consumption.
For instance, a common marketing practice involves providing a customer with a free access to a
product for a limited duration. During the trial period, a customer may either develop a habit of
using the product or may feel satiated with the product, making both case of I1 > 0 and I1 < 0
possible. A customer may also develop a non-zero value of I1 due to consuming similar products in
the past. For instance, if a new brand of yogurt is launched in the market, some of the customers
may already have accumulated a certain level of habit or satiation from consuming similar products
in the past, which makes the initial habit level nonzero.
Equation (9) states the value of the H/S stock in period t in terms of the stock in the previous
period t −1. By recursively applying (9) for periods t −1,t −2,...,1, we can show that:

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
12
;
Lemma 2. Given prices in each period (p2,··· ,pT), It and Ik where t ≥2 and k ≤t satisfy the
following recursive relationship:
It = (2µ)t−1I1 + α
t−2
X
s=0
(2µ)sd(pt−s−1)
= (2µ)t−kIk + α
 t−k−1
X
s=0
(2µ)sd(pt−s−1)

.
(10)
This expression is useful for two purposes. First, it highlights the role of the two parameters, I1
and α, in the optimal pricing decisions, and we focus on this aspect in Section 3 by exploiting the
second equality. Second, by substituting the first equality expression into (7), we obtain an explicit
expression of the total discounted profit in terms of pricing vector ⃗p = (p1,··· ,pT), and parameters
α, and I1, as follows.
π(⃗p;µ,α,I1) =
T
X
t=1

ρt−1(pt −c)

a −bpt + ht −st

=
T
X
t=1

ρt−1(pt −c)

a −bpt + It

=
T
X
t=1

ρt−1[pt −c]

a −bpt + (2µ)t−1I1 + α
t−2
X
k=0

2kµk(a −bpt−k−1)

(11)
Proposition 3. The objective function π(⃗p;µ,α,I1) in (11) is jointly concave in ⃗p.
We next show that the pricing constraints pt ∈[0, a + ht −st
b
] are linear in prices ⃗p and create a
polytope and therefore preserve the concavity properties for the problem
max
pt∈[0, a+ht−st
b
]
π(⃗p;µ,α,I1).
To this end, we first write the upper constraint on prices as (2µ)t−1I1 +(a−bpt)+α
tP
j=2
(2µ)t−j(a−
bpj−1) ≥0;∀t. This is a linear function in prices ⃗p, providing the formulation:
max
pt
π(⃗p;µ,α,I1) = PT
t=1

ρt−1[pt −c]

a −bpt + (2µ)t−1I1 + αPt−2
k=0

2kµk(a −bpt−k−1)

s.t.
(2µ)t−1I1 + (a −bpt) + α
tP
j=2
(2µ)t−j(a −bpj−1) ≥0;∀t, ∀t;
pt ≥0,
∀t.
This problem is a quadratic programming problem with a convex feasible region, which can be
solved using standard optimization routines (Luenberger and Ye, 2016). We discuss one special
case of interest here. For problem instances in which the price constraints do not bind, the optimal
price vector ⃗p∗= (p∗
1,··· ,p∗
T) satisfies the following first order conditions. For i = 1,2,...T,
bα
  i−1
X
t=1
(2µ)i−1−tpt

+ 2bpi + bαρ

T
X
t=i+1
(2µρ)t−i−1pt

= a

1 + 1 −(2µ)i−1
1 −2µ
α

+ bc

1 + 1 −(2µρ)T −i
1 −2µρ
αρ] + (2µ)i−1I1,

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
13
These first order conditions are linear in prices ⃗p∗. We can compactly write them as MP = E,
where M is a T ×T matrix and P and E are column vectors of size T. This system of equations has a
full rank. The matrix M =


2b
bαρ
... bαρ(2µρ)T −3 bαρ(2µρ)T −2
bα
2b
... bαρ(2µρ)T −4 bαρ(2µρ)T −3
...
...
...
...
...
bα
 Pi−1
t=1(2µ)T −3 bα
 Pi−1
t=1(2µ)T −4 ...
2b
bαρ
bα
 Pi−1
t=1(2µ)T −2 bα
 Pi−1
t=1(2µ)T −3 ...
bα
2b


, the
vector P = [p1,p2,...,pT]T r, and each element ei;i = 1,...,T of E is equal to ei = a

1+ 1−(2µ)i−1
1−2µ
α

+
bc

1 + 1−(2µρ)T −i
1−2µρ
αρ] + (2µ)i−1I1. The solution is obtained as p∗
t = [M−1E]t. The linear system of
equations also provide comparative statics tractably, as
∂p∗
i
∂µ = ∂[M−1E]t
∂µ
and
∂p∗
i
∂I1 = ∂[M−1E]t
∂I1
.
The formulation in (11) can also be used to investigate specific pricing strategies. For example,
consider a manager who seeks to offer a low price to get customers habituated to a product
by setting a specific price p1 in period 1. He can then solve the problem for the remainder of
the planning horizon as maximizing the total discounted profit in terms of pricing vector ⃗p =
(p2,··· ,pT), and parameters α, and I1, as follows.
V1(s2,h2) = π(⃗p;µ,α,I2) =
T
X
t=2

ρt−1(pt −c)

a −bpt + ht −st

=
T
X
t=2

ρt−1(pt −c)

a −bpt + It

=
T
X
t=2

ρt−1[pt −c]

a −bpt + (2µ)t−1I1 + α
t−2
X
k=0

2kµk(a −bpt−k−1)

where I2 = α(a−bp1)+2µI1. By changing the levels of the initial price p1 he can conduct a what-if
analysis to determine the changes in optimal prices in the rest of the planning horizon, the demand,
and the total profit.
3. Two Opposite Effects that Impact Price Trajectories: Progressive
Deterioration and Buildup of Habit and Satiation
We next decompose the expression of I1 to identify two effects that determine the trends in optimal
prices over the multi-period horizon. These two effects can be shown using different algebraic
decompositions of It and we discuss here one of these decompositions that leverages Lemma 2. The
demand in period t is equal to (from Proposition 1):
xt = d(pt) + It.
It follows that the firm can charge a higher price when It is higher. To understand what factors
drive the value of It lower or higher, we study the second equality of (10) where we establish that
the H/S stocks in periods k and t are related as:
It = (2µ)t−kIk + α
 t−k−1
X
s=0
(2µ)sd(pt−s−1)

,k ≤t.
(12)

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
14
;
This equation shows that the H/S stock in any period t is equal to the net outcome of two countering
effects with an earlier period k as basis, as shown in the R.H.S. The first effect is captured by
the first term in (12), (2µ)t−kIk, and is the delayed impact of the H/S stock in period k, Ik. Since
µ < 1/2, it follows that this effect deteriorates over time, as shown qualitatively in Figure 1(a).
The pricing implication of this effect is that the habit or satiation in period k deteriorates in
subsequent periods (Deterioration Effect). As a result, the habit a customer has in period k, i.e.,
Ik > 0, becomes weaker in subsequent periods k+1,k+2,...,t . Consequently, the firm would need to
lower the price offered to this customer in subsequent periods k+1,k+2,...,t to overcome the decline
in habit. In contrast when Ik < 0, there is an initial satiation effect in period k which tapers-off in
subsequent periods and the firm can charge a progressively higher price to the customer in periods
k+1,k+2,...,t.
Figure 1: Two counteracting forces to determine net habit in period t
(a) Deteriorating impact (2µ)t−1I1 of initial
habit
(b)
Buildup
of
habit
from
consumption
αPt−2
s=0(2µ)sd(pt−s−1)
The second effect is captured by the second term in (12) and acts in the opposite direction. Figure
1(b) shows that this effect, α
Pt−k−1
s=0
(2µ)sd(pt−s−1)

, is proportional to the sum of consumptions
in all intermediate periods k,k+1,...,t-1. This is a cumulative effect (or Build-up Effect) and its
nature depends on the sign of α. When α > 0, this factor leads to an increase in habit over time,
which in turn, provides an opportunity to the firm to progressively increase the price from period
k onwards. When α < 0, this factor leads to a satiation buildup in the customer, and consequently
the firm is forced to progressively reduce the price offered to this customer from period k onwards.
The price that the firm offers to a customer in a period t is a function of the relative strength of
these two effects. When one of the two effects consistently dominates the other over the complete
planning horizon, the firm’s optimal price for this customer will exhibit monotonicity, otherwise

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
15
it will display a non-monotone behavior. We confirm this intuition with formal results in the next
section. To this end, we first write the case for k=1 and write the first equality in Equation (10):
It = (2µ)t−1I1 + α
t−2
X
s=0
(2µ)sd(pt−s−1), ∀t ≥2
(13)
The Deterioration Effect and the Build-up Effect discussed above can now be described in terms
of two parameters. The first parameter is the initial habit/satiation I1 which measures whether
the customer was habit dominated (I1 > 0) or satiation dominated (I1 < 0) when the firm first
started offering customized prices to the customer. Its effect deteriorates over time. The second
parameter α measures whether a customer will have a buildup of habit (α > 0) or satiation (α < 0)
over a period of time. The trends in optimal prices can now be expressed in terms of these two
parameters, as we discuss next.
4. Optimal Pricing Trends over Multiple Periods
We focus on understanding the trends in the optimal price vector ⃗p∗= (p∗
1,··· ,p∗
T), and identify
the conditions under which the firm should follow a skimming policy or a penetration policy or a
combination of the two. To this end, in Section 4.1, we first illustrate the Deterioration and Build-
up Effects by discussing special cases when either one or both of these parameters are equal to
zero. In Section 4.2, we discuss the optimal prices for the general case when these parameters take
strictly non-zero values. In Section 4.3, we discuss the impact of these parameters on an infinite
planning horizon.
4.1. Benchmark Case and Special Cases with Habit/Satiation
We first consider a benchmark case when α = 0 and I1 = 0. This corresponds to a situation when:
(i) both habit and satiation tendencies are equally strong in a customer, i.e., µ = γ, or neither
habit nor satiation are present, and (ii) the initial H/S stock is zero. It follows that neither the
Deterioration Effect on account of I1 nor the Build-up Effect on account of α, and therefore there
are no demand effects produced by satiation and habit. The firm essentially repeatedly solves a
one-period problem which provides the optimal price for all subsequent periods. We refer to the
optimal pricing level in this case as “Habit/Satiation free pricing”, denoted by pM. The firm would
also choose this price when it ignores the habit or satiation in a customer.
Proposition 4. (Habit/Satiation Free Pricing) When I1 = 0,α = 0, then (i) I∗
t = 0, (ii) p∗
t =
pM = a+bc
2b ,∀t and (iii) π(⃗p∗;µ,0,0) = 1−ρT
1−ρ
(a−bc)2
4b
.
We will use this benchmark price to relatively locate the firm’s optimal prices when the customer
is prone to habit or satiation. We next focus on the case when α = 0,I1 ̸= 0 to highlight the
Deterioration Effect of the initial H/S stock on prices in subsequent periods.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
16
;
Proposition 5. (Penetration vs Skimming Pricing driven solely by initial H/S stock):
When α = 0, then:
(i) If I1 > 0, then skimming pricing is optimal, p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1 ≥pM,∀t.
(ii) If I1 < 0, then penetration pricing is optimal, p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1 ≤pM,∀t.
When α = 0, it follows from (13) that the H/S stock level in each period t only comes from the
Deterioration Effect of the initial H/S stock I1 as shown in Figure 1(a). There is no further buildup
of habit or satiation. When there is a positive initial H/S stock I1 > 0, the firm can charge a price
that is higher than pM to begin with, in t=1. But the customer’s habit becomes progressively
weaker due to the Deterioration Effect. In response, the firm needs to progressively reduce the price.
This leads the firm to follow the price skimming policy. If the initial H/S stock is negative I1 < 0,
this satiation effect will deteriorate over time, which gives the firm an opportunity to progressively
charge a higher price. This results in a price penetration policy. Nevertheless, the price remains
lower than pM to adjust for the lingering effects of initial satiation.
We next provide an analogous result when habit or satiation is present in a customer but the
initial H/S stock is equal to zero, i.e., α ̸= 0;I1 = 0. As summarized in Proposition 6 below, the
optimal pricing policy is again either penetration pricing or skimming type. However, in contrast
to the previous case where the prices in all periods are either consistently above or below the
habit/satiation free price pM, the optimal prices cross pM.
Proposition 6. (Skimming vs Penetration Pricing driven solely by consumption): When
I1 = 0, then
(i) If α > 0, then I∗
t ≥0 and penetration pricing is optimal, p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1, ∀t with p∗
1 ≤pM ≤p∗
T.
(ii) If α < 0, then I∗
t ≤0 and skimming pricing is optimal, p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1, ∀t with p∗
1 ≥pM ≥p∗
T.
When I1 = 0, the H/S stock in each period is solely affected by the Build-up Effect due to
consumption over time, via the second factor in (13). Figure 1(b) shows this effect. As a result,
when α is positive, the customer will form an increasingly stronger habit over time. The firm can
exploit this stronger habit by progressively charging this customer a higher price. Specifically, the
firm would charge a price in period t = 1 that is weakly lower than the habit/satiation free price to
encourage a high consumption in this period, which, in turn, will lead to a stronger habit formation
in subsequent periods. In these later periods, the firm will exploit this build up by charging a
price that is at least as high as the habit/satiation free price. Similarly, when α is negative, the
customer will undergo a build up of satiation. The firm will be forced to progressively lower the
price to counteract this satiation. The firm will start with a price in t = 1 that is higher than
habit/satiation free price to take advantage of the limited window of opportunity before satiation
builds up in subsequent periods. In the later periods, it will respond to satiation by charing prices
that are lower than the habit/satiation free price.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
17
4.2. Optimal Pricing Trajectory with Satiation and Habit Formation Effects Over Finite
Horizon
We next focus on the general case where habit formation and satiation can simultaneously act
through I1 ̸= 0 and α ̸= 0. This general case has a richer structure that is still explained in terms of
the Deterioration and Build-up Effects. The next result shows that for the general case there exist
thresholds of I1 that divide the two-dimensional space of I1 and α into regions where skimming,
penetration, and a combination of these two pricing strategies are optimal.
Proposition 7. (Optimal pricing patterns)
(a) When α > 0, then there exist two thresholds on I1, I1
+ and I1
+ with
0 ≤I1
+ ≤I1
+; such that
(i) when I1 ≤I1
+, p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1, ∀t.
(ii) when I1 ∈(I1
+,I1
+),
∃t⋎∈[2,T −1] : p∗
t−1 ≥p∗
t,∀t ≤t⋎; p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1,∀t ≥t⋎.
(iii) when I1 ≥I1
+, p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1, ∀t.
(b) When α < 0, then there exist two thresholds on I1, I1
−and I1
−with: I1
−≤I1
−≤0; such that
(i) when I1 ≤I1
−, p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1, ∀t.
(ii) when I1 ∈(I1
−,I1
−),
∃t⋏∈[2,T −1] : p∗
t−1 ≤p∗
t,∀t ≤t⋏; p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1,∀t ≥t⋏.
(iii) when I1 ≥I1
−, p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1, ∀t.
The solid lines in Figure 2 are drawn to scale and illustrate these results. When α ̸= 0,I1 ̸= 0,
both the Deterioration Effect and Build-up Effect are at work simultaneously. This leads to a
partitioning of the (α,I1) plane based on which of the two effects is stronger. We first explain part
(a) of the Proposition, when a customer is prone to habit formation, i.e., when α > 0. Panels (a),
(b), (c) of Figure 2 show the pricing results for the three regions of I1. In the first region (I1 < I1
+)
shown in Figure 2(a), the initial habit is relatively weak and it further deteriorates over time. But
due to a positive α the customer also develops a strong habit over time from consumption. The firm
can exploit this habit Build-up Effect by charging him a low price in the beginning. This would
lead to a higher consumption which will result in a habit formation in the customer. The firm will
exploit this habit formation in subsequent periods by charging a progressively higher price, leading
to the penetration policy.
In contrast, in the third region (Figure 2(c)), the initial habit I1 is high (I1 > I1
+). This ini-
tial habit undergoes a sharp deterioration in later periods. This deterioration over time is not
adequately compensated by the habit buildup in subsequent periods due to consumption. Conse-
quently, the firm will respond to the dominating Deterioration Effect: it will charge a higher price

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
18
;
Figure 2: Optimal pricing in different scenarios
α > 0
Habit prone
I1 < I1
(+/−)
(a)
I1 ∈(I1
(+/−),I1
(+/−))
(b)
I1 > I1
(+/−)
(c)
α < 0
Satiation prone
(d)
(e)
(f)
Note: The solid lines in each panel are drawn to scale and illustrate Proposition 7. The dashed lines are for Proposition
8 to illustrate their relative location to the solid lines and are not drawn to scale.
in the initial period but then lower it progressively. In the intermediate region (Figure 2(b)), i.e.,
I1 ∈(I1
+,I1
+), the initial habit level is at a moderate level. At this level, the habit Deterioration
Effect is still strong in the initial periods. As a result, the firm should charge a high price in the
beginning and reduce it progressively. This reduction in price will continuously increase consump-
tion, which, in turn, will make the Build-up Effect stronger. By the intermediate time t⋎, the habit
level is enough to sustain high demand in the remaining periods. The firm can now exploit this
habit buildup by progressively charging a higher price. As a result, in this partition, the optimal
pricing pattern exhibits a “U-shaped” trajectory composed of skimming-penetration policy.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
19
A similar explanation is applicable for part (b) of the Proposition for the case when the customer
is prone to satiation buildup i.e., when α < 0 (panels (d), (e), (f) in Figure 2). There are again two
thresholds of initial H/S stock, I1, I1
−< 0 and I1
−< 0, that partition the space into three regions
with unique pricing policies. In the region, I1 > I1
−(Figure 2(f)), the customer has a low satiation
level which will deteriorate over time. The customer will also undergo a satiation Build-up due
to the negative value of α. The net effect is that the satiation Build-up Effect dominates in this
region. This provides an opportunity to the firm to charge a higher price in the beginning, but then
it will respond to the satiation buildup by progressively lowering the price. In the other extreme
(Figure 2(d)), I1 < I1
−, the customer has a strong satiation to begin with. Its deterioration will
be steep and this Deterioration Effect dominates the satiation Build-up Effect due to consumption
in subsequent periods. The net result is a decline in satiation. Consequently, it is optimal for
the firm to offer a low price in the beginning, and then raise the price as the initial satiation
deteriorates. In the middle region (Figure 2(e)), i.e., I1 ∈(I1
−,I1
−), the initial satiation level is
strong enough that the firm primarily exploit its deterioration by charging a lower price in the
beginning, gradually increasing the price. During this time, the satiation due to consumption also
increases. By the intermediate time t⋏, the satiation level is strong enough that the firm must now
reduce the price in the remaining periods to counter the satiation buildup and generate demand.
As a result, the optimal pricing pattern exhibits an “inverted U-shaped” trajectory composed of
penetration-skimming policy.
We also studied the trends in optimal habit and satiation levels I∗
t . In general, prices p∗
t are in
response to I∗
t and the length of the remaining horizon. Therefore, we expect I∗
t to have trajectories
that are similar to prices with some adjustments to account for the horizon effects. Numerically,
we found this to be the case: The trends in I∗
t resembled trends in p∗
t in the beginning of a finite
planning horizon, however, this similarity does not always hold towards the end of the horizon. We
illustrate this feature numerically in Section 5.2.
The next result provides a comparison of the optimal prices under habit formation and satiation
with the habit/satiation free price.
Proposition 8. (Optimal prices relative to habit/satiation free price) The optimal prices
and the habit/satiation free price satisfy the following orderings:
(a) When α > 0,
(i) if ∃τ : p∗
τ ≥pM, then p∗
t ≥pM, ∀t ≥τ.
(ii) if I1 ≥I1
+, then p∗
t ≥pM ∀t.
(iii) if −α(1−(2µ)T −1)
(2µ)T −1(1−2µ)d(pM) ≤I1 ≤0 ≤I1
+ then p∗
1 ≤pM and p∗
T ≥pM.
(b) When α < 0,

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
20
;
(i) if ∃τ : p∗
τ ≤pM, then p∗
t ≤pM, ∀t ≥τ.
(ii) if I1 ≤I1
−, then p∗
t ≤pM ∀t.
(iii) if I1
−≤0 ≤I1 ≤2(1−(2µ)T −1)
1+(2µ)T −1
  −α
1−2µ

d(pM) then p∗
1 ≥pM and p∗
T ≤pM.
The dashed lines in Figure 2 show these results qualitatively. Results (i) in both cases of α state
that if in a period τ the optimal price exceeds the habit/satiation free price pM (for α > 0) or
is lower than the habit/satiation free price (for α < 0), then the optimal prices in all subsequent
periods will consistently stay above and below the habit/satiation free price respectively. Results
(ii) indicate that optimal prices will always be higher than pM if initial habit I1 is strong enough
when α > 0 and lower than pM if I1 is sufficiently small (or equivalently when satiation is sufficiently
strong) when α < 0. Note that Proposition 7 shows that in these regions, either a U-shaped or
a decreasing price policy is optimal for α > 0 as shown in Figure 2(b) and 2(c); and either an
increasing price or an inverted U-shape policy is optimal when α < 0 as shown in Figure 2(d) and
2(e). It follows from the results (ii) that when α > 0, the optimal prices in both the U-shaped
pricing and monotonic decreasing pricing are above pM in all periods, as shown in the Figure 2(b)
and 2(c). When α < 0, the optimal prices in both the monotonic increasing pricing and inverse
U-shaped pricing are lower then pM, as shown in the Figure 2(d) and 2(e).
Results (iii) provide conditions under which the pricing trajectory crosses pM exactly once for
both α > 0 and α < 0. Specifically, for the case α > 0, when I1 ∈[−α(1−(2µ)T −1)
(2µ)T −1(1−2µ)d(pM),0], the
optimal price starts at p∗
1 ≤pM increases monotonically with time and ends with p∗
T ≥pM. Figure
2(a) shows this result qualitatively. For the case of α < 0, when I1 ∈[0, 2(1−(2µ)T −1)
1+(2µ)T −1
  −α
1−2µ

d(pM)],
the optimal price with p∗
1 ≥pM, decreases continuously and ends with p∗
T ≤pM as shown in Figure
2(f) qualitatively.
Finally, we note some comparative static results for the optimal prices.
Proposition 9. (Monotonicity and successive price difference)
(a) Both p∗
t and I∗
t increase in I1 for every t.
(b) The price difference p∗
t −p∗
t+1 increases in I1.
A higher value of I1 provides a higher base demand and hence a higher optimal price for all
subsequent periods. Furthermore, a higher value of I1 leads to a sharper Deterioration Effect, and
consequently the changes in the optimal prices tend to be steeper.
4.3. Optimal Pricing over an Infinite Horizon
While our primary focus is on finite planning horizon, our modeling development also provides
trends for the optimal prices when the firm has an infinite planning horizon.
Lemma 3. Over an infinite horizon, the price and demand converge to myopic values, i.e.,
limt→+∞p∗
t = pM = a+bc
2b , and limt→+∞x∗
t = xM = a−bc
2 .

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
21
We next focus on determining the trajectory of optimal price to pM. Recall that in the finite
horizon case, the optimal prices followed a monotonic trajectory except in the regions of: I1 ∈
(I1
+,I1
+) for α > 0; and I1 ∈(I1
−,I1
−) for α < 0. These thresholds are functions of planning horizon
T (proof on pages 33-35 of Appendix), and for an infinite horizon they converge in limit, i.e.,
limT →+∞I1
+ = limT →+∞I1
−= limT →+∞I1
+ = limT →+∞I1
−=
α
1−2µ
a−bc
2
(proof on pages 36-37 of
Appendix). As a result, these two regions of non-monotonic pricing trajectories are not present for
the infinite planning horizon.
Proposition 10. For an infinite planning horizon, when I1 ≥
α
1−2µ
a−bc
2 , skimming policy is optimal
with p∗
t ≥p∗
t+1 ≥limt→+∞p∗
t = a+bc
2b
∀t, otherwise, penetration policy is optimal with p∗
t ≤p∗
t+1 ≤
limt→+∞p∗
t = a+bc
2b
∀t.
Similar to the finite planning horizon, the optimal pricing trajectory over an infinite horizon
depends on the initial memory stock level I1 and α. In particular, the comparison of I1 with the
threshold value I1
+ = I1
−=
α
1−2µ
a−bc
2
determines the optimal pricing trajectory. If I1 is greater than
this threshold, the optimal pricing sequence follows a skimming pricing pattern and converges to
pM; and if I1 is less than this threshold, the optimal pricing sequence follows a penetration pricing
pattern and converges to pM. Compared with the finite horizon case where a constant pricing is
optimal only when α = 0 (with I1 = 0), a constant price may be optimal for the infinite horizon
even if either habit formation dominates (α > 0) or satiation dominates (α < 0). In these cases, a
constant optimal pricing is possible when I1 =
α
1−2µ
a−bc
2 . This appropriate level of initial habit or
satiation keeps the habit level or satiation level in each period constant, as the decayed habit or
satiation level in each period is offset exactly by the amount of habit or satiation developed from
the consumption in that period.
This analysis also illustrates that the optimal prices over an infinite horizon show different
characteristics than the optimal prices over a finite horizon, in two ways. Prices in an infinite horizon
either monotonically increase or decrease. In contrast, over a finite horizon the prices may also
exhibit a non-monotone trajectory. These non-monotone trajectories enable a firm to exploit the
end of horizon effects by charging higher prices towards the end of the horizon (in habit dominated
customers) or in the middle of the horizon (in satiation dominated customers). Second, the range
of optimal prices can be larger in a finite horizon since these prices could span both higher and
lower than the myopic price. In contrast, the optimal prices in an infinite horizon remain either
higher or lower than the myopic price.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
22
;
5. Bounds, Value of Habit and Satiation Effects, and Varying Habit/Satiation
5.1. Bounds on Prices
We first provide lower and upper bounds on the optimal prices. While these bounds are primarily
of theoretical interest, they are consistent with some trends we observe in our numerical studies
(discussed in Section 5.2). Subsequently, we provide bounds on the ratio of the firm’s profit when
habit and satiation effects are present compared to when they are absent in a customer.
The optimal price vector ⃗p∗falls within the range provided the two bounds below.
Proposition 11. (Bounds on optimal prices)
(i) When α > 0, then 0 ≤p∗
t ≤max
a + bc
2b
,
a[1 + α 1−(2µ)T −1
1−2µ
] + I1
b

;
(ii) When α < 0, then 0 ≤p∗
t ≤max
a + bc
2b
, a + I1
b
, a
b +
1
1 + α 1−(2µ)T −1
1−2µ
I1
b

.
When α > 0, the range defined by the upper bound becomes (weakly) wider as α increases. This
is consistent with observations in extensive numerical studies that over the planning horizon the
firm offered a wider range of prices to a customer with a stronger habit, all else being equal. Since
this wider range was experienced over the same planning horizon, it meant that the changes in
optimal prices offered to this customer were steeper. The case of α < 0 is more nuanced. When
α < 0, an increase in α means a decrease in the absolute value |α|. Consider the joint effect of
α and I1. When α < 0 and I1 > 0, the value of the upper bound decreases as α increases. When
α < 0 and I1 < 0, we have
1
1+α 1−(2µ)T −1
1−2µ
I1
b < I1
b and therefore 0 ≤p∗
t ≤max

a+bc
2b , a+I1
b

. That is,
the upper bound is a constant.
The next result provides bounds on the ratio of optimal profit for the general case, π(⃗p∗;µ,α,I1),
to the profit π(pM;0,0,0) = 1−ρT
1−ρ (pM −c)d(pM) when habit and satiation formation does not occur
in customers.
Proposition 12. (Impact of customers’ habit and satiation on firm’s profit)
(i) When α > 0,
1 +
I1
d(pM)
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk
+
α
1 −2µ

1 −
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk

≤π(⃗p∗;µ,α,I1)
π(pM;0,0,0) ≤

1 +
max{I1,a}
2d(pM)(1 −2µ)
2
(ii) When α < 0,
1 +
I1
d(pM)
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk
+
α
1 −2µ

1 −
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk

≤π(⃗p∗;µ,α,I1)
π(pM;0,0,0) ≤

1 + (2µ −α)max{I1,0}
2d(pM)
2

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
23
We focus on the first inequality in both results (i) and (ii). In these results, the second term
in the L.H.S.,
I1
d(pM )
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk
, is proportional to initial habit/satiation I1, and the third term,
α
1−2µ

1 −
PT −1
i=0 (2µρ)k
PT −1
i=0 ρk

, is proportional the customer’s inclination to develop habit/satiation, α.
When a customer is inclined to habit formation, i.e., α > 0, for any I1 ≥0, the L.H.S. of the first
inequality in (i) is greater than 1, consistent with habit formation in a customer increasing the total
profit for the firm (as compared to a customer who does not have these effects and therefore has
µ = α = I1 = 0). When the customer has an initial satiation level, i.e., I1 < 0, the bound suggests
that the firm’s profit still may be higher provided that this satiation level is not too high. For
this customer, the habit formation effect eventually dominates in subsequent periods and provides
an opportunity to the firm to extract a price premium from the customer. Finally, the bound
is consistent with a high satiation level in the customer resulting in a lower profit for the firm.
Focusing on part (ii) of the Proposition, when a customer is inclined to develop satiation, i.e.,
α < 0, for any I1 ≤0, the ratio of the profits is less than one, suggesting that the firm’s profit is
lower from such customers as compared to the case when customers do not have these effects.
5.2. Numerical Study: Value of Incorporating Habit and Satiation Effects in Pricing
We conducted numerical experiments to study the magnitude of loss of profit when a firm ignores
state dependent behavioral effects in customers. For these experiments we chose a range of values
of parameters µ,γ,a,b,c,T. To investigate the scenarios where a customer has a propensity for
satiation, we considered various values of 0 < γ < 1/2 with µ = 0 and I1 < 0. For habit, we considered
various values of 0 < µ < 1/2 with γ = 0. and I1 > 0.
For a finite horizon, we used values of I1 obtained in three different ways. First, we considered
exogenous values of I1. This selection represents the case when the customer has prior exposure
to the product, say through a free trial or a gift. Alternately, one can view these values as being
generated when the firm offers the product on a promotion by choosing a price p which results in
the initial satiation/habit level as I1 = α(a−bp). In the second approach, we determined the values
of I1 endogenously. We considered that the firm offers the myopic price in the marketplace pM
which results in the initial satiation/habit level I1 = α(a−bpM) with a−bpM ≥0. For completeness
purposes, in the third approach, we considered that the firm offered the myopic price to the
customer for a considerable time, resulting in the asymptotic value I1 =
α
1−2µ(a −bpM).
For each combination of µ,γ,a,b,c,T,I1, we determined the optimal prices ⃗p∗, habit/satiation
I∗
t , and the firm’s profit at these prices, π(⃗p∗;µ,α,I1). We also determined the firm’s profit when
it incorrectly offers the product in the market over T periods at the constant habit/satiation free
price, as π(pM;µ,α,I1). Subsequently, we determined the percentage of profit loss from using the
habit/satiation free pricing policy, as %∆π(⃗p∗,pM;µ,α,I1) = π( ⃗
p∗;µ,α,I1)−π(pM ;µ,α,I1)
π( ⃗
p∗;µ,α,I1)
.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
24
;
In each of three approaches for generating I1, we found that the percentage profit loss to be
a complex function of the parameters, µ,γ,a,b,c,I1 with non-linear interactions. We report some
general trends here. Figures 3 (a) and (b) provide illustrations for trajectories of optimal prices
and optimal habit levels (on y-axis) over time (on x-axis) respectively for a habit prone customer.
These trajectories have a range of shapes, with (i) price trajectories being consistent with the
earlier results, (ii) price trajectories p∗
t and state space level I∗
t trajectories following similar trends
with some exceptions towards the end of the planning horizon. Figure 3 (c) shows the percentage
loss in profit (on y-axis) when the firm ignores a customer’s satiation/habit propensity (α on x-
axis). We make the following observations in the figure. First, the curves for exogenous values of
I1 shift upwards as the absolute value of I1 increases (e.g., the curve for value of I1 = 15 is higher
than I1 = 10 for all values of α). This trend shows that percentage profit loss from ignoring the
initial satiation/habit level increases when this level is higher. Second, we observe that each curve
has a down step at α = 0. This step down happens at the point α = 0 where the basis of state
dependence transitions from satiation to habit. We also observe that the curves for each value of I1
are asymmetric around α = 0. Mathematically, this asymmetry occurs because in the utility term
u(xt + st −ht) in the customer’s utility maximization problem, habit and satiation have opposite
signs. Finally, we observe that both habit and satiation can be costly for a firm to ignore especially
when these effects are strong in customers.
5.3. Extension to Non-constant Habit and Satiation
The development in Section 2.2.2 for prices can be adapted for situations when a customer’s habit
and satiation evolves over time. For example, consider that the habit and satiation factors are
time-dependent and denoted as µt and γt respectively, with their difference denoted as αt = µt −γt.
The habit/satiation stock can be expressed using these time indexed terms (analogous to (10)) as
It = I1
  t−1
Y
k=1
2µk

+
t−1
X
s=1

αsd(ps)
 t−2
Y
k=s+1
2µk

.
The firm’s discounted profit function is obtained (analogous to (11)) as:
V1(s1,h1) =
T
X
t=1

ρt−1[pt −c]

a −bpt + I1
  t−1
Y
k=1
2µk

+
t−1
X
s=1

αsd(ps)
 t−2
Y
k=s+1
2µk
 
.
All concavity properties are preserved in this formulation. The unrestricted first order conditions
satisfied by the optimal prices ⃗p∗over the planning horizon are obtained as follows (analogous to
conditions after Proposition 3):
∂π
∂pi
= 0 =⇒ρi−1

a

1 +
i−1
X
k=1

αk
 i−1
Y
m=k+1
2µm

+ bc

1 + αiρ
T
X
k=i+1
 k−2
Y
m=i+1
2µmρ

+ I1
  i−1
Y
k=1
2µk

−b
i−1
X
k=1

αkpk
 i−1
Y
m=k+1
2µm

−2bpi −bαiρ

T
X
k=i+1
pk
 k−2
Y
m=i+1
2µmρ

= 0,

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
25
Figure 3: Impacts of state dependence. Instances for the study were generated with α = µ −γ with (γ >
0,µ = 0) for a satiation prone customer and (µ > 0,γ = 0) for a habit prone customer. Other parameter values
are: T = 10,a = 40,b = 1,c = 15,ρ = 0.85.
(a) Illustrations for optimal pt.
(b) Illustrations for optimal It.
(c) Illustration for loss from ignoring habit/satiation and I1.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
26
;
These conditions continue to constitute a system of solvable linear equations.
6. Discussion and Future Research
A growing body of empirical research on consumer behavior shows that customers exhibit state
dependence, i.e., they develop habit or satiation from using a product. But the pricing implications
of these habit and satiation effects are less understood. In this paper, we study the problem of
choosing optimal prices to offer to a customer dynamically based on her prior consumption and her
tendency to develop a habit or satiation from consumption. We derive an inter-temporal demand
function from a customer’s utility maximization problem, when this utility incorporates habit and
satiation. This demand function acts as an input to the firm’s profit maximization problem, which
is jointly concave in prices.
At an operational level, we show that the price optimization problem is tractable since the objec-
tive function is concave in prices. At a tactical level, these results provide a market segmentation
and the optimal pricing trajectory in each segment. Figure 4 shows this segmentation in terms
of two parameters, customer’s state dependence, i.e., whether the customer is prone to habit or
satiation, and her initial habit or satiation level. When the customer is prone to habit, the firm
should adopt a penetration pricing policy when the initial habit is low, a skimming pricing policy
when the initial habit is strong, and a skimming followed by penetration strategy when the initial
habit is at an intermediate level. Similar three segments also exist when the customer is prone to
satiation.
As such our development suggests an understudied benefit of adopting penetration and skimming
pricing and their combinations. The existing descriptive literature shows that penetration pricing
can reach a large share of the market through word-of-mouth quickly (Dean, 1976; Nagle et al.,
2011) and helps firm exploit economies of scale and drive competitors out of the market (Tellis,
1986). Skimming pricing helps firms capture customer surplus early in the product lifecycle from a
low price sensitivity of early adopters (Marn et al., 2003), or exploit network effects Liu (2010). Our
development shows that firms can also use these policies to optimally respond to habit formation
and satiation effects in customers, on a dynamic basis.
This analytical development poses avenues for future research. The estimation of individual
customer’s state dependence in an efficient manner is an interesting problem. There is an extensive
body of work in economics and marketing on estimating habit and satiation using panel data, see,
e.g., McAlister (1982), Kahn et al. (1986), Naik and Moore (1996), Erdem (1996), Keane (1997),
Seetharaman and Chintagunta (1998), and Dub´e et al. (2010), Havranek et al. (2017). These
articles show a progressive increase in technical sophistication to deduce the strength of habit or
satiation. It would be interesting to investigate whether simpler protocols such as lagged effect

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
27
Figure 4: Market segmentation based on habit/satiation and initial levels.
least squares can provide credible estimates of individual level habit or satiation. Such estimates
would be quicker to obtain and easier to automate to support dynamic pricing. Recently, Baucells
and Zhao (2020) proposed an elicitation approach to obtain these estimates. Refinements of this
approach and testing its performance is in order. Empirical studies that connect individuals’
characteristics and demographics with their habit and satiation will also be useful. The tradeoff
between the costs and benefits of learning a customer’s habit and satiation also needs a careful
study. For example, offering the customer the same price for an extended duration would help
a firm learn and quantify a customer’s tendency to develop habit or satiation. But this would
also come at the cost of not being able to customize the prices early. Determining the sweet spot
to balance this tradeoff would be useful for firms that operate in markets with salient habit and
satiation behavior in customers. Finally, future research should also investigate how a customer’s
forward looking behavior would accentuate or modify the trends reported in the paper.
Acknowledgment: The authors express their sincere thanks to the three reviewers and Asso-
ciate Editor for constructive feedback during the review process which led to a much stronger
manuscript. The authors also are grateful to Felipe Caro, Hari Sridhar, Andrew Petersen, and

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
28
;
Arvind Rangaswamy for their help with brainstorming sessions and locating relevant references to
better position the paper.
References
Acquisti, A. and Varian, H. R. (2005). Conditioning prices on purchase history. Marketing Science,
24(3):367–381.
Amir, R., Erickson, P., and Jin, J. (2017). On the microeconomic foundations of linear demand
for differentiated products. Journal of Economic Theory, 169:641 – 665.
Araman, V. F. and Caldentey, R. (2009). Dynamic pricing for nonperishable products with demand
learning. Operations Research, 57(5):1169–1188.
Aviv, Y. and Pazgal, A. (2008). Optimal pricing of seasonal products in the presence of forward-
looking consumers. Manufacturing & service operations management, 10(3):339–359.
Aydin, G. and Ziya, S. (2009). Personalized dynamic pricing of limited inventories. Operations
Research, 57(6):1523–1531.
Baucells, M. and Sarin, R. K. (2010).
Predicting utility under satiation and habit formation.
Management Science, 56(2):286–301.
Baucells, M. and Zhao, L. (2020). Everything in moderation: Foundations and applications of the
satiation model. Management Science, 66(12):5701–5719.
Becker, G. S. and Murphy, K. M. (1988). A theory of rational addiction. Journal of Political
Economy, 96(4):675–700.
Bell, D. E. and Lal, R. (2002). The impact of frequent shopper programs in grocery retailing.
Review of Marketing Science (ROMs) Working Paper.
Bellos, I. and Kavadias, S. (2021). Service design for a holistic customer experience: A process
framework. Management Science, 67(3):1718–1736.
Bergemann, D. and Morris, S. (2005). Robust mechanism design. Econometrica, pages 1771–1813.
Caro, F. and de Alb´eniz, V. M. (2012).
Product and price competition with satiation effects.
Management Science, 58(7):1357–1373.
Chen, Y. and Iyer, G. (2002). Research note consumer addressability and customized pricing.
Marketing Science, 21(2):197–208.
Choudhary, V., Ghose, A., Mukhopadhyay, T., and Rajan, U. (2005). Personalized pricing and
quality differentiation. Management Science, 51(7):1120–1130.
Dean, J. (1976). Pricing policies for new products. Harvard Business Review, 54(6):141–153.
Dresner, M. (2006). Leisure versus business passengers: Similarities, differences, and implications.
Journal of Air Transport Management, 12(1):28 – 32.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
29
Dub´e, J.-P., Fang, Z., Fong, N., and Luo, X. (2017). Competitive price targeting with smartphone
coupons. Marketing Science, 36(6):944–975.
Dub´e, J.-P., Hitsch, G. J., and Rossi, P. E. (2010). State dependence and alternative explanations
for consumer inertia. The RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3):417–445.
Duesenberry, J. (1952). Income, Saving, and Theory of Consumer Behavior. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Elmachtoub, A. N., Gupta, V., and Hamilton, M. L. (2021). The value of personalized pricing.
Management Science, 67(10):6055–6070.
Erdem, T. (1996). A dynamic analysis of market structure based on panel data. Marketing science,
15(4):359–378.
Feng, Q. and Shanthikumar, J. G. (2018). Supply and demand functions in inventory models.
Operations Research, 66(1):77–91.
Ferreira, K. J., Simchi-Levi, D., and Wang, H. (2018). Online network revenue management using
thompson sampling. Operations research, 66(6):1586–1602.
Gallego, G. and van Ryzin, G. J. (1994). Optimal dynamic pricing of inventories with stochastic
demand over finite horizons. Management Science, 40(8):999–1020.
Gangwar, M. (2009). Optimal pricing strategies under consumer stockpiling and store loyalty. The
University of Texas at Dallas.
Gangwar, M., Kumar, N., and Rao, R. C. (2021). Pricing under dynamic competition when loyal
consumers stockpile. Marketing Science, 40(3):569–588.
Ghose, A. and Huang, K.-W. (2009). Personalized pricing and quality customization. Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy, 18(4):1095–1135.
Gomes, F. and Michaelides, A. (2003). Portfolio choice with internal habit formation: a life-cycle
model with uninsurable labor income risk. Review of Economic Dynamics, 6(4):729 – 766.
Greenleaf, E. (1995). The impact of reference price effects on teh profitability of price promotions.
Marketing Science, 14(1):82–104.
Havranek, T., Rusnak, M., and Sokolova, A. (2017). Habit formation in consumption: A meta-
analysis. European Economic Review, 95:142–167.
He, Y., Dyer, J. S., and Butler, J. C. (2013). On the axiomatization of the satiation and habit
formation utility models. Operations Research, 61(6):1399–1410.
Hoch, S. and Loewenstein, G. (1991). Time-inconsistent preferences and consumer self-control. J.
Consumer Res., 17(4):492–507.
Kahn, B. E., Kalwani, M. U., and Morrison, D. G. (1986). Measuring variety-seeking and rein-
forcement behaviors using panel data. Journal of marketing research, 23(2):89–100.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
30
;
Keane, M. P. (1997). Modeling heterogeneity and state dependence in consumer choice behavior.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15(3):310–327.
Kopalle, P. K., Rao, A. G., and Assungao, J. L. (1996). Asymmetric reference price effects and
dynamic pricing policies. Marketing Science, 15(1):60–85.
Kristeller, J. L. and Rodin, J. (1989). Identifying eating patterns in male and female undergraduates
using cluster analysis. Addictive Behaviors, 14(6):631–642.
Liebermann, Y. (1999). Membership clubs as a tool for enhancing buyers’ patronage. Journal of
Business Research, 45(3):291 – 297.
Liu, H. (2010). Dynamics of pricing in the video game console market: Skimming or penetration?
Journal of Marketing Research, 47(3):428–443.
Liu, Y. and Zhang, Z. J. (2006). Research note—the benefits of personalized pricing in a channel.
Marketing Science, 25(1):97–105.
Loewenstein, G. and Angner, E. (2003). Time and Decision: Economic and Psychological Perspec-
tives of Intertemporal Choice, chapter 12 Predicting and Indulging Changing Preferences. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation,.
Luenberger, D. and Ye, Y. (2016). Linear and Nonlinear Programming. Springer International
Publishing.
Mak, V., Rapoport, A., Gisches, E. J., and Han, J. (2014). Purchasing scarce products under
dynamic pricing: An experimental investigation. Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment, 16(3):425–438.
Mantrala, M. K. and Rao, S. (2001). A decision-support system that helps retailers decide order
quantities and markdowns for fashion goods. Interfaces, 31(3):S146–S165.
Marn, M. V., Roegner, E. V., and Zawada, C. C. (2003).
Pricing new products.
McKinsey
Quarterly, 3:40–49.
Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M. D., and Green, J. R. (1995). Microeconomic Theory. Oxford Uni-
versity Press: New York.
McAlister, L. (1982). A dynamic attribute satiation model of variety-seeking behavior. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9(2):141–150.
Nagle, T., Hogan, J., and Zale, J. (2011). The Strategy and Tactics of Pricing: A Guide to Growing
More Profitably. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Naik, N. Y. and Moore, M. J. (1996). Habit formation and intertemporal substitution in individual
food consumption. The Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 321–328.
Park, J.-Y. and Jang, S. S. (2014). Why do customers switch? more satiated or less satisfied.
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 37:159–170.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
31
Polkovnichenko, V. (2007). Life-cycle portfolio choice with additive habit formation preferences
and uninsurable labor income risk. Rev Financ Stud, 20 (1)(83-124).
Popescu, I. and Wu, Y. (2007).
Dynamic pricing strategies with reference effects.
Operations
Research, 55(3):413–429.
Putler, D. (1992). Incorporating reference price effects into a theory of consumer choice. Marketing
Science, 11(3):287–309.
Rao, V. R. (2009). Handbook of pricing research in marketing. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G. F., and Rabin, M. (1999). Choice bracketing. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 19(1-3):171–197.
Rossi, P. E., McCulloch, R. E., and Allenby, G. M. (1996). The value of purchase history data in
target marketing. Marketing Science, 15(4):321–340.
Seetharaman, P. and Chintagunta, P. (1998). A model of inertia and variety-seeking with marketing
variables. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 15(1):1–17.
Soysal, G. P. and Krishnamurthi, L. (2012). Demand dynamics in the seasonal goods industry: An
empirical analysis. Marketing Science, 31(2):293–316.
Strauss, A. K., Klein, R., and Steinhardt, C. (2018). A review of choice-based revenue management:
Theory and methods. European Journal of Operational Research, 271(2):375 – 387.
Su, X. (2010). Intertemporal pricing and consumer stockpiling. Operations research, 58(4-part-
2):1133–1147.
Talluri, K. and van Ryzin, G. (2004). The Theory and Practice of Revenue Management, volume 68
of International Series in Operations Research & Management Science. Springer US, 1 edition.
Tellis, G. J. (1986). Beyond the many faces of price: An integration of pricing strategies. Journal
of Marketing, 50(4):146.
Thaler, R. H. (1999). Mental accounting matters. Journal of Behavioral decision making, 12(3):183–
206.
Tirole, J. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT press.
Varian, H. R. (1992). Microeconomic Analysis. New York: Norton, 3rd edition.
Varian, H. R. (2010). Intermediate microeconomics: a modern approach. New York: Norton.
Verplanken, B. (2006). Beyond frequency: Habit as mental construct. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 45(3):639–656.
Verplanken, B., Aarts, H., and van Knippenberg, A. (1994).
Attitude versus general habit:
Antecedents of travel mode choice1. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24(4):285–300.
Verplanken, B., Roy, D., and Whitmarsh, L. (2018). Cracks in the wall: Habit discontinuitiesas
vehicles for behaviour change.
In Verplanken, B., editor, The Psychology of Habit: Theory,

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
32
;
Mechanisms, Change, and Contexts, chapter 11, pages 189–205. Springer Nature Switzerland
AG, 1st edition.
Wathieu, L. (1997).
Habits and the anomalies in intertemporal choice.
Management Science,
50(5):587–596.
Yu, X. (2015). Utility maximization with addictive consumption habit formation in incomplete
semimartingale markets. Ann. Appl. Probab., 25(3):1383–1419.
Zhang, J. and Wedel, M. (2009). The effectiveness of customized promotions in online and offline
stores. Journal of Marketing Research, 46(2):190–206.

: Dynamic Pricing under Habit and Satiation
;
33
Author Biography
Wen Chen is an associate professor of Operations Management at the Providence College. Her
research focuses on inventory management, revenue management, and dynamic programming. She
earned a Ph.D. in Supply Chain management from The University of Texas at Austin.
Ying He is an associate professor in the Department of Business and Economics at University of
Southern Denmark. He received his Ph.D. in information, risk, and operations management from
McCombs School of Business at the University of Texas at Austin in 2013. He was awarded the
first-place prize from the INFORMS Decision Analysis Society for its student paper competition
in 2011. His research interests include decision and risk analysis, utility theory, and behavioral
decision making.
Saurabh Bansal is an associate professor of Supply Chain Management and Information Systems,
and a faculty of Operations Research at the Pennsylvania State University. His research focuses on
developing mathematical models, algorithms, and protocols to estimate business-risks and optimize
business operations under risks. He earned a Ph.D. in Risk Analysis and Decision Making from
The University of Texas at Austin.