TITLE: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization: A New Paradigm for Modeling Rank Constraints
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2182
---

Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization:
A New Paradigm for Modeling Rank Constraints
Dimitris Bertsimas
Sloan School of Management and Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
ORCID: 0000-0002-1985-1003
dbertsim@mit.edu
Ryan Cory-Wright
Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA,
ORCID: 0000-0002-4485-0619
ryancw@mit.edu
Jean Pauphilet
London Business School, London, UK,
ORCID: 0000-0001-6352-0984
jpauphilet@london.edu
We propose a framework for modeling and solving low-rank optimization problems to certiﬁable optimality.
We introduce symmetric projection matrices that satisfy Y 2 = Y , the matrix analog of binary variables that
satisfy z2 = z, to model rank constraints. By leveraging regularization and strong duality, we prove that
this modeling paradigm yields tractable convex optimization problems over the non-convex set of orthogonal
projection matrices. Furthermore, we design outer-approximation algorithms to solve low-rank problems to
certiﬁable optimality, compute lower bounds via their semideﬁnite relaxations, and provide near optimal
solutions through rounding and local search techniques. We implement these numerical ingredients and, for
the ﬁrst time, solve low-rank optimization problems to certiﬁable optimality. Our algorithms also supply
certiﬁably near-optimal solutions for larger problem sizes and outperform existing heuristics, by deriving an
alternative to the popular nuclear norm relaxation which generalizes the perspective relaxation from vectors
to matrices. Using currently available spatial branch-and-bound codes, not tailored to projection matrices,
we can scale our exact (resp. near-exact) algorithms to matrices with up to 30 (resp. 600) rows/columns.
All in all, our framework, which we name Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization, solves low-rank problems
to certiﬁable optimality in a tractable and uniﬁed fashion.
Key words : rank minimization, semideﬁnite optimization, global optimization, discrete optimization,
outer-approximation, regularization, perspective relaxation, matrix completion, nuclear norm
Subject classiﬁcations: programming: non-linear: quadratic, algorithms, applications
Area of review : Optimization
1. Introduction
Many central problems in optimization, machine learning, and control theory are equivalent to optimiz-
ing a low-rank matrix over a convex set. For instance, low-rank constraints successfully model notions of
minimal complexity, low dimensionality, or orthogonality in a system. However, while rank constraints
oﬀer unparalleled modeling ﬂexibility, no generic code currently solves these problems to certiﬁable op-
timality at even moderate sizes. This state of aﬀairs has led inﬂuential works on low-rank optimization
1
arXiv:2009.10395v2 [math.OC] 2 Apr 2021

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
2
(Cand`es and Plan 2010, Recht et al. 2010) to characterize low-rank optimization as intractable and
advocate convex relaxations or heuristics which do not enjoy assumption-free optimality guarantees.
The manner in which rank constrained optimization is regarded today is reminiscent of how mixed-
integer conic optimization (MICO), which can model NP-complete problems, was originally considered.
After decades of research eﬀort, however, algorithms and software for MICO are now widely available
(see, e.g., Bonami et al. 2008, Coey et al. 2020) and solve large instances of disparate non-convex
problems such as best subset selection (Bertsimas and Van Parys 2020) or sparse portfolio selection
(Frangioni and Gentile 2007, Zheng et al. 2014, Bertsimas and Cory-Wright 2018) to certiﬁable opti-
mality. Unfortunately, rank constraints cannot be represented using mixed-integer convex optimization
(Lubin et al. 2021, Lemma 4.1) and do not beneﬁt from these advances.
In this work, we characterize the complexity of rank constrained optimization and propose a new,
more general framework, which we term Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization (MPCO). Our proposal
generalizes MICO, by replacing binary variables z which satisfy z2 = z with symmetric orthogonal
projection matrices Y which satisfy Y 2 = Y , and oﬀers the following advantages over existing state-
of-the-art methods: First, it supplies certiﬁcates of (near) optimality for low-rank problems. Second,
it demonstrates that some of the best ideas in MICO, such as decomposition methods, cutting-planes,
relaxations, and random rounding schemes, admit straightforward extensions to MPCO. Finally, we im-
plement a near-optimal rounding strategy and a globally optimal cutting-plane algorithm that improve
upon the state-of-the-art for matrix completion and sensor location problems. We hope that MPCO
gives rise to exciting new challenges for the optimization community to tackle.
1.1. Scope of the Framework
Formally, we consider the problem:
min
X∈Rn×m
⟨C,X⟩+ λ · Rank(X)
s.t.
AX = B, Rank(X) ≤k, X ∈K,
(1)
where λ (resp. k) prices (bounds) the rank of X, (A,B) ∈Rℓ×n × Rℓ×m deﬁnes an aﬃne subspace,
and K is a proper cone in the sense of Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004), i.e., closed, convex, solid and
pointed. Observe that Problem (1) oﬀers signiﬁcant modeling ﬂexibility, as it allows arbitrary conic
constraints on X. As a result, linear, convex quadratic, semideﬁnite, exponential, and power constraints
and objectives can be captured by letting K be an appropriate product of the non-negative orthant and
the second order, semideﬁnite, exponential, and power cones.
We now introduce our notation and present some central problems from the optimization and machine
learning literature which admit low-rank formulations and fall within our framework.
Notation:
We let nonbold face characters such as b denote scalars, lowercase bold-faced characters
such as x denote vectors, uppercase bold-faced characters such as X denote matrices, and calligraphic

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
3
uppercase characters such as Z denote sets. We let [n] denote the set of running indices {1,...,n}. We
let e denote a vector of all 1’s, 0 denote a vector of all 0’s, and I denote the identity matrix.
We also use an assortment of matrix operators. We let σi(X) denote the ith largest singular value
of a matrix X, ⟨·,·⟩denote the Euclidean inner product between two vectors or matrices of the same
dimension, X† denote the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of a matrix X, ∥· ∥F denote the Frobenius
norm of a matrix, ∥· ∥σ denote the spectral norm of a matrix, and ∥· ∥∗denote the nuclear norm of a
matrix; see Horn and Johnson (1985) for a general theory of matrix operators.
Finally, we use a wide variety of convex cones. We let Sn denote the n×n cone of symmetric matrices,
and Sn
+ denote the n × n positive semideﬁnite cone.
1.1.1. Low-Rank Matrix Completion
Given a sub-sample (Ai,j : (i,j) ∈I ⊆[n] × [m]) of a
matrix A ∈Rn×m, the matrix completion problem is to recover the entire matrix, by assuming A is low
rank and seeking a rank-k matrix X which approximately ﬁts the observed values. This problem arises
in recommender system applications at Netﬂix and Amazon and admits the formulation:
min
X∈Rn×m
1
2
X
(i,j)∈I
(Xi,j −Ai,j)
2
s.t.
Rank(X) ≤k.
(2)
Since there are (n + m)k degrees of freedom in a singular value decomposition of a rank-k matrix
X ∈Rn×m, Problem (2) is not well-deﬁned unless |I| ≥(n + m)k.
1.1.2. Minimum Dimension Euclidean Distance Embedding
Given a set of pairwise dis-
tances di,j, the Euclidean Distance Embedding (EDM) problem is to determine the lowest dimensional
space which the distances can be embedded in, such that the distances correspond to Euclidean dis-
tances. As discussed by Blekherman et al. (2012) Theorem 2.49, a set of distances di,j can be embedded
in a Euclidean space of dimension k if and only if there exists some Gram matrix G ⪰0 of rank k such
that d2
i,j = Gi,i + Gj,j −2Gi,j, on all pairs (i,j) where di,j is supplied. Denoting Di,j = d2
i,j, we write
these constraints in matrix form, D = Diag(G)e⊤+ eDiag(G)⊤−2G, where the equality is implicitly
imposed only for pairs (i,j) where di,j is supplied. This is equivalent to:
min
G∈Sn
+
Rank(G)
s.t.
Diag(G)e⊤+ eDiag(G)⊤−2G = D.
(3)
1.1.3. Quadratically Constrained Quadratic Optimization
A quadratically constrained
quadratic optimization problem (QCQO) seeks an x ∈Rn which solves:
min
x∈Rn x⊤Q0x + q⊤
0 x
s.t.
x⊤Qix + q⊤
i x ≤ri
∀i ∈[m],
(4)
where Q0, Qi ,q0 qi, ri are given problem data. We assume that Q0,Qi are symmetric matrices, but do
not assume that they are positive semideﬁnite. Therefore, this problem is non-convex, and encompasses
binary quadratic optimization (Goemans and Williamson 1995) and alternating current optimal power

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
4
ﬂow problems (Lavaei and Low 2011). The fundamental diﬃculty in Problem (4) is the potential non-
convexity of the outer product xx⊤. However, we can isolate this non-convexity by introducing a
rank-one matrix X to model the outer product xx⊤. This leads to the following reformulation:
min
x∈Rn,X∈Sn ⟨Q0,X⟩+ ⟨q0,x⟩
s.t.
⟨Qi,X⟩+ ⟨qi,x⟩≤ri
∀i ∈[m], Rank

1 x⊤
x X

= 1.
(5)
We have established that QCQOs are rank constrained problems. Notably however, the converse
is also true: rank constrained problems with linear, second-order cone, or semideﬁnite constraints are
QCQOs. Indeed, the constraint Rank(X) ≤k is equivalent to requiring that X = UV ⊤: U ∈Rn×k,V ∈
Rm×k, i.e., imposing m×n non-convex quadratic equalities. As modern solvers such as Gurobi can now
solve non-convex QCQOs to global optimality, this QCQO formulation can be used to solve low-rank
problems, although it is not particularly scalable; we expand on this point in Section 4.1.2.
1.2. Background and Literature Review
Our work arises at the intersection of three complementary areas of the low-rank optimization literature:
(a) global optimization algorithms for non-convex quadratically constrained problems, (b) the interplay
of convex relaxations and their dual side, randomized rounding methods, and (c) heuristics which
provide high-quality solutions to non-convex problems in an eﬃcient fashion.
1.2.1. Global Optimization Techniques
Branch-and-bound: A broad class of global optimization algorithms have been proposed for QCQOs,
since McCormick (1976) observed that convex envelopes of non-convex regions supply globally valid
lower bounds. This gives rise to a numerical strategy where one recursively partitions the QCQO’s
feasible region into subregions, constructs convex envelopes for each subregion and uses these envelopes
to construct iteratively improving lower bounds. This approach is known as spatial branch-and-bound;
see Lee and Zou (2014) for a scheme which decomposes a matrix into a sparse matrix plus a low-rank
matrix, Kocuk et al. (2016) for a modern implementation in alternating current optimal power ﬂow,
and Bertsimas et al. (2017) for an exact branch-and-bound approach to low-rank factor analysis.
Branch-and-cut: In a complementary direction, several branch-and-cut methods (Audet et al. 2000,
Linderoth 2005) have been proposed for solving non-convex QCQOs, by borrowing decomposition
schemes from the mixed-integer nonlinear optimization literature (Duran and Grossmann 1986). While
often eﬃcient in practice, a common theme in these methods is that the more eﬃcient decomposition
schemes used for MINLOs cannot be applied out-of-the-box, because they may fail to converge to a
globally optimal solution (see Grossmann 2002, for a counterexample). As a result, non-convex prob-
lems need to be preprocessed in an expensive fashion. This preprocessing step has inhibited the use of
global optimization methods for low-rank problems; indeed, we are not aware of any works which apply
branch-and-cut techniques to solve low-rank problems to certiﬁable optimality.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
5
Complementarity: In an opposite direction, several authors have proposed applying general nonlinear
optimization techniques to address low-rank problems, since Ding et al. (2014) observed that a low-rank
constraint is equivalent to a complementarity constraint over the positive semideﬁnite cone, and thus
can be addressed by general techniques for mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints (see
Luo et al. 1996, for a general theory). Among others, Bai et al. (2016) invoked the complementarity
observation to design a completely positive reformulation of low-rank SDOs, and Bi et al. (2020)
developed a multi-stage convex relaxation of the complementarity constraint. We are not aware of any
works which use these ideas to solve low-rank problems exactly where say n ≥10.
Algebraic: By taking an algebraic view of rank constraints, several algebraic geometry techniques
have been proposed for addressing low-rank SDOs. Among others, d’Aspremont (2003) proposed re-
formulating low-rank constraints as systems of polynomial equations which can be addressed via the
sum-of-squares hierarchy (Lasserre 2001). More recently, Naldi (2018) proposed a semi-algebraic refor-
mulation of rank-constrained SDOs, which can be optimized over via Gr¨obner basis computation (Cox
et al. 2013). Unfortunately, algebraic approaches do not scale well in practice. Indeed, as observed by
Recht et al. (2010), it seems unlikely that algebraic approaches can solve low-rank SDOs when n > 10.
1.2.2. Convex Relaxations and Random Rounding Methods for Low-Rank Problems
Convex relaxations: A number of authors have studied convex relaxations of low-rank problems, since
Fazel (2002) observed that the nuclear norm of a matrix is the convex envelope of a rank constraint on
the set of matrices with spectral norm at most M, i.e.,
Conv
 
X ∈Rn×m : ∥X∥σ ≤M,Rank(X) ≤k
 
=

X ∈Rn×m : ∥X∥σ ≤M,∥X∥∗≤kM
 
.
(6)
Because the epigraph of a nuclear norm is semideﬁnite representable, this gives rise to semideﬁnite
relaxations of low-rank problems which can be computed in polynomial time.
Rounding methods: A complementary line of work aims to supply certiﬁably near-optimal solutions
to low-rank problems, by rounding their semideﬁnite relaxations. Initiated by Goemans and Williamson
(1995) in the context of binary quadratic optimization, who established that randomly rounding an
SDO relaxation supplies a 0.878-approximation, it has evolved into a successful framework for solving
rank-one optimization problems; see Nemirovski et al. (1999) for a uniﬁed approach in the rank-one
case. However, this line of work has a key drawback. Namely, existing rounding methods do not address
rank-k problems such as matrix completion, due to the analytic diﬃculty of constructing a rounding
mechanism which preserves both feasibility and near-optimality in the rank-k case.
1.2.3. Heuristic Methods
Due to the computational diﬃculty of solving Problem (1) to certiﬁ-
able optimality, and the analytic diﬃculty of deriving a high-quality randomized rounding procedure,
a variety of heuristic methods have been proposed for solving Problem (1), originating with methods
for solving low-rank linear matrix inequalities in the optimal control literature (Boyd et al. 1994).

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
6
Although slow and somewhat ad-hoc in their original implementations, heuristic methods were moved
front-and-center by the works of Fazel (2002), Burer and Monteiro (2003, 2005). Fazel (2002) observed
that low-rank positive semideﬁnite matrices lie on the boundary of the PSD cone, and used this ob-
servation to justify a “log-det” heuristic, where a rank minimization objective is replaced with the
function log det(X + δI). Burer and Monteiro (2003, 2005) proposed implicitly modeling a rank con-
straint Rank(X) ≤k by applying the non-linear reformulation X = UV ⊤, where U,V ∈Rn×k and
eliminating X, to obtain a problem which is non-convex in (U,V ). Although originally solved using
augmented Lagrangian techniques, modern implementations of the Burer-Monterio heuristic typically
use alternating minimization (Jain et al. 2013), to enhance the methods scalability and ensure conver-
gence towards a second-order critical point.
The modern era of heuristics methods for low-rank matrix optimization was initiated by matrix
completion and the Netﬂix competition (Bell and Koren 2007). The magnitude of the data made
available, challenged the aforementioned methods and led to new techniques such as Wen et al. (2012),
who proposed a nonlinear successive over-relaxation approach that scales to 10,000 × 10,000 matrices,
Recht and R´e (2013), who proposed a stochastic gradient descent method which scales to 1,000,000 ×
1,000,000 matrices; see Udell et al. (2016), Nguyen et al. (2019) for reviews of heuristic approaches.
1.3. Contributions and Structure
The key contributions of the paper are threefold: First, we propose using orthogonal projection matrices
which satisfy Y 2 = Y , the matrix analogue of binary variables which satisfy z2 = z, to model low-
rank constraints via the non-linear equation X = Y X. Under this lens, low-rank problems admit
reformulations as optimization problems where some decision variables comprise a projection matrix.
We term this family of problems Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization (MPCO), in reference to mixed-
integer optimization. To our knowledge, our approach is the ﬁrst mathematical framework which solves
low-rank optimization problems to certiﬁable optimality. Second, by leveraging regularization and strong
duality we rewrite low-rank optimization problems as saddle-point problems over the space of orthogonal
projection matrices, and propose an outer-approximation method to solve the saddle-point problem to
certiﬁable optimality. Third, by analyzing the saddle-point problem, we derive new convex relaxations
and rounding schemes which provide certiﬁably near optimal solutions in polynomial time in theory
and rapidly in practice. Using a generic spatial branch-and-bound code, we are able to solve low-rank
optimization problems exactly for matrices with 30 rows and columns, and ﬁnd near-exact solutions for
matrices with up to 600 rows and columns. We believe branch-and-bound schemes tailored to the set of
projection matrices and dedicated semi-deﬁnite codes for the relaxations have to potential to increase
the numerical scalability of MPCO even further and constitute an exciting future research direction.
We note that the idea of using projection matrices to model low-rank constraints is not entirely new,
as Peng and Xia (2005) have proposed reformulating k-means clustering as a semideﬁnite optimization

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
7
problem over the set of orthogonal projection matrices. However, our proposal has several key points
of diﬀerence. Namely, (1) we consider optimizing over projection matrices directly, while Peng and Xia
(2005) use projection matrices as a vehicle to derive semideﬁnite relaxations, and (2) we use projection
matrices to solve low-rank optimization problems that do not admit mixed-integer reformulations, while
k-means clustering certainly admits a mixed-integer reformulation (Gr¨otschel and Wakabayashi 1989).
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows:
In Section 2, we show that projection matrices are a natural generalization of binary vectors to
matrices. Inspired by a common tactic in cardinality constrained optimization, namely introducing
binary variables to encode the support of the decision vector, we propose introducing a projection matrix
to encode the image of the decision matrix and thereby model rank. We also investigate the complexity
of low-rank optimization problems and show that rank minimization is as hard as the existential theory
of the reals (i.e., deciding whether a semi-algebraic set is non-empty), and thus in PSPACE.
In Section 3, we derive the MPCO formulations of the aforementioned rank optimization problems.
By introducing a constraint on the spectral norm of X or a penalty on its Frobenius norm - the matrix
analogs of big-M constraints and perspective formulations (G¨unl¨uk and Linderoth 2012) respectively,
we leverage strong duality, reformulate Problem (1) as a saddle-point problem, and prove the resulting
optimization problem admits a convex objective.
We propose numerical algorithms to solve these MPCO problem to provable (near) optimality in
Section 4, by extending some of the most successful techniques from MICO. First, we propose an outer-
approximation scheme for solving Problem (1) exactly. Then, we obtain valid lower-bounds from solving
its convex relaxations and propose an alternating minimization algorithm to do so. In addition, we
prove that a singular value decomposition (SVD) followed by greedily rounding the eigenvalues provides
certiﬁably near-optimal solutions in polynomial time. Finally, we propose a local-search strategy to
improve the quality of the greedily rounded solution.
In Section 5, we implement and numerically evaluate our proposed algorithms. On examples from
matrix completion and sensor location, we demonstrate that methods proposed in this paper solve
instances of Problem (1) to certiﬁable optimality in minutes for n in the tens. To our knowledge, our
work is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that moderately sized rank constrained problems can be solved to
provable optimality in a tractable fashion. For n in the hundreds, our proposal scales and provides in
minutes solutions of higher quality than existing heuristics, such as nuclear norm minimization.
2. From Cardinality to Rank: A Unifying Nonlinear Perspective
Low rank constraints Rank(X) ≤k are a natural generalization of cardinality constraints ∥x∥0 ≤k from
vectors to matrices. Indeed, if X is a diagonal matrix then Rank(X) ≤k if and only if ∥X∥0 ≤k, and
more generally Rank(X) ≤k if and only if ∥σ(X)∥0 ≤k, where σ(X) is the vector of singular values
of X. However, while cardinality and rank constraints are intimately linked, they are addressed using

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
8
diﬀerent algorithms. Namely, we can solve cardinality constrained problems with 100,000s of variables
to optimality (Bertsimas and Van Parys 2020), while low-rank problems are dramatically harder and
have not yet been solved to certiﬁable optimality for n > 10 (Naldi 2018).
In our opinion, the diﬀerence between the community’s understanding of cardinality and rank con-
straints has arisen because of two algorithmic barriers. The ﬁrst barrier is that rank constraints belong
to a harder complexity class. The second barrier arises because cardinality constraints can be repre-
sented using binary variables, while rank constraints cannot (Lubin et al. 2021, Corollary 4.1). This
presents a challenge for researchers, who have developed scalable methods for cardinality constraints
by exploiting advances in mixed-integer conic optimization (MICO), but cannot use these advances to
address rank constraints. In this section, we question these barriers by characterizing the complexity
of low-rank problems and proposing a new framework for modeling rank that generalizes (MICO).
2.1. On the Complexity of Rank-Constrained Optimization
Existing studies of Problem (1) typically claim that it is intractable, and support this claim by proving
that it is NP-hard, by reduction from an NP-complete problem such as Boolean linear programming (see,
e.g., Vandenberghe and Boyd 1996, Section 7.3). In our opinion, this argument needs to be revisited,
for two separate reasons. First, NP-hardness is a worst-case analysis statement. In practice, NP-hard
optimization problems are often tractable. For instance, sparse regression can usually be solved to
certiﬁable optimality with 100,000s of features in minutes (Bertsimas and Van Parys 2020). Second,
there is no evidence that Problem (1) is even in NP. Indeed, Problem (1) cannot be represented using
mixed-integer convex optimization (Lubin et al. 2021, Corollary 4.1), while all 21 of Karp’s NP-complete
problems can, and the best-known algorithms for Problem (1) run in EXPTIME (Chistov and Grigoriev
1984, Naldi 2018).
In this section, we provide a more complete characterization of Problem (1)’s complexity than is
currently available in the literature. First, we demonstrate that it belongs to a diﬀerent class than
NP. In particular, it is existential theory of the reals-hard (∃R-hard; see Renegar (1992) for a general
theory), i.e., as hard as any polynomial optimization problem, which implies that, if NP⫋∃R, Problem
(1) is strictly harder than NP-complete problems. Second, we prove that Problem (1) is actually in ∃R.
We now demonstrate that Problem (1) is existential theory of the reals complete (i.e., ∃R-complete).
We begin by reminding the reader of the deﬁnition of the ∃R complexity class (c.f. Schaefer 2013):
Definition 1. A decision problem belongs to the existential theory of the reals complexity class if
it reduces to deciding whether a statement “(∃x1,...,xn)φ(x1,...,xn)” is true or false, where φ(·) is a
quantiﬁer-free Boolean formula involving polynomials equalities and inequalities, for instance, deciding
the emptiness of a semi-algebraic set. We say a problem is ∃R-hard if any problem in ∃R reduces to it.
Note that 3-SAT ∈∃R, so NP⊆∃R, and any statement in ∃R can be decided in PSPACE (Canny
1988), so ∃R ⊆PSPACE. To establish that Problem (1) is ∃R hard, we require the following proposition,
which is essentially a restatement of (Schaefer 2013, Theorem 3.1) in the language of optimization.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
9
Proposition 1. Let G := (V,E) be a graph, and ℓ(e) be the length of edge e. Then, deciding if G can
be embedded in R2 is ∃R complete, even when all edges have unit length.
By reducing Proposition 1’s planar embedding problem to a Euclidean Distance Embedding problem,
we obtain the following result (proof deferred to Appendix A.1):
Theorem 1. Problem (1) is ∃R-hard.
Theorem 1 demonstrates that Problem (1) is, from a traditional complexity theory perspective, at
least as hard as any problem in ∃R. However, its complexity status remains unresolved. Indeed, while
Cand`es and Plan (2010) have observed that Problem (1) is in EXPTIME, it seems likely that ∃R ⊂
EXPTIME. We now address this matter, by proving that if K represents the semideﬁnite cone then
Problem (1) is in ∃R, and hence ∃R-complete; note that the examples listed in Section 1.1 can all
be rewritten as low-rank SDOs, so this result applies to all of the aforementioned examples (proof of
theorem deferred to Appendix A.2).
Theorem 2. Let K = Sn
+ denote the n×n positive semideﬁnite cone. Then, Problem (1) is in ∃R, and
hence ∃R-complete.
Remark 1. Since ∃R ⊆PSPACE ⊆EXPTIME, this upper bound improves upon the EXPTIME bound
on Problem (1)’s complexity stated by Recht et al. (2010), Cand`es and Plan (2010) among others.
Moreover, it seems unlikely to us that this bound can be further improved without settling fundamental
questions in complexity theory (e.g., characterizing NP vs. ∃R vs. PSPACE vs. EXPTIME).
Remark 2. Imposing an additional integrality constraint dramatically changes the complexity of Prob-
lem (1). Indeed, under the constraint X ∈Zn×n, we can use a reduction from Hilbert’s 10th problem
to show that we cannot decide in ﬁnite time whether Problem (1)’s optimal objective is 0, even if we
know the objective is binary; see Appendix A.3 for a proof.
2.2. Projection Matrices for Modeling Rank
As previously discussed, rank constraints can be seen as a generalization to the matrix case of cardinality
constraints. For a vector x ∈Rn, the cardinality constraint ∥x∥0 ≤k ensures that at most k coordinates
of x are non-zero, and can be modeled by introducing a vector of binary variables since
∥x∥0 ≤k ⇐⇒∃z ∈{0,1}n : e⊤z ≤k, x = z ◦x,
(7)
where z ◦x denotes the component-wise product of z and x. Actually, non-linear constraints of the
form “x = z ◦x” where z is binary and x is continuous occur in a variety of mixed-integer optimization
problems, far beyond cardinality constrained optimization. Bertsimas et al. (2019) observed that such
non-linear constraints “x = z ◦x” actually lead to tractable optimization problems, provided that
the overall objective is appropriately regularized. In particular, big-M constraints (Glover 1975) and

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
10
perspective reformulations (G¨unl¨uk and Linderoth 2012) can be seen as appropriate regularizers. By
building upon this observation and the work of several other authors (Fischetti et al. 2017, Bertsimas
and Van Parys 2020), they successfully solve cardinality constrained problems at scale via a combination
of branch-and-cut, randomized rounding and heuristic methods.
Unfortunately, rank constraints cannot be modeled using mixed-integer convex optimization (Lubin
et al. 2021, Corollary 4.1) and therefore MICO techniques cannot be applied “out-of-the-box” to address
rank constraints. Therefore, we now propose a new framework to model rank in optimization problems.
Instead of a binary vector z to encode the support of x, we introduce a projection matrix Y to capture
the column space of X and obtain a similar non-linear reformulation.
Definition 2. A matrix Y ∈Rn×n is called a projection matrix if it satisﬁes the equality Y 2 = Y . In
addition, if Y is symmetric, Y is called an orthogonal projection matrix.
As symmetric matrices, orthogonal projection matrices are diagonalizable and their eigenvalues satisfy
λ2
i = λi, i.e., are binary. As a result, the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of an orthogonal projection Y
is Y itself (Y = Y †). In addition, since its eigenvalues are binary, the trace of Y equals the number of
non-zero eigenvalues, i.e., Rank(Y ) = tr(Y ). We are now in a position to link projection matrices and
rank constraints.
Proposition 2. For any X ∈Rn×m, Rank(X) ≤k ⇐⇒∃Y ∈Yn : tr(Y ) ≤k, X = Y X, where Yn :=
{P ∈Sn : P 2 = P } is the set of n × n orthogonal projection matrices.
Proof of Proposition 2
We prove the two implications successively.
• Let X = UΣV ⊤, with U ∈Rn×k, Σ ∈Rk×k, V ∈Rm×k, be a singular value decomposition of X
and deﬁne Y = U (U ⊤U)
−1 U ⊤= UU ⊤. By construction, X = Y X, since U ⊤U = I. Moreover,
tr(Y ) = rank(Y ) = rank(X) ≤k.
• Since X = Y X, rank(X) ≤rank(Y ) = tr(Y ) ≤k.
□
Remark 3. In Proposition 2, the rank constraint is expressed via a trace constraint on Y , the orthogo-
nal projection onto the image or column space of X. Alternatively, one could model the rank constraint
via a matrix Y ′ ∈Ym such that tr(Y ′) ≤k and X = XY ′. In this case, Y ′ encodes the projection onto
the row space of X. In practice, one could introduce both Y and Y ′ and obtain tighter formulations,
at the price of introducing additional notation. We explore this idea in Appendix B.
Proposition 2 suggests that projection matrices are to rank constraints what binary variables are
to cardinality constraints. Indeed, similarities between the two are evident: binary variables z are
idempotent scalars which solve z2 = z, while projection matrices Y are idempotent matrices which solve
Y 2 = Y . Also, if X and Y are diagonal, Proposition 2 recovers cardinality constrained optimization.
Over the past decades, extensive eﬀorts have been devoted to improving the scalability of mixed-
integer optimization. We believe that similar achievements can be obtained for rank constrained prob-
lems by adapting techniques from MICO to MPCO. In this direction, Table 1 establishes a dictionary

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
11
linking cardinality and rank constraints, and demonstrates that many of the techniques developed for
binary convex optimization admit generalizations to MPCO, including the main results from our recent
work (Bertsimas et al. 2019). Note that we have not yet established most of the connections claimed
in Table 1; this is the focus of the next two sections of the paper.
Table 1
Analogy between mixed-integer conic and mixed-projection conic optimization.
Framework
Bertsimas et al. (2019)
This paper
Parsimony concept
cardinality
rank
Non-convex outer set
binaries
orthogonal projection matrices
Strongly convex regularizer
ℓ2
2 penalty
Frobenius norm squared
Boundedness regularizer
ℓ∞norm
spectral norm
Non-linear formulation
x = x ◦z; z ∈{0,1}n
X = Y X, Y ∈Yn
Big-M formulation
−Mz ≤x ≤Mz

MY
X
X⊤MI

⪰0
Perspective formulation

θi xi
xi zi

⪰0

θ
X
X⊤Y

⪰0
Convex relaxation complexity linear/second-order cone semideﬁnite
Greedy rounding mechanism
coordinate-wise
singular value decomposition
3. Regularization and a Saddle-Point Reformulation
In this section, we prove that (9) can be reformulated as a saddle-point mixed-projection problem by
leveraging regularization terms analogous to the big-M and ridge regularization techniques from MICO,
and derive their semideﬁnite relaxations, as summarized in Table 1.
Throughout this paper, we let Yn := {P ∈Sn : P 2 = P } denote the set of n×n orthogonal projection
matrices and Yk
n := {P ∈Sn : P 2 = P ,tr(P ) ≤k} denote projection matrices with rank at most k.
Although Yn and Yk
n do not commonly appear in the optimization literature, their convex hulls are
well-studied, as we now remind the reader, by restating (Overton and Womersley 1992, Theorem 3):
Lemma 1. Let Yn denote the n×n orthogonal projection matrices and Yk
n denote the low-rank orthogo-
nal projection matrices. Then, Conv(Yn) = {P : 0 ⪯P ⪯I} and Conv(Yk
n) = {P : 0 ⪯P ⪯I,tr(Y ) ≤k}.
Moreover, the extreme points of Conv(Yn) are Yn, and the extreme points of Conv(Yk
n) are Yk
n.
3.1. A Regularization Assumption
By invoking Proposition 2, we rewrite Problem (1) as the following mixed-projection conic problem:
min
Y ∈Ykn
min
X∈Rn×m
⟨C,X⟩+ λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
AX = B, X = Y X, X ∈K.
(8)
Observe that Problem (8) has a two-stage structure which involves ﬁrst selecting a low-rank projection
matrix Y and second selecting a matrix X under the constraint X = Y X. Moreover, selecting an
optimal X given Y is easy, because it involves solving a conic optimization problem under the linear

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
12
constraint X = Y X, while selecting an optimal Y is hard, because Yk
n is a non-convex set. Therefore,
our modeling framework isolates the hardness of Problem (8) in Yk
n.
To cope with the non-linear constraints X = Y X in a tractable fashion, we augment the objective
function in (8) with a regularization term. Namely, we consider
min
Y ∈Ykn
min
X∈Rn×m
⟨C,X⟩+ Ω(X) + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
AX = B, X = Y X, X ∈K.
(9)
where the regularization term Ω(X) satisﬁes the following assumption:
Assumption 1. In Problem (9), the regularization term Ω(X) is one of:
• A spectral norm penalty, Ω(X) = 0 if ∥X∥σ ≤M and Ω(X) = +∞otherwise.
• A Frobenius norm penalty, Ω(X) =
1
2γ∥X∥2
F.
As we demonstrate in Section 3.2, Assumption 1 is crucial for developing eﬃcient low-rank algorithms,
for the regularizer drives the convexity (see Theorem 3) and smoothness (see Lemma 3) of the problem,
and also make computationally cheap to evaluate subgradients readily accessible (Table 2). The idea of
leveraging regularization to optimize possibly non-smooth functions by obtaining computationally useful
subgradients is classical (Nesterov 2005, 2007) and therefore its eﬀectiveness should not be surprising.
The two regularizers are matrix analogues of the popular big-M constraints (constraints on the ℓ∞
norm of the continuous variables) and ridge regularization (penalty on the ℓ2
2 norm) for vectors. In
mixed-integer optimization, such regularization terms can eﬃciently cope with non-linear constraints
between continuous and binary variables (Bertsimas et al. 2019) and motivate our current approach.
Practically speaking, regularization can be a natural component of the original problem (8), otherwise
we advocate for introducing it artiﬁcially, for it leads to tractable algorithms with moderate impact on
the resulting solution. For instance, if M is large enough so that the optimal solution to Problem (8),
X⋆, satisﬁes ∥X⋆∥σ ≤M, Problems (9) and (8) are equivalent.In Section 3.5, we develop a disciplined
technique for computing such an M. With the Frobenius norm penalty, the gap between Problem (9)’s
and (8)’s objective is at most
1
2γ∥X⋆∥2
F, which can certainly be bounded whenever tr(X) is bounded,
as often occurs in practice.
For ease of notation, we let
g(X) = ⟨C,X⟩+
(
0,
if AX = B, X ∈K,
+∞,
otherwise,
denote the unregularized second-stage cost for a given X. Therefore, Problem (9) can be written as:
min
Y ∈Ykn
f(Y ) + λ · tr(Y ),
(10)
where f(Y ) :=
min
X∈Rn×m g(X) + Ω(X)
s.t.
X = Y X
(11)
yields a best choice of X given Y . As we establish in this section, this turns out to be a computationally
useful reformulation, for f is convex in Y (see Theorem 3) and Lipschitz continuous (see Lemma 3),
and therefore the non-convexity in the problem has been isolated within the set Yk
n.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
13
Observe that both regularizers are coercive (i.e., “blow up” to +∞as ∥X∥→∞), and therefore render
all unbounded solutions infeasible and ensure the compactness of the level sets of X 7→g(X) + Ω(X).
This alleviates two of the major issues with conic duality (Ben-Tal and Nemirovski 2001, Theorem 2.4.1).
First, regularization ensures that optimal solutions to conic problems are attained (see Blekherman
et al. 2012, Example 2.27, for a regularization-free counterexample). Second, regularization ensures that
infeasibility of a conic system is certiﬁable1, i.e., there is either a feasible solution or a certiﬁcate of
infeasibility. In general, such a procedure is not possible because a conic system could be infeasible but
asymptotically feasible, i.e.,
∄X : AX = B,X ∈K but ∃{Xt}∞
t=1 : Xt ∈K
∀t with ∥AXt −B∥→0.
Here, the regularization term ensures that the set of feasible X (with objective at most θ0 ∈R) is a
closed convex compact set. Therefore, f(Y ) cannot generate an asymptotically feasible problem.
Finally, the two regularization functions in Assumption 1 satisfy a non-trivial property which turns
out to be crucial in both proving that f(Y ) is convex and deriving our overall algorithmic strategy:
Lemma 2. Consider a regularization function Ω(X) satisfying Assumption 1. There, there exists a
Fenchel conjugate Ω⋆(see, e.g., Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004, Chap. 3.3.1) such that, for any projection
matrix Y ∈Yn and any matrix α, we have
min
X {Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩} = max
V11,V22 −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22),
and Ω⋆is linear in Y (see Table 2 for its explicit deﬁnition).
Proof of Lemma 2
We start with the Frobenius regularization case, Ω(X) =
1
2γ∥X∥F
and
minX {Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩} =
1
2γ∥Y X∥F + ⟨α,Y X⟩. Any solution to the minimization problem satis-
ﬁes the ﬁrst-order condition 1
γY X +Y α = 0. Hence, since Y 2 = Y , X⋆= −γY α satisﬁes the ﬁrst-order
condition and the optimal objective value is −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22) = −γ
2⟨α,Y α⟩.
The spectral case is technically more challenging and detailed proofs are deferred to Appendix B. In
the rectangular case, Lemma B.2 with Y ′ = Im yields
min
X {Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩} = max
V11,V22 −M
2 ⟨Y ,V11⟩+ M
2 ⟨Im,V22⟩s.t.

V11 α
α⊤V22

⪰0.
In the symmetric case, Lemma B.3 states that
min
X {Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩} =
max
V11,V22⪰0 −M⟨Y ,V11 + V22⟩s.t. α = V11 −V22.
□
1 Unless the conic dual is also infeasible, this case is unimportant for our purposes, because it only arises when the original
problem is itself infeasible for any Y , which can be checked a priori.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
14
Table 2
Regularization penalties and conjugates, as deﬁned in Lemma 2.
Penalty
Ω(X)
Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22)
∂
∂Yi,j Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22)
Spectral norm (X rectangular)
(
0,
if ∥X∥σ ≤M,
+∞,
o.w.,
M
2 ⟨Y ,V11⟩+ M
2 ⟨Im,V22⟩
M
2 V11,i,j.
s.t.

V11 α
α⊤V22

⪰0,
Spectral norm (X symmetric)
(
0,
if ∥X∥σ ≤M,
+∞,
o.w.,
M⟨Y ,V11 + V22⟩
M(V11 + V22)i,j.
s.t. α = V11 −V22,
V11,V2,2 ⪰0,
Frobenius norm
1
2γ∥X∥2
F
γ
2⟨α,Y α⟩
γ
2⟨αi,αj⟩
3.2. A Saddle-Point Reformulation
We now reformulate Problem (9) as a saddle-point problem. This reformulation is signiﬁcant for two
reasons. First, as shown in the proof of Theorem 3, it leverages the nonlinear constraint X = Y X by
introducing a new matrix of variables V ∈Rn×m such that V = Y X, giving:
f(Y ) = min
V ,X{g(V ) + Ω(Y X) : V = Y X},
a substitution reminiscent of the Douglas-Rachford splitting technique for composite convex optimiza-
tion problems (Douglas and Rachford 1956, Eckstein and Bertsekas 1992)—the proof of Theorem 3
shows that this substitution does not change the optimal objective value. Second, it proves that the
regularizer Ω(X) drives the convexity and smoothness of f(Y ). To derive the problem’s dual, we require:
Assumption 2. For each subproblem (11) generated by f(Y ) where Y ∈Yk
n, either the optimization
problem is infeasible, or strong duality holds.
Assumption 2 holds under Slater’s constraint qualiﬁcation (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004, Section
5.2.3). By invoking Assumption 2, the following theorem reformulates (10) as a saddle-point problem:
Theorem 3. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds and Ω(·) is either the spectral or Frobenius regularizer.
Then, the following two optimization problems are equivalent:
f(Y ) :=
min
X∈Rn×m
g(X) + Ω(X)
s.t.
X = Y X,
(12)
=
max
α,V11,V22
h(α) −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22),
(13)
where h(α) :=
max
Π:C−α−A⊤Π∈K⋆⟨b,Π⟩, K⋆:= {W : ⟨W ,X⟩≥0
∀X ∈K} denotes the dual cone to K,
and Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22) is deﬁned in Table 2.
Proof of Theorem 3
Let us ﬁx Y ∈Yk
n, and suppose that strong duality holds for the inner mini-
mization problem which deﬁnes f(Y ). To progress, we introduce a matrix V ∈Rn×m such that V = Y X
and obtain the relaxation:
min
X,V g(V ) + Ω(Y X)
s.t. V = Y X.
(14)

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
15
Let us verify that this relaxation is a valid substitution, i.e., that Problems (12) and (14) have the same
optimal objective, f(Y ). If X is feasible for (12), then (V = X,X) is obviously feasible for (14) with
same objective value. Similarly, let (V ,X) be feasible for (14). Y V = Y 2X = Y X = V since Y 2 = Y .
Hence, V is feasible for (12) with same objective value.
Now, let α denote the dual variables associated with the coupling constraints V = Y X. The mini-
mization problem is then equivalent to its dual problem, which is given by:
f(Y ) = max
α
h(α) + min
X [Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩],
where h(α) := infV g(V )−⟨V ,α⟩is, up to a sign, the Fenchel conjugate of g. By a standard application
of Fenchel duality, it follows that
h(α) = max
Π ⟨b,Π⟩+
(
0,
if C −α −A⊤Π ∈K⋆,
+∞,
otherwise.
Finally, from Lemma 2 we have min
X {Ω(Y X) + ⟨α,Y X⟩} = max
V11,V22 −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22), which con-
cludes the proof.
Alternatively, under either penalty, if the inner minimization problem deﬁning f(Y ) is infeasible,
then its dual problem is unbounded by weak duality.2.
□
Remark 4. In the unregularized case, i.e., Ω(X) = 0, we can derive a similar reformulation:
min
Y ∈Ykn
max
α∈Rn×m
h(α) + λ · tr(Y ) s.t.
Y α = 0.
(15)
Under this lens, regularization of the primal problem is equivalent to a relaxation in the dual formula-
tion: the hard constraint Y α = 0 is penalized by −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22).
Remark 5. By Theorem 3 and Lemma 2, f(Y ) is convex as the point-wise maximum of functions
which are linear in Y .
By Theorem 3, when we evaluate f( ˆY ), one of two alternatives occur. The ﬁrst is that we have
f( ˆY ) < +∞and there is some optimal (α,V11,V22). In this case, we construct the lower approximation
f(Y ) ≥f( ˆY ) + ⟨H,Y −ˆY ⟩,
where Hi,j =
∂
∂Yi,j Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22) (see Table 2 for closed-form expression of the partial derivatives,
which follow readily from Danskin’s theorem (see, e.g., Bertsekas 2016, Prop. B.22)). The second alter-
native is that f( ˆY ) = +∞, in which case, by the conic duality theorem (see Ben-Tal and Nemirovski
2001, Chapter 2) there exists a (α,Π) such that
C −α −A⊤Π ∈K⋆, and ⟨b,Π⟩> ⟨−H, ˆY ⟩.
(16)
2 Weak duality implies that the dual problem is either unfeasible or unbounded. Since the feasible set of the maximization
problem does not depend on Y , it is always feasible, unless the original problem is itself infeasible. Therefore, we assume
without loss of generality that it is unbounded.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
16
Under this alternative, we can separate ˆY from the set of feasible Y ’s by imposing the cut 0 ≥⟨b,Π⟩+
⟨H,Y ⟩. Under either alternative, we obtain a globally valid ﬁrst-order underestimator of the form
zf(Y ) ≥h + ⟨H,Y −ˆY ⟩,
(17)
where z, h are deﬁned as
z =
(
1,
if f( ˆY ) < +∞,
0,
if f( ˆY ) = +∞,
and
h =
(
f( ˆY ),
if f( ˆY ) < +∞,
⟨b,Π⟩+ ⟨H, ˆY ⟩,
if f( ˆY ) = +∞.
(18)
This observation suggests that a valid numerical strategy for minimizing f(Y ) is to iteratively minimize
and reﬁne a piecewise linear underestimator of f(Y ) deﬁned by the pointwise supremum of a ﬁnite
number of underestimators of the form zf(Y ) ≥h + ⟨H,Y −Y ⟩. Indeed, as we will see in Section 4,
this strategy gives rise to the global optimization algorithm known as outer-approximation.
Smoothness We now demonstrate that f(Y ) is smooth, in the sense of Lipschitz continuity, under a
boundedness assumption on the size of the dual variables, which is a crucial property for ensuring the
convergence of our global optimization methods and bounding the quality of our semideﬁnite relaxation
and greedy rounding methods. Formally, the following result follows directly from Theorem 3.
Lemma 3. Let Y ,Y ′ ∈Conv(Yk
n) be on the convex hull of the orthogonal projection matrices. Then
f(Y ) −f(Y ′) ≤Ω⋆(α⋆(Y ),Y ′ −Y ,V ⋆
11(Y ),V ⋆
22(Y )).
Moreover, suppose α⋆(Y ),V ⋆
11(Y ),V ⋆
22(Y ) can be bounded independently from Y , i.e., ∥α⋆(Y )∥σ ≤L1,
∥V ⋆
11(Y )∥σ ≤L2, ∥V ⋆
22(Y )∥σ ≤L2. Then, under spectral regularization we have
f(Y ) −f(Y ′) ≤M⟨V ⋆
11(Y ),Y ′ −Y ⟩≤ML2∥Y ′ −Y ∥∗,
(19)
and under Frobenius regularization we have
f(Y ) −f(Y ′) ≤γ
2⟨α⋆⊤(Y )α⋆(Y ),Y ′ −Y ⟩≤γ
2L2
1∥Y ′ −Y ∥∗,
(20)
where the bounds involving L1,L2 follow from Holder’s inequality3.
Remark 6. Section 3.5 develops disciplined techniques for computing an M such that the constraint
∥X∥σ ≤M in the primal does not alter the optimal objective. The same technique, applied to the dual,
yields explicit bounds on L1. Moreover, since there exists an optimal pair (V11, V22) which is an explicit
functions of an optimal α, this translates into explicit bounds on L2.
3.3. Semideﬁnite Relaxations
To lower bound (10)’s objective, we invoke Lemma 1 to relax the non-convex constraint Y ∈Yk
n to
Y ∈Conv
 Yk
n

= {Y ∈Sn : 0 ⪯Y ⪯I,tr(Y ) ≤k}.
3 Namely, |⟨X,Y ⟩| ≤∥X∥σ∥Y ∥∗, since the ∥· ∥σ and ∥· ∥∗, as the matrix analogs of the ℓ∞and ℓ1 norms, are dual.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
17
This yields the saddle-point problem
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
max
α,V11,V22∈Sm h(α) −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22) + λ · tr(Y ).
(21)
Problem (21) can in turn be reformulated as an SDO. Indeed, under Assumption 2, we obtain
a semideﬁnite formulation by taking Problem (21)’s dual with respect to α. Formally, we have the
following results (proofs deferred to Appendix A.4 and A.5 respectively):
Lemma 4. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, strong duality holds between:
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
max
α∈Rn×m
h(α) −γ
2⟨α,Y α⟩+ λ · tr(Y ),
(22)
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
min
X∈Rn×m,θ∈Sn
g(X) + 1
2γ tr(θ) + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.

θ
X
X⊤Y

⪰0.
(23)
Lemma 5. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, strong duality holds between:
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
max
α∈Sn,V11,V22⪰0
h(α) −M⟨Y ,V11 + V22⟩+ λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
α = V11 −V22,
(24)
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
min
X∈Sn
g(X) + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
−MY ⪯X ⪯MY .
(25)
We now oﬀer some remarks on these bi-dual problems:
• We can derive a more general version of Lemma 5 without the symmetry assumption on X in much
the same manner, via the Schur complement lemma.
• Problem (23)’s formulation generalizes the perspective relaxation from vectors to matrices. This sug-
gests that (23) is an eﬃcient formulation for addressing rank constraints, as perspective formulations
eﬃciently address cardinality constrained problems with conic quadratic (G¨unl¨uk and Linderoth
2012) or power cone (Akt¨urk et al. 2009) objectives, indeed, they provide a theoretical basis for scal-
able algorithms for sparse regression (Bertsimas and Van Parys 2020, Hazimeh et al. 2020), sparse
portfolio selection (Zheng et al. 2014, Bertsimas and Cory-Wright 2018) and network design (Fischetti
et al. 2017) problems among others..
3.4. Convex Penalty Interpretations of Relaxations
In this section, we consider instances where rank is penalized in the objective only and interpret the
above convex relaxations as penalty functions, in the tradition of Fazel (2002), Recht et al. (2010). In
the presence of the Frobenius penalty, our ﬁrst result generalizes the reverse Huber penalty of Pilanci
et al. (2015), Dong et al. (2015) from cardinality to rank objectives (proof deferred to Appendix A.7).
Lemma 6. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, the following problems are equivalent:
min
Y ∈Conv(Yn)
min
X∈Rn×m,θ∈Sn
g(X) + 1
2γ tr(θ) + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.

θ
X
X⊤Y

⪰0,
(26)
min
X∈Rn×m
g(X) +
n
X
i=1
min
 s
2λ
γ σi(X),λ + σi(X)2
2γ
!
.
(27)

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
18
Remark 7.
Since
min
0≤θ≤1

λθ + t2
θ

=
(
2
√
λ|t|,
if |t| ≤
√
λ,
t2 + λ,
otherwise,
the proof of Lemma 6 reveals that Problems (26)-(27) are equivalent to minimizing
min
X∈Rn×m,θ∈Rn: 0≤θ≤e
g(X) +
n
X
i=1

λθi + σi(X)2
2γθi

,
(28)
which applies the smooth penalty t →λθ +
t2
2γθ : 0 ≤θ ≤1 to model the non-convex cost t →λ∥t∥0 + t2
2γ
incurred by each singular value of X. Indeed, this smooth penalty is precisely the convex envelope of
the non-convex cost function (see, e.g., G¨unl¨uk and Linderoth 2012). Compared to other penalties for
low-rank problems (Fan and Li 2001, Zhang 2010), this generalized Huber penalty is convex, amenable
to eﬃcient alternating minimization procedures (see Section 4.2.2) and could be of independent interest
to the statistical learning community.
Lemma 6 proposes an alternative to the nuclear norm penalty for approximately solving low-rank
problems. This is signiﬁcant, as many low-rank problems have constraints X ⪰0,tr(X) = k (e.g. sparse
PCA (d’Aspremont et al. 2007), k-means clustering (Peng and Wei 2007)), and under these constraints
a nuclear norm cannot encourage low-rank solutions (Zhang et al. 2013), while Lemma 6’s penalty can.
Our next results relate rank minimization problems with a spectral regularizer to the nuclear norm
penalty, in both the square symmetric and the rectangular case (proofs deferred to Appendix A.6):
Lemma 7. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, the following problems are equivalent:
min
Y ∈Conv(Yn) min
X∈Sn
g(X) + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
−MY ⪯X ⪯MY ,
(29)
min
X∈Sn
g(X) + λ
M ∥X∥∗
s.t.
∥X∥σ ≤M.
(30)
Lemma 8. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, the following problems are equivalent:
min
Y ∈Conv(Yn),Y ′∈Conv(Ym)
min
X∈Rn×m
g(X) + λ
2 tr(Y ) + λ
2 tr(Y ′)
s.t.

MY
X
X⊤MY ′

⪰0,
(31)
min
X∈Rn×m
g(X) + λ
M ∥X∥∗
s.t.
∥X∥σ ≤M.
(32)
3.5. Bounding the Spectral Penalty
We now present techniques for computing an M such that the optimal values of (8) and (9) agree;
these are essentially a generalization of similar techniques for logically constrained MICOs (Bertsimas
et al. 2016, Section 2.3). We ﬁrst consider the positive semideﬁnite case, then develop the general case.
Note that the Ms obtained here are not, in general, the smallest possible—computing this quantity is
NP-hard even for MICOs (Kleinert et al. 2020).

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
19
Positive semideﬁnite case. Let X ∈Sn
+. Then, since tr(X) = Pn
i=1 λi(X) ≥λ1(X), the optimal value
of the following problem gives a valid bound on M:
Mtr := max
X∈Sn
+
tr(X) s.t. AX = B,X ∈K.
(33)
Alternatively, since the volume of X and its spectral radius are related, we can maximize
X⋆= arg
max
X∈Sn
+:AX=B,X∈Klog det(X).
(34)
We have det(X) ≤(λmax(X))
n, which implies we can set Mdet =
np
det(X⋆). Alternatively, we could
solve both (33) and (34) and set M = min(Mtr,Mdet), which also gives a valid bound.
General case Let X ∈Rn×m. Then, computing a valid M is more expensive, because ∥X∥σ, ∥X∥F,
and ∥X∥∗are not mixed-integer convex representable when maximizing (Lubin et al. 2021, Corollary
4.1). To progress, let us evaluate n · m values Mi,j, each computed by solving two conic problems:
Mi,j :=
max
X∈R⋉×⋗:AX=B,X∈K |Xi,j|
(35)
Then, a valid M is given by P
i,j Mi,j, since P
i,j Mi,j ≥∥X∥1 ≥∥X∥σ (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004).
Unbounded interpretation. We remind the reader that interpreting the case where M = +∞requires
caution. Indeed, when a feasible X and extreme ray W give an unbounded direction such that
rank(X + λW ) ≤k
∀λ ≥0
we have a certiﬁcate that no valid bound on M exists. Alternatively, when rank(X + λW ) ≥k + 1,
we don’t actually know whether a valid M exists, since the set {X ∈Sn
+ : AX = B,X ∈K} could be
unbounded, even while its intersection with a low-rank set is bounded. This diﬃculty also arises in the
sparsity-constrained (MICO) case however, and therefore should not be unexpected; it can be dealt
with by cross-validating M/γ, which is usually acceptable since A,B are usually estimated from data.
4. Eﬃcient Algorithmic Approaches
In this section, we present an eﬃcient numerical approach to solve Problem (1) and its convex re-
laxations. The backbone is an outer-approximation strategy, embedded within a non-convex QCQO
branch-and-bound procedure to solve the problem exactly. We also propose rounding heuristics to ﬁnd
good feasible solutions, and semideﬁnite free methods for optimizing over (1)’s convex relaxations.
The primary motivations for developing an outer-approximation procedure and solving mixed-
projection problem as saddle-point problems are twofold. First, we are not aware of any exact solvers
which address mixed-projection problems with semideﬁnite constraints. Instead, a decomposition strat-
egy like outer-approximation can be readily implemented using a conjunction of Gurobi (to solve non-
convex quadratically constrained master problems) and Mosek (to solve conic subproblems). Second,
decomposition schemes for mixed-integer semideﬁnite problems typically outperform one-shot strategies
(Belotti et al. 2013), so we expect - and observe in Section 5.3 - a similar comparison for mixed-
projection optimization, hence connecting the frameworks in both theory (see Table 1) and practice.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
20
4.1. A Globally Optimal Cutting-Plane Method
The analysis in the previous section reveals that evaluating f(Y ) yields a globally valid ﬁrst-order
underestimator of f(·). Therefore, a numerically eﬃcient strategy for minimizing f(Y ) is to itera-
tively minimize and reﬁne a piecewise linear underestimator of f(Y ). This strategy is known as outer-
approximation (OA), and was originally proposed by Duran and Grossmann (1986). OA iteratively
constructs underestimators of the following form at each iterate t + 1:
ft+1(Y ) = max
1≤i≤t{f(Yi) + ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩}.
(36)
By iteratively minimizing ft+1(Y ) and imposing the resulting cuts when constructing the next under-
estimator, we obtain a non-decreasing sequence of underestimators ft(Yt) and non-increasing sequence
of overestimators mini∈[t] f(Yi) which converge to an ϵ-optimal solution within a ﬁnite number of iter-
ations; see also Section 3.2 for details on cut generation. Indeed, since Conv (Yk
n) is a compact set and
f(·) is an L-Lipschitz continuous function in Y , OA never visits a ball of radius
ϵ
L twice.
We now formalize this numerical procedure in Algorithm 1, and state its convergence properties
(proof of convergence deferred to Appendix A.8):
Algorithm 1 An outer-approximation method for Problem (10)
Require: Initial solution Y1
t ←1
repeat
Compute Yt+1,θt+1 solution of
min
Y ∈Ykn,θ θ + λ · tr(Y )
s.t. ziθ ≥hi + ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩
∀i ∈[t].
Compute f(Yt+1), Ht+1, zt+1, dt+1
until f(Yt) −θt ≤ε
return Yt
Theorem 4. Suppose that Assumptions 1-2 hold, and that there exists some Lipschitz constant L such
that for any feasible Y ,Y ′ ∈Conv(Yk
n) we have: |f(Y ) −f(Y ′)| ≤L∥Y −Y ′∥F, and for any feasibility
cut ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩+ hi ≤0 we have |⟨Hi,Y −Y ′⟩| ≤L∥Y −Y ′∥F. Let Yt ∈Yk
n be a feasible solution
returned by the tth iterate of Algorithm 1, where
t ≥
Lk
ϵ + 1
n2
.
Then, Yt is an ϵ-optimal and ϵ-feasible solution to Problem (9). Moreover, suppose that we set ϵ →0.
Then, any limit point of {Yt}∞
t=1 solves (9).

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
21
4.1.1. Optimizing Over Orthogonal Projection Matrices
To successfully implement Algo-
rithm 1, we need to repeatedly solve optimization problems of the form
min
Y ∈Ykn,θ θ + λ · tr(Y )
s.t. ziθ ≥hi + ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩
∀i ∈[t],
(37)
which requires a tractable representation of Yk
n. Fortunately, Gurobi 9.0 contains a globally optimal
spatial branch-and-bound method for general QCQOs which recursively partitions the feasible region
into boxes and invokes the ubiquitous McCormick inequalities to obtain valid upper and lower bounds
on each box—see Achterberg and Towle (2020) for a discussion of Gurobi’s bilinear solver, Belotti et al.
(2013) for a general theory of spatial branch-and-bound. Therefore, we represent Y by introducing a ma-
trix U ∈Rn×k and requiring that Y = UU ⊤and U ⊤U = I. This allows Algorithm 1 to be implemented
by iteratively solving a sequence of QCQOs and conic optimization problems. Moreover, to decrease
the amount of branching required in each iteration of Algorithm 1, we impose an outer-approximation
of the valid constraint Y ⪰UU ⊤. Speciﬁcally, we strengthen the formulation by imposing second-order
cone relaxations of the PSD constraint. First, we require that the 2 × 2 minors in Y are non-negative
, i.e., Y 2
i,j ≤Yi,iYj,j ∀i,j ∈[n], as proposed in Ahmadi and Majumdar (2019), Bertsimas and Cory-
Wright (2020). Second, we require that the on-diagonal entries of Y ⪰UU ⊤are non-negative i.e., Yi,i ≥
Pk
i=1 U 2
i,t ∀i ∈[n]. Finally, we follow Atamt¨urk and Gomez (2019, Proposition 5) in taking a second-order
cone approximation of the 2× 2 minors in Y ⪰UU ⊤i.e., 0 ≥∥Ui ± Uj∥2
2 ± 2Yi,j −Yi,i −Yj,j, ∀i,j ∈[n].
All told, we have4:
min
Y ∈Sn,U∈Rn×k,θ
θ + λ · tr(Y )
s.t. ziθ ≥hi + ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩
∀i ∈[t],
Y = UU ⊤,U ⊤U = I,Yi,iYj,j ≥Y 2
i,j ∀i,j ∈[n],Yi,i ≥
k
X
t=1
U 2
i,t ∀i ∈[n],tr(Y ) = k,
0 ≥∥Ui + Uj∥2
2 −2Yi,j −Yi,i −Yj,j, 0 ≥∥Ui −Uj∥2
2 + 2Yi,j −Yi,i −Yj,j
∀i,j ∈[n].
(38)
Finally, for a given Y ,U, we strengthen this formulation by imposing second-order cone cuts of the
form ⟨Y −UU ⊤,uu⊤⟩≥0, where u is the most negative eigenvector of Y −UU ⊤, as proposed by
Sherali and Fraticelli (2002).
As described, a linear optimization problem over the set of orthogonal projection matrices is solved at
each iteration, hence building a new branch-and-bound tree each time. We refer to this implementation
as a “multi-tree” method. Although ineﬃcient if implemented naively, multi-tree methods beneﬁt from
gradually tightening the numerical tolerance of the solver as the number of cuts increases.
To improve the eﬃciency of Algorithm 1, one can integrate the entire procedure within a single
branch-and-cut tree using lazy callbacks, as originally proposed in the context of MICO by Quesada and
Grossmann (1992). Henceforth, we refer to this implementation as a “single-tree” method. However, the
4 It should be noted that this formulation is rather complicated because non-convex QCQO solvers such as Gurobi currently
do not model PSD constraints. If they did, we would supplant the second-order cone constraints with Y ⪰UU ⊤and
thereby obtain a simpler master problem.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
22
beneﬁt from using multi-tree over single-tree is not straightforward for it depends on how the method
is engineered. We benchmark both implementations in Section 5.3.
4.1.2. A Simple Benchmark
We now lay out a simple approach for solving low-rank problems
exactly, which we will compare against in our numerical experiments. Rather than introducing an
orthogonal projection matrix Y , we let X = UV ⊤where U ∈Rn×k and V ∈Rm×k, and U, V are both
bounded in absolute value by big-M constraints of the form |Ui,j| ≤1,|Vi,j| ≤M. Assuming that the
objective and constraints are QCQO representable, as occurs for all of the examples mentioned in the
introduction, this formulation can then be optimized over using Gurobi’s piecewise linear reformulation
technique for general QCQOs. Formally, a rank constraint Rank(X) ≤k leads to:
min
X∈Rn×m,U∈Rn×k,V ∈Rm×k
Ω(X) + g(X)
s.t.
X ≥UV ⊤−ϵE,X ≤UV ⊤+ ϵE, ∥Ui∥2 ≤1
∀i ∈[n],∥V ∥∞≤M,
where E is a matrix of all ones. Note however that, as we observe in Section 5, this approach is
signiﬁcantly less eﬃcient than the previously described cutting-plane approaches.
4.2. Lower bounds via Semideﬁnite Relaxations
To certify optimality, high-quality lower bounds are of interest and can be obtained by relaxing the non-
convex constraint Y ∈Yk
n to Y ∈Conv (Yk
n) to obtain a semideﬁnite relaxation as discussed in Lemma
1. In addition to a valid lower bound on (10)’s objective, the optimal solution to the relaxation Y ⋆is
a natural candidate for a random rounding strategy, for stronger convex relaxations lead to superior
random rounding strategies. We will explore such rounding strategies in detail in the next section.
The convex relaxation yields the optimization problem (21) which can be solved using a cutting-plane
method (see Section 4.2.1), an alternating minimization method (see Section 4.2.2) or reformulated
as an SDO and solved as such. Since Algorithm 1 is also an outer-approximation scheme, solving
the convex relaxation via a cutting-plane method has the additional beneﬁt of producing valid linear
lower-approximations of f(Y ) to initialize Algorithm 1 with.
4.2.1. Cutting-Plane Methods for Improving the Root Node Bound
As mentioned pre-
viously, Problem (21) can be solved by a cutting-plane method such as Kelley’s algorithm (see Kelley
1960), which is a continuous analog of Algorithm 1 that solves Problem (10) over Conv(Yk
n), rather
than Yk
n. The main beneﬁt of such a cutting-plane method is that the cuts generated are valid for
both Conv(Yk
n) and Yk
n, and therefore can be used to initialize Algorithm 1 and ensure that its initial
lower bound is equal to the semideﬁnite relaxation. As demonstrated by Fischetti et al. (2017) in the
context of MICO and facility location problems, this approach often accelerates the convergence of
decomposition schemes by orders of magnitude. We present pseudocode in Appendix D.1

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
23
0
500
1000
1500
-1000
-750
-500
-250
0
Time(s)
Objective value
Kelley LB
Kelley UB
In-out LB
In-out UB
cuts=21
cuts=82
100.0 
100.5 
101.0 
101.5 
102.0 
102.5 
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
Time(s)
Lower Bound
Kelley
In-out
In-out+SOC
nc=22,850
nc=18,187
nc=3,270
Figure 1
Convergence behavior of Kelley’s method and the in-out method for solving the semideﬁnite relaxation of
a synthetic matrix completion instance where n = 100 (left), and lower bounds generated by a single-tree
implementation of Algorithm 1 for a synthetic matrix completion instance where n = 10 (right).
Figure 1’s left panel illustrates the convergence of Kelley’s method and the in-out method for solving
the semideﬁnite relaxation of a noiseless matrix completion problem5. Note that in our plot of the
in-out method on the continuous relaxation we omit the time required to ﬁrst solve the SDO relaxation;
this is negligible (38.4s) compared to the time required for either approach to solve the relaxation using
cutting planes. Observe that the in-out method’s lower bound is both initially better and converges
substantially faster to the optimal solution than Kelley’s method. This justiﬁes our use of the in-out
method over Kelley’s method for a stabilizing cut loop in numerical experiments.
Once the relaxation is solved, the generated cuts are used to initialize Algorithm 1. Figure 1’s right
panel displays the convergence proﬁle of the lower bound of Algorithm 1 initialized with cuts from
Kelley’s or the in-out method (with a limit of 100 cuts). We use a single-tree implementation of
Algorithm 16 and again a noiseless matrix completion setting7. We also consider the impact of using
the SOC inequalities Y 2
i,j ≤Yi,iYj,j in the master problem formulation. Using the in-out method and
imposing the SOC inequalities are both vitally important for obtaining high-quality lower bounds from
Algorithm 1. Accordingly, we make use of both ingredients in our numerical experiments.
4.2.2. Solving the Semideﬁnite Relaxation at Scale via Alternating Minimization
In
preliminary numerical experiments, we found that modern IPM codes such as Mosek 9.0 cannot optimize
over the Frobenius/nuclear norm penalties when n > 200 on a standard laptop. As real-world low-rank
problems are often large-scale, we now explore more scalable alternatives for optimizing over these
penalties. As scalable alternatives for the nuclear norm penalty have been studied, we focus on the
5 The data generation process is detailed in Section 5.2. Here, n = 100, p = 0.25, r = 1, and γ = 20
p .
6 We warm-start the upper bound with greedy rounding and the Burer-Monterio local improvement heuristic described
in Section 4.3. To mitigate against numerical instability, we opted to be conservative with our parameters, and therefore
turned Gurobi’s heuristics oﬀ, set FuncPieceError and FuncPieceLength to their minimum possible values (10−5 and 10−6),
set the MIP gap to 1% and the time limit for each solve to one hour.
7 Here, n = 10, p = 0.25, r = 1, and γ = 5
p.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
24
Frobenius penalty, and refer to (Recht et al. 2010) for nuclear norm minimization. We begin our analysis
with the following result (proof deferred to Appendix A.9):
Lemma 9. For any ﬁxed Xt in Problem (23), an optimal choice of θ is given by θ⋆= X⊤
t (Y ⋆)†Xt,
where Y ⋆= Pn
i=1 ρ⋆
i uiu⊤
i , Xt = UΣV ⊤is an SVD of Xt, and ρ⋆is an optimal solution to the following
second order cone problem:
min
ρ∈[0,1]n: e⊤ρ≤k λ · e⊤ρ +
n
X
i=1
σ(Xt)2
2γρi
.
(39)
As optimizing over X for a ﬁxed Yt is straightforward, Lemma 9 suggests a viable approach for
optimize over the Frobenius norm penalty is alternating minimization (AM; see Beck and Teboulle 2009,
for a modern implementation). By specializing Beck and Teboulle (2009)’s implementation of AM to
the Frobenius norm penalty, we obtain an eﬃcient numerical strategy for obtaining an optimal solution
to (23), which we present in Algorithm 2; we note that since ⟨XX,Y †⟩is jointly convex in X,Y
(this follows directly from Lemma 4), alternating minimization converges to an optimal solution to the
semideﬁnite relaxation under standard convergence conditions for block coordinate descent techniques
for convex programs (see, e.g., Bertsekas 2016, Section 3.7) such as the introduction of a proximal term.
We now discuss some enhancements to Algorithm 2 which improve its rate of convergence in practice.
• Imposing a proximal regularization term in the objective, namely + τ
2∥X −Xt∥2
F, improves the rate
of convergence of the method by stabilizing the iterates; we make use of this in our experiments.
• The method stalls when the eigenvalues of Yt are near zero (a) due to numerical instability and (b)
because Yt is near the boundary of Conv(Yk
n). Therefore, to accelerate convergence, we require that
λmin(Y ) ≥K
t at the tth iterate, where K ≊10−2. In practice, this introduces very little error.
• Selecting an optimal W t+1 is generally much cheaper than selecting an optimal V t+1, since the
former problem involves optimizing over n eigenvalues, rather than n2 variables. Therefore, eﬃcient
implementations of Algorithm 2 necessarily require eﬃcient methods for obtaining V t+1. In the case
of matrix completion, g(X) is a quadratic form, which implies that obtaining V t+1 is equivalent to
solving a linear system, which we do iteratively in our numerical experiments.
• We solve for V t+1 by solving the ﬁrst-order optimality condition using a successive over-relaxation
linear technique, or in rare instances where the linear system solver fails to converge we use Ipopt
to solve the QP’s ﬁrst-order optimality condition.
To conﬁrm that Algorithm 2 has indeed converged (at least approximately) to an optimal solution,
we require a dual certiﬁcate. As optimizing over the set of dual variables α for a ﬁxed Yt does not
supply such a bound, we now invoke strong duality to derive a globally valid lower bound. Formally,
we have the following result (proof deferred to Appendix A.10):
Lemma 10. Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Then, strong duality holds between:
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
max
α∈Rn×m
h(α) −γ
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
Yi,j⟨αi,αj⟩,
(40)

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
25
Algorithm 2 An Accelerated Alternating Minimization Algorithm (c.f. Beck and Teboulle 2009)
Require: Initial solution X1,τ1 ←1
t ←1,Tmax
repeat
Compute W t+1 solution of argminY ∈Conv(Ykn) g(Xt) + 1
2γ⟨XtX⊤
t ,Y †⟩
Set Y t+1 = W t +
τt−1
τt+1 (Wt −Wt−1)
Compute V t+1 solution of argminX∈Rn×m g(X) + 1
2γ⟨XX⊤,Y †
t ⟩
Set Xt+1 = V t +
τt−1
τt+1 (Vt −Vt−1)
Set τt+1 =
1+√
1+4τ2
t
2
If t mod 20 = 0 compute dual bound at Y t+1 via Equation (41).
t ←t + 1
until t > Tmax or duality gap ≤ϵ
return Xt,Yt
max
α∈Rn×m,
U⪰0,t≥0
h(α) −tr(U) −kt
s.t.
U + It ⪰γ
2αα⊤.
(41)
Lemma 10 demonstrates that Problem (1)’s semideﬁnite relaxation is equivalent to maximizing the dual
conjugate h(α), minus the k largest eigenvalues of γ
2αα⊤. Moreover, as proven in the special case of
sparse regression by Bertsimas et al. (2020), one can show that if the kth and k+1th largest eigenvalues
of αα⊤in a solution to (40) are distinct then Problem (40)’s lower bound is tight.
4.3. Upper Bounds via Greedy Rounding
We now propose a greedy rounding method for rounding Y ⋆, an optimal Y in a semideﬁnite relaxation
of Problem (9), to obtain certiﬁably near-optimal solutions to Problem (9) quickly. Rounding schemes
for approximately solving low-rank optimization problems by rounding their SDO relaxations have
received a great deal of attention since they were ﬁrst proposed by Goemans and Williamson (1995).
Our analysis is, however, more general than typically conducted when solving low-rank problems, as it
involves rounding a projection matrix Y , rather than rounding X, and therefore is able to generalize
to the rank-k case for k > 1, which has historically been challenging.
Observe that for any feasible Y ∈Conv(Yn), 0 ≤λi(Y ) ≤1 for each eigenvalue of Y , and Y is a
projection matrix if and only if its eigenvalues are binary. Combining this observation with the Lipschitz
continuity of f(Y ) in Y suggests that high-quality feasible projection matrices can be found in the
neighborhood of a solution to the semideﬁnite relaxation, and a good method for obtaining them is to
greedily round the eigenvalues of Y . Namely, let Y ⋆denote a solution to the semideﬁnite relaxation
(21), Y ⋆= UΛ⋆U ⊤be a singular value decomposition of Y ⋆such that Λ is a diagonal matrix with
on-diagonal entries Λi,i, and Λgreedy be a diagonal matrix obtained from rounding up (to 1) k of the

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
26
highest diagonal coeﬃcients of Λ⋆, and rounding down (to 0) the n −k others, with diagonal entries
Λi,i := (Λgreedy)i,i. We then let Ygreedy = UΛgreedyU ⊤. We now provide guarantees on the quality of the
greedily rounded solution (proof deferred to Appendix A.11):
Theorem 5. Let Y ⋆denote a solution to the semideﬁnite relaxation (21), Y ⋆= UΛU ⊤be a singular
value decomposition of Y ⋆, R denote the indices of strictly fractional diagonal entries in Λ, and α⋆(Y )
denote an optimal choice of α for a given Y , i.e.,
α⋆(Y ) ∈arg max
α

max
V11V22 h(α) −Ω⋆(α,Y ,V11,V22)

.
Suppose that for any Y ∈Yk
n, we have σmax(α⋆(Y )) ≤L. Then, any valid rounding of Y ⋆which preserves
the relaxation’s eigenbasis, i.e., Yrounded = UΛroundedU ⊤where Y ⋆= UΛU ⊤and Λrounded is a diagonal
matrix with binary diagonal entries Λrounded
i,i
such that tr(Λrounded) ≤k, satisﬁes
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) ≤γ
2L2|R|
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i
)βi,
(42)
under the Frobenius penalty and
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) ≤ML|R|
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i
)βi,
(43)
for the spectral penalty. Moreover, let Ygreedy = UΛgreedyU ⊤be an instance of Yrounded obtained by
setting Λi,i = 1 for k of the highest diagonal coeﬃcients in Λ⋆. Then, the above bounds imply that 0 ≤
f(Ygreedy)−f(Y ⋆) ≤ϵ, where ϵ = MLmin(|R|,n−k) for the spectral penalty and ϵ = γ
2 min(|R|,n−k)L2
for the Frobenius penalty.
This result calls for multiple remarks:
• When the relaxation gap f(Ygreedy) −f(Y ⋆) = 0, and the optimal solution to the relaxation, Y ⋆, is
unique, |R| = 0. This justiﬁes retaining R in the bound, rather than replacing it with n.
• The techniques introduced in Section 3.5 for computing an M so that an optimal solution X⋆obeys
∥X⋆∥σ ≤M, also apply to computing an explicit L such that ∥α⋆∥σ ≤L in the above bound.
• The rounding technique is robust, because it minimizes the worst-case Lipschitz upper bound, under
the assumption σmax(α⋆) ≤L (i.e., we have no information about which coordinate8 has the largest
Lipschitz upper bound). For instance, under Frobenius regularization the bound is
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) ≤γ
2L2|R|
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i
)βi,
(44)
which is minimized over Λrounded : tr(Λrounded) ≤k by solving:
min
λ∈Skn
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
γ
2L2|R|
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −λi)βi,
(45)
i.e., rounding greedily. This interpretation suggests that greedy rounding never performs too badly.
8 If we had this information then, as the proof of Theorem 5 suggests, we would greedily round to one k of the indices with
the largest values of LiΛ⋆
i,i.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
27
To improve the greedily rounded solution, we implement a local search strategy which obtains even
higher quality warm-starts. Namely, a variant of the popular Burer-Monterio (BM) heuristic (Burer and
Monteiro 2003), which seeks low-rank solutions X by applying a non-linear factorization X = UV ⊤,
where U ∈Rn×l,V ∈Rm×k and iteratively optimizing over U for a ﬁxed V (resp. V for a ﬁxed U) until
convergence to a local optima occurs. This strategy improves our greedily rounded solution because we
initially set U to be the square root of Ygreedy and optimize over V ; recall that if Y is a projection
matrix we have Y = UU ⊤and X = UΣV ⊤for some singular value decomposition U,Σ,V ⊤.
5. Numerical Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the algorithmic strategies derived in the previous section, implemented in
Julia 1.3 using JuMP.jl 0.20.1, Gurobi 9.0.1 to solve the non-convex QCQO master problems9, and
Mosek 9.1 to solve the conic subproblems/continuous relaxations. Except where indicated otherwise,
all experiments were performed on a Intel Xeon E5—2690 v4 2.6GHz CPU core using 32 GB RAM.
To bridge the gap between theory and practice, we have made our code freely available on Github at
github.com/ryancorywright/MixedProjectionSoftware.
We evaluate the diﬀerent ingredients of our numerical strategy on a matrix completion example:
First, we solve the semideﬁnite relaxation by implementing Algorithm 2 and demonstrate its increased
scalability over Mosek’s IPM in Section 5.1. From the solution of the relaxation, our rounding and
local search heuristics then provide near-optimal solutions that outperform state-of-the-art heuristic
methods, as discussed in Section 5.2. We implement Algorithm 1, benchmark its performance and, for
the ﬁrst time, solve low-rank matrix completion to certiﬁable optimality in Section 5.3. In Section 5.4,
we explore the role which regularization plays in our numerical strategy, by showing that increasing
the amount of regularization in Problem (1) decreases the relative gap, the problem’s complexity, and
the amount of time required to solve the problem to optimality. Finally, in Section 5.5 we solve sensor
location problems to certiﬁable optimality.
5.1. Exploring the Scalability of the Convex Relaxations
In this section, we explore the relative scalability of Mosek’s interior point method and Algorithm 2.
We consider convex relaxations of matrix completion problems. Similarly to Cand`es and Plan (2010),
we generate two low-rank matrices ML,MR ∈Rn×r with i.i.d. N(0,1) entries, and attempt to recover
the matrix M = MLM ⊤
R given a proportion p of its observations. Here, we ﬁx p = 0.25 and k = r = 5,
vary n, and set γ = 20
p where we scale γ proportionally to 1/p so that the relative importance of ∥X∥2
F
and P
(i,j)∈Ω(Xi,j −Ai,j)2 remains constant with p.
9 We remark that Gurobi solves the non-convex QCQO master problems by translating them to piecewise linear optimiza-
tion problems. Since rank constraints are not MICO representable, this introduces some error. To mitigate against this
error, we set the Gurobi parameters FuncPieceError and FuncPieceLength to their minimum possible values (10−6 and
10−5 respectively). Additionally, we set NonConvex to 2, and otherwise use default Gurobi/Mosek parameters.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
28
We solve the continuous relaxation
min
X∈Rn×n,Y ∈Conv(Ykn),θ∈Sn
1
2γ tr(θ) +
X
(i,j)∈Ω
(Xi,j −Ai,j)2
s.t.

θ
X
X⊤Y

⪰0.
(46)
Table 3 reports the time required by Algorithm 2 to obtain a solution with a relative duality gap
of 0.1%. To evaluate numerical stability, we also report the relative MSE of the greedily rounded
solution; experiments where n ≤250 were run on a standard MacBook pro with 16GB RAM, while
larger experiments were run on the previously described cluster with 100GB RAM.
Table 3
Scalability of convex relaxations, averaged over 5 matrices. Problem is regularized with Frobenius norm and
γ = 20
p . “-” indicates an instance could not be solved with the supplied memory budget.
n
Mosek
Algorithm 2
n
Algorithm 2
Relative MSE
Time (s)
Relative MSE
Time (s)
Relative MSE
Time (s)
50
0.429
2.28
0.438
17.28
350
0.058
6,970
100
0.138
47.20
0.139
79.01
400
0.056
8,096
150
0.082
336.1
0.081
228.7
450
0.055
26,350
200
0.0675
1,906
0.067
841.7
500
0.054
28,920
250
-
-
0.062
1,419
550
0.0536
39,060
300
-
-
0.059
2,897
600
0.0525
38,470
Our results demonstrate the eﬃciency of Algorithm 2: the relative MSE is comparable to Mosek’s, but
computational time does not explode with n. Since it does not require solving any SDOs and avoids the
computational burden of performing the Newton step in an IPM, Algorithm 2 scales beyond n = 600
(1,440,000 decision variables), compared to n = 200 for IPMs (80,000 decision variables).
5.2. Numerical Evaluation of Greedy Rounding on Matrix Completion Problems
In this section, we compare the greedy rounding method with state-of-the-art heuristic methods, and
demonstrate that, by combining greedy rounding with the local search heuristic of (Burer and Monteiro
2003), our approach outperforms state-of-the-art heuristic methods and therefore should be considered
as a viable and eﬃcient warm-start for Algorithm 1.
We consider the previous matrix completion problems and assess the ability to recover the low-rank
matrix M (up to a relative MSE of 1%), for varying fraction of observed entries p and rank r, with
n = 100 ﬁxed. Note that, other than the inclusion of a Frobenius regularization term, this is the same
experimental setup considered by Cand`es and Recht (2009), Recht et al. (2010) among others.
We compare the performance of four methods: the greedy rounding method, both with and without
the local improvement heuristic from Burer and Monteiro (2003), against the local improvement heuris-
tic alone (with a thresholded-SVD initialization point) and the nuclear norm approach. Speciﬁcally, the
greedy rounding method takes the solution of the previous convex relaxation with γ = 500
p
and rounds
its singular values to generate a feasible solution Ygreedy. For the local improvement heuristic, we solve:
min
X∈Rn×n,U,V ∈Rn×k
1
2γ ∥X∥2
2 +
X
(i,j)∈Ω
(Xi,j −Ai,j)2
s.t.
X = UV ⊤,

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
29
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(a) Greedy Rounding
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(b) Nuclear Norm
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(c) SVD+Local Improvement
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(d) Greedy+Local Improvement
Figure 2
Prop. matrices recovered with ≤1% relative MSE (higher is better), for diﬀerent values of p (x-axis) and
r(2n −r)/pn2 ∝1/n (y-axis), averaged over 25 rank-r matrices.
for γ = 500
p and k = r, and iteratively optimize over U and V using Mosek. We provide an initial value
for U by either taking the ﬁrst k left-singular vectors of a matrix A where unobserved entries are
replaced by 0, or taking the square root of Ygreedy. For the nuclear norm regularization strategy, since
our observations are noiseless, we solve: minX∈Rn×n ∥X∥∗s.t. Xi,j = Ai,j
∀(i,j) ∈Ω.
Figure 2 depicts the proportion of times the matrix was recovered exactly (averaged over 25 samples
per tuple of (n,p,r)), while Figure 3 depicts the relative average MSE over all instances. As in Cand`es
and Recht (2009), Recht et al. (2010), we vary p between 0 and 1 and consider all possible ranks
r such that r(2n −r) ≤pn2.
From this set of experiments, we make several observations: First,
greedy rounding and the local improvement heuristic outperform nuclear norm minimization both in
terms of average relative MSE and amount of data required to recover the matrix. Second, the local
improvement heuristic improves upon greedy rounding. In terms of its ability to recover the underlying
matrix exactly, it performs equally well with either initialization strategy. However, initialization with
the greedy rounding supplies dramatically lower average MSEs in instances where no approach recovers
the true matrix exactly. This suggests that initialization strategies for the Burer-Monterio heuristic
should be revisited and greedy rounding considered as a viable and more accurate alternative than
selecting a random feasible point.
5.3. Benchmarking Algorithm 1 on Synthetic Matrix Completion Problems
We now benchmark Algorithm 1 on matrix completion problems where n ∈{10,20,30}.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
30
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(a) Greedy Rounding
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(b) Nuclear Norm
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(c) SVD+Local Improvement
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(d) Greedy+Local Improvement
Figure 3
Average relative MSE (lower is better), averaged over 25 rank-r matrices. We cap the relative MSE at 1.0.
We ﬁrst compare the two diﬀerent implementations of Algorithm 1, single- and multi-tree, with
solving the problem directly as a QCQO in Gurobi 9.0 (Section 4.1.2). In Algorithm 1, the lower
bounds are warm-started with 200 cuts from the in-out method, and greedy rounding with local search
improvement is used for the upper bounds; if a single-tree instance fails to ﬁnd a feasible solution (due
to numerical instability in Gurobi) we return the gap between the warm-start and the semideﬁnite
relaxation. At the tth iteration, we impose a time limit of 10t seconds for generating the new cut so
as to increase numerical precision as the solver progresses. We also impose a limit of 20 cuts for the
multi-tree approach, a time limit of 30,000s for the single-tree approach10, a time limit of 3,600s for
Gurobi, and an optimality gap of 1%11. Average runtime, number of nodes, and optimality gap are
reported in Table 4. Note that the same random instances were solved by all three approaches (by ﬁxing
the random seeds), to facilitate a less noisy comparison.
We observe that Algorithm 1 drastically improves upon Gurobi both in terms of computational time
(reduced by up to an order of magnitude) and accuracy (absolute gap reduced by around an order of
10 We require a larger time limit than 3,600s, since Gurobi often fails to ﬁnd any feasible solutions within this time limit
due to the numerical diﬃculties inherent in integrating lazy constraint callbacks and a non-convex master problem.
11 We report the absolute gap between the better of Gurobi’s lower bound and the semideﬁnite lower bound, compare
to the objective value which we evaluate directly; this is sometimes 1 −2% even when Gurobi reports that it has found
an optimal solution, due to numerical instability in Gurobi. Note that we report the absolute, rather than relative, gap
since the relative gap depends on the quality of Gurobi’s approximation of Yk
n, which is controlled by the parameter
FuncPieceError and cannot be set lower than 10−6; also note that the objective values are on the order of 0.5-5.0 for the
problems reported in Table 4.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
31
magnitude). Multi-tree dominates single-tree and Gurobi in terms of runtime and the quality of the
solution found, although single-tree occasionally has a smaller gap at termination. Moreover, multi-tree
consistently ﬁnds high-quality feasible solutions earlier than single tree and accepts our warm-start
more consistently, which suggests it may scale better to high-dimensional settings.
Table 4
Scalability of Algorithm 1 vs. Gurobi for solving rank-1 matrix completion problems to certiﬁable optimality,
averaged over 20 random matrices per row. In multi-tree, Nodes denotes the number of nodes expanded in the ﬁnal
branch-and-cut tree, while Nodes (t) denotes the number of nodes expanded over all trees for the multi-tree
implementation.
Gurobi (direct)
Algorithm 1 (single-tree)
Algorithm 1 (multi-tree)
n
p
γ
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
Time(s)
Nodes
Nodes (t)
Gap
Cuts
10
0.1
20/p
> 3,600
313,700
0.0301
10,310
40,060
0.0004
23,460
252.3
630.2
10,099
0.0019
2.95
10
0.2
20/p
> 3,600
299,200
0.0854
19,440
28,430
0.0229
19,370
1,672
2,277
28,895
0.0104
11.0
10
0.3
20/p
> 3,600
274,500
0.1167
20,368
25,480
0.0433
20,290
2,319
2,684
30,906
0.0317
15.4
10
0.1
100/p
> 3,600
281,800
0.0068
18,580
62,680
0.0015
42,200
239.5
405
7,499
0.0003
3.20
10
0.2
100/p
> 3,600
271,300
0.0178
27,990
39,330
0.0492
31,060
1,269
1,931
21,420
0.0042
8.40
10
0.3
100/p
3,239
237,000
0.0178
25,750
29,350
0.0434
23,390
2,472
2,134
32,196
0.0098
19.6
20
0.1
20/p
> 3,600
80,760
0.8915
> 30,000
13,110
0.741
13,070
2,917
413.2
4,835
0.0166
18.5
20
0.2
20/p
> 3,600
65,310
4.094
> 30,000
7,023
0.1816
7,008
3,512
143.0
1,746
0.247
20.0
20
0.3
20/p
> 3,600
64,850
4.745
28,700
6,914
0.1066
6,828
3,287
204.9
2,081
0.253
19.6
20
0.1
100/p
> 3,600
60,830
0.428
> 30,000
13,790
0.7714
13,799
3,013
508.0
6,152
0.0072
17.6
20
0.2
100/p
> 3,600
43,850
1.421
> 30,000
6,395
0.0543
6,395
3,106
80.9
1,027
0.0903
17.6
20
0.3
100/p
> 3,600
55,150
2.810
29,530
6,538
0.0271
6,510
2,910
62.7
744.2
0.1368
17.0
Next, we evaluate the performance of the multi-tree implementation of Algorithm 1 on a more
extensive test-set, including instances where Rank(M) > 1, in Table 5. Note that when r = 1 we use
the same experimental setup (although we impose a time limit of 30t seconds, or 7200 seconds if there
has been no improvement for two consecutive iterations, a cut limit of 50 cuts when n > 20), and when
r > 1 we increase the time limit per iteration to 300t seconds (or 7200 seconds if there has been no
improvement for two consecutive iterations), and allow up to 100 PSD cuts per iteration to be added at
the root node via a user cut callback, in order to strengthen the approximation of the PSD constraint
Y ⪰0. We observe that the problem’s complexity increases with the rank, although not too excessively.
Moreover, when r > 1 the bound gap is actually smaller when γ = 100
p than when γ = 20
p . We believe this
is because Gurobi cannot represent the SDO constraint Y ⪰0 and its SOC approximation is inexact
(even with PSD cuts), and in some cases reﬁning this approximation is actually harder than reﬁning
our approximation of g(X).
Note that the main bottleneck inhibiting solving matrix completion problems where n ≥50 is Gurobi
itself, as the non-convex solver takes increasing amounts of time to process warm-starts (sometimes in
the 100s or 1000s of seconds) when n increases. We believe this may be because of the way Gurobi
translates orthogonal projection matrices to a piecewise linear formulation. Encouragingly, this suggests
that our approach may successfully scale to 100 × 100 matrices as Gurobi improves their solver.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
32
Table 5
Scalability of Algorithm 1 (multi-tree) for solving low-rank matrix completion problems to certiﬁable
optimality, averaged over 20 random matrices per row.
Rank-1
Rank-2
Rank-3
n
p
γ
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
10
0.1
20/p
182.1
9,755
0.0005
2.56
24,220
35,670
0.0034
5.78
37,780
39,870
0.0071
9.28
10
0.2
20/p
3,508
21,060
0.0026
10.8
209,900
108,000
0.0252
35.3
135,260
35,870
0.031
26.2
10
0.3
20/p
5,488
30,970
0.0039
13.1
302,200
70,500
0.0866
50.0
302,100
31,870
0.0197
50.0
10
0.1
100/p
656.5
28,870
0.0001
2.14
676.1
25,493
0.0009
1.83
842.7
20,700
0.0024
1.79
10
0.2
100/p
1,107
10,010
0.0009
4.29
2,065
42,490
0.0019
5.61
57,530
36,910
0.0124
10.7
10
0.3
100/p
3,364
48,730
0.0022
6.30
272,300
33,150
0.0195
44.7
249,700
35,530
0.0499
42.2
20
0.1
20/p
2,017
4,756
0.0061
8.20
253,900
8,030
0.0279
42.7
255,400
3,015
0.0309
43.2
20
0.2
20/p
6,369
6,636
0.0136
15.0
298,700
3,342
0.549
50.0
295,500
236.5
0.879
50.0
20
0.3
20/p
6,687
4,187
0.0082
18.4
296,500
3,175
1.123
50.0
291,100
41.35
2.147
50.0
20
0.1
100/p
1,266
8,792
0.0087
8.35
211,700
6,860
0.0073
34.24
171,900
2,350
0.0131
29.8
20
0.2
100/p
1,220
2,710
0.0104
7.80
302,800
2,426
0.123
50.0
298,800
221.4
0.123
50.0
20
0.3
100/p
1,272
1,837
0.0064
3.14
299,000
2,518
0.264
50.0
293,500
43.0
0.659
50.0
30
0.1
20/p
300,300
2,735
0.0905
50.0
304,300
164.0
0.790
50.0
303,100
1.10
0.365
50.0
30
0.2
20/p
298,700
1,511
0.136
50.0
301,700
9.62
3.105
50.0
302,600
1.00
5.581
50.0
30
0.3
20/p
183,800
1,743
0.0476
36.9
303,000
1.63
5.232
50.0
305,000
0.70
14.60
50.0
30
0.1
100/p
305,600
2,262
0.0273
50.0
302,800
97.40
0.0973
50.0
305,000
1.90
0.0967
50.0
30
0.2
100/p
246,300
3,285
0.0315
43.6
304,300
6.17
0.697
50.0
302,600
1.00
1.419
50.0
30
0.3
100/p
25,970
11,020
0.0089
17.1
304,000
1.00
0.923
50.0
304,700
1.00
3.221
50.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Proportion of entries sampled
Average Relative MSE
NN
GD
BM
OA
(a) n = 25
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0
Proportion of entries sampled
Average Relative MSE
NN
GD
BM
OA
(b) n = 50
Figure 4
Average relative MSE for nuclear norm (NN), greedy rounding (GD), Burer-Monterio (BM), and outer-
approximation (OA) when imputing a rank-1 n × n matrix. All results are averaged over 25 matrices.
Finally, we compare the solution from the exact formulation (9) solved using Algorithm 1 (multi-
tree) with the initial warm-start we proposed and two state-of-the-art heuristics, namely nuclear norm
minimization and the Burer-Monterio approach, as in Section 5.2. Here, we take n ∈{25,50}, r = 1, p
ranging from 0 to 0.4, and γ = 100
p . Figure 4 depicts the average relative MSE over the entire matrix,
averaged over 25 random instances per value of p. When p ≥0.2, the exact method supplies an out-of-
sample relative MSE around 0.6% lower than Burer-Monterio12.
12 Because we ran all methods on the same random instances, this diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant, with a p-value of
2 × 10−51 (resp. 2 × 10−129) that the relative MSE is lower for the exact method when n = 25 (resp. n = 50).

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
33
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(a) Relative in-sample bound gap (γ = 0.5
p )
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(b) Relative in-sample bound gap (γ = 5
p)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(c) Relative in-sample bound gap (γ = 50
p )
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p
r(2n- r)/pn^2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(d) Relative in-sample bound gap (γ = 500
p )
Figure 5
Average relative in-sample bound gap (%), averaged over 25 rank-r matrices.
5.4. Exploring the Impact of Regularization on Problem Complexity
We now examine the impact of the regularization term
1
2γ∥X∥2
F on the problem complexity, as captured
by the relative in-sample duality gap between the semideﬁnite relaxation and the objective value of
the greedy solution with a BM local improvement heuristic. We generate the problem data in the same
manner as the previous experiment, and display results for four values of γ in Figure 5. Observe that as γ
increases, both the duality gap and the problem’s complexity increase.This observation conﬁrms similar
results on the impact of regularization in mixed-integer conic optimization problems (c.f. Bertsimas and
Cory-Wright 2018, Bertsimas et al. 2019). Additionally, when γ = 500
p in Figure 5(d), the region where
the in-sample duality gap is zero corresponds to exactly recovering the underlying matrix with high
probability, while a strictly positive duality gap corresponds to instances with partial recovery only (see
Figure 2). This suggests a deep connection between relaxation tightness and statistical recovery.
While the relative in-sample semideﬁnite relaxation gap is a theoretical measure of problem diﬃculty,
it does not indicate how fast Algorithm 1 converged in practice. In this direction, we solve the 20
synthetic matrix completion problems considered in Table 4 where n ∈{10,20}, r = 1, p ∈{0.2,0.3} for
20 diﬀerent values of γ ∈[100,104] (distributed uniformly on a log-scale), and compare the relative in-
sample semideﬁnite gap (greedily rounded solution vs. semideﬁnite bound) with Algorithm 1’s runtimes
in Figure 6, for the single-tree (left panel) and multi-tree (right panel) implementation. Results are
averaged over 20 random synthetic instances per value of γ. We observe that the relaxation gap does
correlate with runtime for single-tree. Yet, the relationship between the relaxation gap and runtime

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
34
is less straightforward for multi-tree, as it depends on how Gurobi balances cut generation and node
expansion, and the conditioning of the problem.
Figure 6
Average runtime against relative semideﬁnite relaxation gap for Algorithm 1 single-tree (left) and multi-tree
(right) over 20 synthetic matrix completion instances per data point, where p ∈{0.2,0.3}, r = 1, n ∈{10,20}.
The regularizer γ also impact the bias term
1
2γ∥X∥2
F added to the objective function, hence the
suboptimality of the solution. To further illustrate the impact of the regularizer γ on solve times and
the trade-oﬀbetween tractability and sub-optimality, Figure 7 reports the average runtime and MSE
for the previously solved instances, as a function of γ. Figure 7 illustrates how γ balances tractability
(runtime, top row) and optimality of the solution (MSE, bottom row). Also, single-tree (left panel)
is one order of magnitude slower than multi-tree (right panel), and is also more numerically instable
when γ increases, largely because of the diﬃculty of combining a non-convex master problem and lazy
constraint callbacks (which imposes many cuts, without processing the implications of these cuts as
quickly). Echoing our ﬁndings in the previous section, this suggests that, while in MICO single-tree
typically outperforms multi-tree, at the current state of technology multi-tree should be considered as a
viable and potentially more eﬃcient alternative for matrix completion problems which have non-convex
master problems. However, as the algorithmic implementations of non-convex QCQOP solvers mature,
this ﬁnding should be revisited.
5.5. Benchmarking Algorithm 1 on Synthetic Coordinate Recovery Problems
We now benchmark the performance of Algorithm 1 on anchor-free synthetic coordinate recovery prob-
lems, as previously studied by Biswas and Ye (2004), Luo et al. (2010) among others.
Speciﬁcally, we sample n coordinates xi uniformly over [−0.5,0.5]k for k ∈{2,3}, and attempt to
recover a noisy Gram matrix G ∈Sn
+ of the xi’s, given a subset of observations of the underlying matrix.
Similarly to Biswas and Ye (2004), we supply the distance between the points Di,j = ∥xi −xj∥2
2 + z,
where z ∼N(0,0.01), if and only if the radio range between the two points is such that Di,j ≤d2
radio.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
35
Figure 7
Average runtime (top) and MSE (bottom) vs. γ for Algorithm 1 single-tree (left) and multi-tree (right)
implementations over 20 synthetic matrix completion instances where p ∈{0.2,0.3}, r = 1 and n ∈{10,20}.
The same random seeds were used to generate random matrices completed by single-tree and multi-tree.
Note that we solve these problems in precisely the same fashion as the largest matrix completion
problems solved in the previous section (multi-tree, with a limit of 50 cut passes etc.)
Formally, in order to account for noise in the observed entries, we solve the following problem:
min
Y ∈Ykn
min
G∈Sn
+
1
2γ ∥G∥2
F + tr(G) + λ · ∥ξ∥1
s.t.
Gi,i + Gj,j −2Gi,j + ξi,j = Di,j ∀(i,j) ∈Ω, G = Y G,
where λ > 0 is a penalty term which encourages robustness, and the Frobenius norm objective likewise
encourages robustness against noise in G. The performance of Algorithm 1 (multi-tree) on various
synthetic instances is reported in Table 6, for γ,n,dradio,k varying.
We observe that the problem’s complexity increases with the rank and with the dimensionality of the
Gram matrix, although not too excessively. Indeed, Algorithm 1 can solve coordinate recovery problems
with tens of data points to certiﬁable optimality in hours.
5.6. Summary of Findings from Numerical Experiments
Our main ﬁndings from the numerical experiments in this section are as follows:

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
36
Table 6
Scalability of Algorithm 1 (multi-tree) for solving sensor location problems to certiﬁable optimality, averaged
over 20 random instances per row. A “-” denotes an instance that cannot be solved within the time budget, because
Gurobi fails to accept our warm-start and cannot ﬁnd a feasible solution. We let λ = n2 for all instances.
Rank-2
Rank-3
n
dradio
γ
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
Time(s)
Nodes
Gap
Cuts
10
0.1
1/p
135.3
6,926
0.0001
1.00
45.14
0.02
0.0000
1.00
10
0.2
1/p
3,189
5,249
0.0024
11.5
216.8
7,819
0.0022
1.00
10
0.1
100/p
76.2
1,155
0.0000
1.00
140.6
950
0.0000
1.00
10
0.2
100/p
480.6
0.05
0.0001
21.7
92.6
139
0.0000
1.14
20
0.1
1/p
3,475
4,548
0.0007
13.0
3,090
9,740
0.0001
1.00
20
0.2
1/p
73,000
0.50
0.0149
50.0
7,173
5,313
0.0038
1.20
20
0.1
100/p
1,878
0.00
0.0000
3.91
64.9
0.00
0.0000
1.07
20
0.2
100/p
67,530
0.20
0.0044
50.0
55.7
0.00
0.0002
1.00
• As demonstrated in Section 5.1, Algorithm 2 successfully solves convex relaxations of low-rank prob-
lems where n = 100s, in a faster and more scalable fashion than state-of-the-art interior point codes
such as Mosek.
• As demonstrated in Section 5.2, the following strategy is almost as eﬀective as solving a low-rank
problem exactly: solving the convex relaxation using Algorithm 2, greedily rounding the solution to
the convex relaxation, and using this greedily rounded solution as a warm-start for a local method
such as the method of Burer and Monteiro (2003, 2005). The success of this strategy can be explained
because solving a relaxation and rounding is a global strategy which matches the low-order moments
of the set of optimal solutions to obtain a solution near an optimal solution, while local methods
polish a solution by seeking the best solution within some neighborhood of an initial point.
• As demonstrated in Section 5.4, increasing the amount of regularization in a low-rank problem by
decreasing γ decreases the duality gap between a low-rank problem with Frobenius or spectral norm
problem, and its convex relaxation. Therefore, increasing the amount of regularization makes the
problem easier in a practical sense (although not necessarily in a complexity-theoretic sense).
• As demonstrated in Sections 5.3, 5.5, Algorithm 1 scales to solve problems where n is in the tens,
i.e., hundreds or thousands of decision variables, in hours. Moreover, the main bottleneck inhibiting
solving problems where n is in the hundreds or thousands is that we solve our master problems
using Gurobi, a QCQO solver which translates the orthogonal projection matrix constraint into many
piecewise linear constraints. This suggests that a custom branch-and-bound solver which explicitly
models orthogonal projection matrices constitutes a promising area for future work.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization, a new framework for modeling
rank constrained optimization problems that, for the ﬁrst time, solves low-rank problems to certiﬁable
optimality at moderate problem sizes. We also provided a characterization of the complexity of rank

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
37
constraints, and proposed new convex relaxations and rounding methods that lead to viable and more
accurate solutions than those obtained via existing techniques such as the log-det or nuclear norm
heuristics. Inspired by the collective successes achieved in mixed-integer optimization, we hope that
MPCO constitutes an exciting new research direction for the optimization community. For instance,
we believe that custom branch-and-bound solvers that explicitly model orthogonal projection matrices
could further enhance the scalability of the MPCO framework.
Acknowledgments:
We thank the two anonymous referees and the associate editor for many
valuable comments which improved the paper substantially.
References
T. Achterberg and E. Towle. Gurobi webinar: Non-convex quadratic optimization. https://www.gurobi.com/resource/
non-convex-quadratic-optimization/, 2020. Accessed: 2021-02-09.
A. A. Ahmadi and A. Majumdar. DSOS and SDSOS optimization: More tractable alternatives to sum of squares and
semideﬁnite optimization. SIAM J. Appl. Alg. Geom., 3(2):193–230, 2019.
M. S. Akt¨urk, A. Atamt¨urk, and S. G¨urel.
A strong conic quadratic reformulation for machine-job assignment with
controllable processing times. Oper. Res. Letters, 37(3):187–191, 2009.
A. Atamt¨urk and A. Gomez. Rank-one convexiﬁcation for sparse regression. arXiv:1901.10334, 2019.
C. Audet, P. Hansen, B. Jaumard, and G. Savard. A branch and cut algorithm for nonconvex quadratically constrained
quadratic programming. Math. Prog., 87(1):131–152, 2000.
L. Bai, J. E. Mitchell, and J.-S. Pang. On conic QPCCs, conic QCQPs and completely positive programs. Math. Prog.,
159(1):109–136, 2016.
A. Beck and M. Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse problems. SIAM J. Imag.
Sci., 2(1):183–202, 2009.
R. M. Bell and Y. Koren. Lessons from the Netﬂix prize challenge. Technical report, AT&T Bell Laboratories, 2007.
P. Belotti, C. Kirches, S. Leyﬀer, J. Linderoth, J. Luedtke, and A. Mahajan. Mixed-integer nonlinear optimization. Acta
Numerica, 22:1, 2013.
W. Ben-Ameur and J. Neto. Acceleration of cutting-plane and column generation algorithms: Applications to network
design. Networks, 49(1):3–17, 2007.
A. Ben-Tal and A. Nemirovski. Lectures on modern convex optimization, volume 2. SIAM, 2001.
D. P. Bertsekas. Nonlinear programming. Athena Scientiﬁc Belmont, 3rd edition, 2016.
D. Bertsimas and R. Cory-Wright. A scalable algorithm for sparse portfolio selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00138,
2018.
D. Bertsimas and R. Cory-Wright.
On polyhedral and second-order cone decompositions of semideﬁnite optimization
problems. Oper. Res. Lett., 48(1):78–85, 2020.
D. Bertsimas and B. Van Parys. Sparse high-dimensional regression: Exact scalable algorithms and phase transitions.
Annals of Statistics, 48(1):300–323, 2020.
D. Bertsimas, A. King, and R. Mazumder. Best subset selection via a modern optimization lens. Ann. Stat., pages 813–852,
2016.
D. Bertsimas, M. S. Copenhaver, and R. Mazumder. Certiﬁably optimal low rank factor analysis. J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
18(1):907–959, 2017.
D. Bertsimas, R. Cory-Wright, and J. Pauphilet. A uniﬁed approach to mixed-integer optimization problems with logical
constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02109, 2019.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
38
D. Bertsimas, J. Pauphilet, and B. van Parys. Sparse regression: Scalable algorithms and empirical performance. Statistical
Science, 35(4):555–578, 2020.
S. Bi, S. Pan, and D. Sun. A multi-stage convex relaxation approach to noisy structured low-rank matrix recovery. Math.
Prog. Comp., 12(4):569–602, 2020.
P. Biswas and Y. Ye. Semideﬁnite programming for ad hoc wireless sensor network localization. In Proceedings of the 3rd
international symposium on Information processing in sensor networks, pages 46–54. ACM, 2004.
G. Blekherman, P. A. Parrilo, and R. R. Thomas. Semideﬁnite optimization and convex algebraic geometry. Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 2012.
P. Bonami, L. T. Biegler, A. R. Conn, G. Cornu´ejols, I. E. Grossmann, C. D. Laird, J. Lee, A. Lodi, F. Margot, N. Sawaya,
and A. W¨achter. An algorithmic framework for convex mixed integer nonlinear programs. Disc. Optim., 5(2):186–204,
2008.
S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2004.
S. Boyd, L. El Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrishnan. Linear matrix inequalities in system and control theory, volume 15.
SIAM Philadelphia, PA, 1994.
S. Burer and R. D. Monteiro. A nonlinear programming algorithm for solving semideﬁnite programs via low-rank factor-
ization. Math. Prog., 95(2):329–357, 2003.
S. Burer and R. D. Monteiro. Local minima and convergence in low-rank semideﬁnite programming. Math. Prog., 103(3):
427–444, 2005.
E. J. Cand`es and Y. Plan. Matrix completion with noise. Proceedings of the IEEE, 98(6):925–936, 2010.
E. J. Cand`es and B. Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Found. Comp. Math., 9(6):717, 2009.
J. Canny. Some algebraic and geometric computations in PSPACE. In Proc. Symp. T. Comp., pages 460–467. ACM, 1988.
A. L. Chistov and D. Y. Grigoriev. Complexity of quantiﬁer elimination in the theory of algebraically closed ﬁelds. In
International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, volume 176 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 17–31. Springer Verlag, 1984.
C. Coey, M. Lubin, and J. P. Vielma. Outer approximation with conic certiﬁcates for mixed-integer convex problems.
Math. Prog. Comp., 12:249–293, 2020.
D. Cox, J. Little, and D. O’Shea. Ideals, varieties, and algorithms: an introduction to computational algebraic geometry
and commutative algebra. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
A. d’Aspremont.
A semideﬁnite representation for some minimum cardinality problems.
In 42nd IEEE International
Conference on Decision and Control, volume 5, pages 4985–4990. IEEE, 2003.
A. d’Aspremont, L. El Ghaoui, M. I. Jordan, and G. R. Lanckriet. A direct formulation for sparse pca using semideﬁnite
programming. SIAM Rev., 49(3):434–448, 2007.
C. Ding, D. Sun, and J. Y. Jane. First order optimality conditions for mathematical programs with semideﬁnite cone
complementarity constraints. Math. Prog., 147(1):539–579, 2014.
H. Dong, K. Chen, and J. Linderoth. Regularization vs. relaxation: A conic optimization perspective of statistical variable
selection. arXiv:1510.06083, 2015.
J. Douglas and H. H. Rachford. On the numerical solution of heat conduction problems in two and three space variables.
Transactions of the American mathematical Society, 82(2):421–439, 1956.
M. A. Duran and I. E. Grossmann. An outer-approximation algorithm for a class of mixed-integer nonlinear programs.
Math. Prog., 36(3):307–339, 1986.
J. Eckstein and D. P. Bertsekas. On the Douglas—Rachford splitting method and the proximal point algorithm for maximal
monotone operators. Math. Prog., 55(1):293–318, 1992.
J. Fan and R. Li. Variable selection via nonconcave penalized likelihood and its oracle properties. Journal of the American
statistical Association, 96(456):1348–1360, 2001.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
39
M. Fazel. Matrix rank minimization with applications. PhD thesis, Stanford University, 2002.
M. Fischetti, I. Ljubi´c, and M. Sinnl. Redesigning Benders decomposition for large-scale facility location. Mang. Sci., 63
(7):2146–2162, 2017.
A. Frangioni and C. Gentile. SDP diagonalizations and perspective cuts for a class of nonseparable MIQP. Oper. Res.
Lett., 35(2):181–185, 2007.
F. Glover. Improved linear integer programming formulations of nonlinear integer problems. Mang. Sci., 22(4):455–460,
1975.
M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut and satisﬁability problems
using semideﬁnite programming. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 42(6):1115–1145, 1995.
I. E. Grossmann. Review of nonlinear mixed-integer and disjunctive programming techniques. Opt. & Eng., 3(3):227–252,
2002.
M. Gr¨otschel and Y. Wakabayashi. A cutting plane algorithm for a clustering problem. Math. Prog., 45(1-3):59–96, 1989.
O. G¨unl¨uk and J. Linderoth. Perspective reformulation and applications. In Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programming, pages
61–89. Springer, 2012.
H. Hazimeh, R. Mazumder, and A. Saab. Sparse regression at scale: Branch-and-bound rooted in ﬁrst-order optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06152, 2020.
R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson. Matrix analysis. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1985.
P. Jain, P. Netrapalli, and S. Sanghavi. Low-rank matrix completion using alternating minimization. In Proc. forty-ﬁfth
ACM symp. T. Comput., pages 665–674, 2013.
R. C. Jeroslow. There cannot be any algorithm for integer programming with quadratic constraints. Oper. Res., 21(1):
221–224, 1973.
J. E. Kelley, Jr. The cutting-plane method for solving convex programs. J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., 8(4):703–712, 1960.
T. Kleinert, M. Labb´e, F. a. Plein, and M. Schmidt. There’s no free lunch: on the hardness of choosing a correct big-M in
bilevel optimization. Oper. Res., 68(6):1716–1721, 2020.
B. Kocuk, S. S. Dey, and X. A. Sun. Strong SOCP relaxations for the optimal power ﬂow problem. Oper. Res., 64(6):
1177–1196, 2016.
J. B. Lasserre. Global optimization with polynomials and the problem of moments. SIAM J. Opt., 11(3):796–817, 2001.
J. Lavaei and S. H. Low. Zero duality gap in optimal power ﬂow problem. IEEE Trans. Power Sys., 27(1):92–107, 2011.
J. Lee and B. Zou. Optimal rank-sparsity decomposition. J. Glob. Opt., 60(2):307–315, 2014.
J. Linderoth. A simplicial branch-and-bound algorithm for solving quadratically constrained quadratic programs. Math.
Prog., 103(2):251–282, 2005.
M. Lubin, I. Zadik, and J. P. Vielma. Mixed-integer convex representability. Math. Oper. Res., to appear, 2021.
Z.-Q. Luo, J.-S. Pang, and D. Ralph. Mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints. Cambridge University Press,
1996.
Z.-Q. Luo, W.-K. Ma, A. M.-C. So, Y. Ye, and S. Zhang. Semideﬁnite relaxation of quadratic optimization problems.
IEEE Sig. Proc. Mag., 27(3):20–34, 2010.
G. P. McCormick. Computability of global solutions to factorable nonconvex programs: Part i—convex underestimating
problems. Math. Prog., 10(1):147–175, 1976.
A. Meenakshi and C. Rajian. On a product of positive semideﬁnite matrices. Lin. Alg. Appl., 295(1-3):3–6, 1999.
A. Mutapcic and S. Boyd. Cutting-set methods for robust convex optimization with pessimizing oracles. Opt. Meth. Soft.,
24(3):381–406, 2009.
S. Naldi. Solving rank-constrained semideﬁnite programs in exact arithmetic. J. Symb. Comput., 85:206–223, 2018.
A. Nemirovski, C. Roos, and T. Terlaky. On maximization of quadratic form over intersection of ellipsoids with common
center. Math. Prog., 86(3):463–473, 1999.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
40
Y. Nesterov. Smooth minimization of non-smooth functions. Mathematical programming, 103(1):127–152, 2005.
Y. Nesterov. Smoothing technique and its applications in semideﬁnite optimization. Mathematical Programming, 110(2):
245–259, 2007.
L. T. Nguyen, J. Kim, and B. Shim. Low-rank matrix completion: A contemporary survey. IEEE Access, 7:94215–94237,
2019.
M. L. Overton and R. S. Womersley. On the sum of the largest eigenvalues of a symmetric matrix. SIAM J. Matr. Anal.
Appl., 13(1):41–45, 1992.
J. Peng and Y. Wei. Approximating k-means-type clustering via semideﬁnite programming. SIAM J. Opt., 18(1):186–205,
2007.
J. Peng and Y. Xia. A new theoretical framework for k-means-type clustering. In Found. Adv. data mining, pages 79–96.
Springer, 2005.
M. Pilanci, M. J. Wainwright, and L. El Ghaoui. Sparse learning via boolean relaxations. Math. Prog., 151(1):63–87, 2015.
S. Puntanen and G. P. H. Styan. Historical introduction: Issai Schur and the early development of the Schur complement.
In F. Zhang, editor, The Schur Complement and Its Applications, pages 1–16. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005.
I. Quesada and I. E. Grossmann. An LP/NLP based branch and bound algorithm for convex MINLP optimization problems.
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 16(10-11):937–947, 1992.
B. Recht and C. R´e. Parallel stochastic gradient algorithms for large-scale matrix completion. Math. Prog. Computation,
5(2):201–226, 2013.
B. Recht, M. Fazel, and P. Parrilo. Guaranteed minimum-rank solutions of linear matrix equations via nuclear norm
minimization. SIAM Rev., 52(3):471–501, 2010.
J. Renegar. On the computational complexity and geometry of the ﬁrst-order theory of the reals. part i-iii. J. Symb.
Comp., 13(3):255–352, 1992.
M. Schaefer. Realizability of graphs and linkages. In J. Pach, editor, Thirty Essays on Geometric Graph Theory, pages
461–482. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2013.
H. D. Sherali and B. M. Fraticelli. Enhancing RLT relaxations via a new class of semideﬁnite cuts. J. Glob. Opt., 22(1-4):
233–261, 2002.
M. Udell, C. Horn, R. Zadeh, and S. Boyd. Generalized low rank models. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
9(1):1–118, 2016.
L. Vandenberghe and S. Boyd. Semideﬁnite programming. SIAM Review, 38(1):49–95, 1996.
Z. Wen, W. Yin, and Y. Zhang. Solving a low-rank factorization model for matrix completion by a nonlinear successive
over-relaxation algorithm. Math. Prog. Comp., 4(4):333–361, 2012.
H. Wolkowicz, R. Saigal, and L. Vandenberghe. Handbook of semideﬁnite programming. Springer US, 2012.
C.-H. Zhang. Nearly unbiased variable selection under minimax concave penalty. Ann. Stat., 38(2):894–942, 2010.
H. Zhang, Z. Lin, and C. Zhang. A counterexample for the validity of using nuclear norm as a convex surrogate of rank.
In Euro. Conf. Mach. Learn. Know. Disc. Data., pages 226–241. Springer, 2013.
X. Zheng, X. Sun, and D. Li. Improving the performance of MIQP solvers for quadratic programs with cardinality and
minimum threshold constraints: A semideﬁnite program approach. INFORMS J. Comput., 26(4):690–703, 2014.
A. Omitted Proofs
In this section, we supply omitted proofs of the results stated in the manuscript, in the order in which
the results were stated.

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
41
A.1. Proof of Theorem 1
Proof of Theorem 1
By (Blekherman et al. 2012, Theorem 2.49), a set of distances di,j can be
embedded in a Euclidean space of dimension k if and only if there exists some Gram matrix G such
that D = Diag(G)e⊤+ eDiag(G)⊤−2G where G ⪰0 and Rank(G) ≤k. Therefore, Proposition 1’s
∃R-hard problem is a special case of:
min
G∈Sn
+
Rank(G)
s.t.
Diag(G)e⊤+ eDiag(G)⊤−2G = D,
where k = 2, Di,j = 1 ∀(i,j) ∈E, and we do not impose the (i,j)th equality otherwise.
□
A.2. Proof of Theorem 2
Proof of Theorem 2
To establish this result, it suﬃces to perform a reduction from the following
feasibility system to a polynomially sized system of polynomial equalities and inequalities:
∃X :
Rank(X) ≤k,
⟨Ai,X⟩= bi
∀i ∈[m],
X ⪰0,
because testing the feasibility of the above system a polynomial number of times for k ∈[n] certainly
solves Problem (9).
By Proposition 2, this system is feasible if and only if the following system is also feasible:
∃X,Y :
Y 2 = Y ,
X = XY ,
tr(Y ) ≤k, ⟨Ai,X⟩= bi
∀i ∈[m],
X ⪰0,
The result then follows by observing that semideﬁnite constraints are indeed semialgebraic con-
straints, by the Tarski-Seidenberg theorem (see Blekherman et al. 2012, Chapter A.4.4), and therefore
this system is equivalent to a polynomially sized system of polynomial equalities and inequalities.
□
A.3. Complexity of Low-Rank Integer Optimization and Hilbert’s 10th Problem
We now demonstrate that imposing the constraint X ∈Zn×n changes Problem (1)’s complexity status,
by making it undecidable. Formally, we have:
Theorem 6. The following problem is undecidable, even when k = 1 and its objective is binary:
min
X∈Zn×n
⟨C,X⟩
s.t.
⟨Ai,X⟩= bi
∀i ∈[m], Rank(X) ≤k, X ⪰0.
Remark 8. Theorem 6’s reduction does not hold in the presence of a regularizer. Indeed, imposing
either a spectral or Frobenius norm regularizer ensures the boundedness of the problem’s level sets,
which allows the problem to be solved in ﬁnite time via branch-and-bound. Nonetheless, Theorem 6
shows that imposing an integrality constraint makes Problem (1) much harder.
Proof of Theorem 6
We perform a reduction from integer optimization with quadratic constraints,
which is undecidable when the objective is binary (Jeroslow 1973), by reduction from Hilbert’s 10th
problem. Recall that integer optimization with quadratic constraints is deﬁnitionally:
min
x∈Zn
⟨c,x⟩
s.t.
⟨x,Qix⟩+ ⟨ai,x⟩≤bi
∀i ∈[m].
(47)

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
42
We now show that this problem is equivalent to:
min
x∈Zn,X∈Zn×n
⟨c,x⟩
s.t.
⟨Qi,X⟩+ ⟨ai,x⟩≤bi
∀i ∈[m],
Rank

1 x⊤
x X

≤1,

1 x⊤
x X

⪰0.
To establish the result, it suﬃces to show that X = xx⊤in any feasible solution to the second
problem. We now show this, by appealing to the Guttman rank identity (see Lemma C.2). We remind
the reader that an equivalent form of the Guttman rank formula is the identity:
Rank

1 x⊤
x X

= Rank(X) + Rank(X −xx⊤),
Since X ⪰0 and the left hand side of the above expression is either 0 or 1, this formula implies that
either X = xx⊤or X = 0. However, the latter case can only hold if x = 0, since X ⪰xx⊤by Schur
complements. Therefore, X = xx⊤and the result holds.
□
A.4. Proof of Lemma 4
Proof of Lemma 4
Let us ﬁx Y ∈Conv (Yn). Then, we have that:
max
α
h(α) −γ
2 ⟨α,Y α⟩= max
α,β h(α) −γ
2 ⟨β,Y β⟩s.t. β = α,
= max
α,β min
X
h(α) −γ
2 ⟨β,Y β⟩−⟨X,β −α⟩,
= min
X
max
α
[h(α) + ⟨X,α⟩]
|
{z
}
(−h)⋆(X)=g(X)
+max
β
−γ
2 ⟨Y β,β⟩−⟨X,β⟩

.
Finally, the optimality condition with respect to β is Y β = −1
γ X, which implies the later term is
max
W
 1
2γ ⟨X,Y †X⟩−1
2⟨X,(I −Y †Y )W ⟩

= max
W
 1
2γ ⟨X,Y †X⟩−1
2⟨W ,(I −Y †Y )X⟩

=



1
2γ

X,Y †X

if Y ∈Span(X),
+∞
otherwise.
We therefore conclude that the later term is equal to
1
2γ

X,Y †X

whenever the constraint Y †Y X = X
holds. By the generalized Schur complement lemma C.1, this expression is equivalent to introducing a
new matrix θ, imposing the term
1
2γtr(θ) and requiring that

θ
X
X⊤Y

⪰0.
□
A.5. Proof of Lemma 5
Proof of Lemma 5
Let us ﬁx Y ∈Conv (Yn). Then, we have that:
max
α∈Sn,W+,W−⪰0 h(α) −M ⟨Y ,W+ −W−⟩
s.t.
α = W+ −W−
=
max
α∈Sn,W+,W−⪰0 min
X∈Sn h(α) −M ⟨Y ,W+ −W−⟩+ ⟨X,α −W+ + W−⟩
= min
X∈Sn
max
α∈Sn,W+,W−⪰0 h(α) −M ⟨Y ,W+ −W−⟩+ ⟨X,α −W+ + W−⟩
= min
X∈Sn max
α∈Sn [h(α) + ⟨X,α⟩]
|
{z
}
(−h)⋆(X)=g(X)
+
max
W+,W−⪰0[−M ⟨Y ,W+ −W−⟩+ ⟨X,−W+ + W−⟩].
Finally, the optimality conditions with respect to W+,W−imply that −MY ⪯X ⪯MY .
□

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
43
A.6. Proof of Lemmas 7 and 8
Proof of Lemma 7
In Problem (29), it is not too hard to see that for any X an optimal choice
of Y is Y =
1
M X+ +
1
M X−, where X+,X−are orthogonal positive semideﬁnite matrices such that
X = X+ −X−. Therefore, the result follows by observing that tr(X+ + X−) = ∥X∥∗.
□
Proof of Lemma 8
In Problem (31), for any feasible X we have ∥X∥σ ≤M. Under this constraint,
it follows that for any X an optimal choice of Y ,Y ′ is Y = UΣU ⊤, Y ′ = V ΣV ⊤, where X = UΣV ⊤
is an SVD of X. The result follows as tr(Y ) = tr(Σ) = ∥X∥∗.
□
A.7. Proof of Lemma 6
Proof of Lemma 6
Observe that, by the Generalized Schur Complement Lemma (see, e.g., lemma
C.1), an optimal choice of θ in Problem (26) is θ = XY †X⊤. Therefore, we can eliminate θ from
Problem (26), to obtain the equivalent objective:
min
Y ∈Conv(Yn)
min
X∈Rn×m
λ · tr(Y ) + g(X) + 1
2γ ⟨XX⊤,Y †⟩.
Moreover, by the rank-nullity theorem (see, e.g., Horn and Johnson 1985, Chapter 0.2.3), we can split
the columns of Y into columns in the span of the columns of X and columns orthogonal to the columns
of X. Since the columns orthogonal to the columns of X do not aﬀect the objective value, it follows
that we can write Y † = Pn
i=1
1
θi uiu⊤
i without loss of optimality, where XX⊤= UΣU ⊤is an SVD of
XX⊤, and 0 ≤θi ≤1 for each θi, because Y ∈Conv(Yn). Problem (26) then becomes:
min
X∈Rn×m,θ∈Rn: 0≤θ≤e
g(X) +
n
X
i=1

λθi + σi(X)2
2γθi

.
The result then follows because, for any λ > 0, (c.f. Pilanci et al. 2015, Equation (30))
min
0≤θ≤1

λθ + t2
θ

=
(
2
√
λ|t|,
if |t| ≤
√
λ,
t2 + λ,
otherwise.
□
A.8. Proof of Theorem 4
Proof of Theorem 4
We only detail the proof of ϵ-optimality; the proof of ϵ-feasibility is almost
identical (see Mutapcic and Boyd 2009).
Suppose that at some iteration k > 1, Algorithm 1 has not converged. Then,
θk −f(Yk) < −ϵ,
and
θk ≥f(Yi) + ⟨Hi,Yk −Yi⟩∀i < k.
But θk ≤f(Yi), since θk and f(Yi) are respectively valid lower and upper bounds on the optimal
objective. Therefore, ⟨Hi,Yk −Yi⟩≥0. Putting the two inequalities together then implies that
f(Yk) −f(Yi) > ϵ + ⟨Hi,Yk −Yi⟩≥ϵ, or equivalently
ϵ < f(Yk) −f(Yi) ≤L∥Yi −Yk∥F,
where the second inequality holds by Lipschitz continuity. Rearranging this inequality implies that
∥Yi −Yk∥F > ϵ
L, i.e., Algorithm 1 never visits any point within a ball of radius
ϵ
L (with respect to the

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
44
Frobenius norm) twice. Moreover, by iteration k, Algorithm 1 visits k points within non-overlapping
balls with combined volume
k
π
n2
2
Γ( n2
2 + 1)
 ϵ
L
n2
,
and these balls are centered at feasible points, i.e., contained within a ball of radius K + ϵ
L with volume
π
n2
2
Γ( n2
2 + 1)

K + ϵ
L
n2
.
That is, if Algorithm 1 has not converged at iteration k, we have: k <
  LK
ϵ + 1
n2
, which implies that
we converge to an ϵ-optimal solution within k ≤
  LK
ϵ + 1
n2
iterations.
□
A.9. Proof of Lemma 9
Proof of Lemma 9
The equality θ⋆= X⊤
t (Y ⋆)†Xt is immediate from the Schur complement lemma
C.1. Therefore, we focus on deriving an optimal Y for a ﬁxed Xt.
From the second equality in the Schur complement lemma C.1, we must have X = Y Y †X for
feasibility. Therefore, span(X) ⊆span(Y ). Moreover, columns of Y which are in null(X) do not con-
tribute to the optimal objective and can therefore be omitted without loss of optimality. Therefore,
Y = Pn
i=1 ρiuiu⊤
i for some ρ, where Xt = UΣV ⊤is an SVD of Xt. The result follows from observing
that 0 ≤ρ ≤e and e⊤ρ ≤k, since Y ∈Conv(Yk
n).
□
A.10. Proof of Lemma 10
Proof of Lemma 10
As Assumption 2 holds, we can exchange the minimization and maximization
operators in Problem (40). Therefore, Problem (40) has the same optimal objective as:
max
α h(α) −
max
Y ∈Conv(Ykn)
γ
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
Yi,j⟨αi,αj⟩.
(48)
Therefore, to establish the result, it suﬃces to show that we obtain Problem (41) after taking the dual of
Problem (48)’s inner problem. This is indeed the case, because Conv(Yk
n) is a convex compact set with
non-empty relative interior, and therefore strong duality holds between the following two problems:
max
Y ⪰0
γ
2
n
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
Yi,j⟨αi,αj⟩
s.t.
Y ⪯I, [U] ⟨I,Y ⟩≤k, [t],
min
U⪰0,t≥0
tr(U) + kt
s.t.
U + It ⪰γ
2αα⊤.
□
A.11. Proof of Theorem 5
Proof of Theorem 5
To establish the result, we establish the ﬁrst half of the following inequalites:
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆)≤γ
2L2
max
β≥0:∥β∥∞≤1
X
i∈R
 Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i

βi ≤γ
2L2|R|
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i
)βi,
under the Frobenius penalty and
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆)≤ML
max
β≥0:∥β∥∞≤1
X
i∈R
 Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i

βi ≤ML|R|
max
β≥0:∥β∥1≤1
X
i∈R
(Λ⋆
i,i −Λrounded
i,i
)βi,

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
45
for the spectral penalty—the second half of both inequalities follows readily from the fact that ∥β∥1 ≤
|R|∥β∥∞≤|R| which allows us to replace ∥β∥∞≤1 with ∥β∥1 ≤|R| and move |R| outside the bound.
Indeed, after establishing these inequalities, the result follows by observing that Ygreedy minimizes the
right-hand-side of (42)-(43) over the class of projection matrices Yrounded.
Under a Frobenius penalty, by Lipschitz continuity, we have
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) ≤γ
2⟨α⋆(Y )α⋆(Y )⊤,U(Λ⋆−Λrounded)U ⊤⟩= γ
2⟨U ⊤α⋆(Y )α⋆(Y )⊤U,Λ⋆−Λrounded⟩.
Moreover, since Λ⋆−Λrounded is a diagonal matrix we need only include the diagonal terms in the inner
product. Therefore, since
(U ⊤α⋆(Y )α⋆(Y )⊤U)i,i = ⟨α⋆(Y )⊤α⋆(Y ),UiU ⊤
i ⟩≤λmax(α⋆(Y )⊤α⋆(Y )) ≤L2,
where the second-to-last inequality holds because ∥Ui∥2 = 1, the bound on f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) holds.
Alternatively, under spectral norm regularization, by Lipschitz continuity we have
f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) ≤M⟨V ⋆
11(Y ) + V ⋆
22(Y ),U(Λ⋆−Λrounded)U ⊤⟩
= M⟨U ⊤(V ⋆
11(Y ) + V ⋆
22(Y ))U,Λ⋆−Λrounded⟩.
Moreover, Λ⋆−Λrounded is a diagonal matrix and therefore
(U ⊤(V ⋆
11(Y ) + V ⋆
22(Y ))U)i,i = ⟨UiU ⊤
i ,V ⋆
11(Y ) + V ⋆
22(Y )⟩≤λmax(α⋆(Y )) ≤L,
where the last inequality follows since V11,V22 are orthogonal at optimality, meaning V11 +V22’s leading
eigenvalue equals α⋆’s leading singular value. Therefore, the bound on f(Yrounded) −f(Y ⋆) holds.
□
B. Derivations for the conjugate of the regularizer
In this section, we derive the conjugates of the penalties stated in Table 2, in order to complete
our proof of Lemma 2. We ﬁrst derive our results for rectangular matrices under the formulation X =
Y XY ′ for appropriate projection matrices Y ,Y ′, before specializing our results by setting Y ′ = I. For
completeness, we ﬁrst prove that this reformulation is indeed a valid reformulation of a rank constraint.
Proposition 3. For any X ∈Rn×m, Rank(X) ≤k ⇐⇒∃Y ∈Yn,Y ′ ∈Ym
s.t.
tr(Y ),tr(Y ′) ≤
k and X = Y XY ′, where Yn := {P ∈Sn : P 2 = P } is the set of projection matrices.
Proof of Proposition 3
We prove the two implications successively.
( =⇒) Let X = UΣV ⊤be a singular value decomposition of X. Since Rank(X) ≤k, we can let
U ∈Rn×k,Σ ∈Rk×k,V ∈Rk×m without loss of generality. Deﬁne Y = U(U ⊤U)−1U and Y ′ =
V (V ⊤V )−1V . By construction, Y XY ′ = X. In addition, tr(Y ) = rank(Y ) = rank((U)) ≤k, and
tr(Y ′) = rank(Y ′) = rank((V )) ≤k.
( ⇐= ) Since X = Y XY ′, rank(X) ≤min(rank(Y ),rank(Y ′)) ≤min(tr(Y ),tr(Y ′)) ≤k.
□

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
46
B.1. Rectangular Case
In this section, we derive a dual reformulation for the conjugate of the regularization term in (9). More
precisely, for all regularizers of interest Ω(·), we show that for any matrix α of similar dimension as X
and any projection matrices Y ∈Yk
n and Y ′ ∈Yk
m,
min
X [Ω(Y XY ′) + ⟨α,Y XY ′⟩] = max
V11,V22 −Ω⋆(α,Y ,Y ′,V11,V22),
where Ω⋆(·) is notably linear in Y ,Y ′.
Lemma B.1 Let A ∈Rn×m be a rectangular matrix, Y ∈Yn, Y ′ ∈Ym be projection matrices and γ > 0
be a positive scalar. Then
min
X∈Rn×m
1
2γ ∥Y XY ′∥2
F + ⟨A,Y XY ′⟩= −γ
2tr(Y AY ′A⊤).
Proof of Lemma B.1
Any solution to the minimization problem satisﬁes the ﬁrst-order condition
1
γY XY ′ + Y AY ′ = 0. Hence, X⋆= −γY AY ′ is optimal and the objective is −γ
2tr(Y AY ′A⊤).
□
Lemma B.2 Let A ∈Rn×m be a rectangular matrix, Y ∈Yn, Y ′ ∈Ym be projection matrices and
M > 0 be a positive scalar. Then
min
X∈Rn×m:∥Y XY ′∥σ≤M ⟨A,Y XY ′⟩= max
V11,V22
−M
2 ⟨V11,Y ⟩−M
2 ⟨V22,Y ′⟩
s.t.

V11 A
A⊤V22

⪰0,
Proof of Lemma B.2
Since the trace is invariant by cyclic permutation and the matrices Y and Y ′
are symmetric,
min
X∈Rn×m:∥Y XY ′∥σ≤M ⟨A,Y XY ′⟩=
min
X∈Rn×m:∥Y XY ′∥σ≤M ⟨Y AY ′,X⟩.
The spectral norm penalty is equivalent to
∥Y XY ′∥σ ≤M ⇐⇒Y XY ′Y ′X⊤Y ⪯M 2In
⇐⇒(Y XY ′)Y ′(Y ′X⊤Y ) ⪯M 2In
⇐⇒(Y XY ′)Y ′(Y ′X⊤Y ) ⪯M 2Y ,
where the last inequality follows from the fact that the matrix on the left-hand side is equal to zero
over Im(Y )⊤. By Schur complements, the ﬁnal semideﬁnite inequality is equivalent to

MY
Y XY ′
Y ′X⊤Y
MY ′

⪰0

W11 W12
W ⊤
12 W22

.
We associate a matrix of dual variables in square brackets. Therefore, the dual problem is
max
W11,W12,W22
−M⟨W11,Y ⟩−M⟨W22,Y ′⟩
s.t.
Y AY ′ = 2Y W12Y ′,

W11 W12
W ⊤
12 W22

⪰0,
or equivalently,
max
V11,V22
−M
2 ⟨V11,Y ⟩−M
2 ⟨V22,Y ′⟩s.t.

V11 A
A⊤V22

⪰0.
□

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
47
B.2. Square and Symmetric Case
When the matrix X is square and symmetric we can take Y = Y ′ and apply the previous results.
Alternatively, for the spectral norm penalty, we can further simplify
Lemma B.3 Let A ∈Rn×n be a square symmetric matrix and Y ∈Yn be a projection matrix. Then
min
X∈Sn:∥Y XY ∥σ≤M ⟨A,Y XY ⟩=
max
V+,V−⪰0
−M⟨V+ + V−,Y ⟩
s.t.
A = V+ −V−.
Proof of Lemma B.3
The constraint ∥Y XY ∥σ ≤M can be rewritten as −MY ⪯Y XY ⪯MY .
By strong semideﬁnite duality (which holds as the minimization problem has non-empty interior; see
(Wolkowicz et al. 2012, Chapter 4.1)):
min
X∈Sn:∥Y XY ∥σ≤M ⟨A,Y XY ⟩=
max
W+,W−⪰0−M⟨Y ,W+ + W−⟩
s.t.
Y AY = Y W+Y −Y W−Y .
The decision variables in the maximization problem decompose the symmetric matrix Y AY into a
positive and negative deﬁnite parts, W+ and W−respectively. Without loss of optimality we can restrict
our attention to W+ = Y V+Y and W−= Y V−Y where A = V+ −V−.
□
C. A Collection of Useful Matrix Identities
In this work, we have repeatedly used some technical matrix identities. In order to keep this paper self
contained, we now state these identities formally.
The following result generalizes the well-known Schur complement lemma to the case where neither
on-diagonal block matrix is positive deﬁnite (see Boyd et al. 1994, Equation 2.41)
Lemma C.1 (Generalized Schur Complement Lemma) Let A,B,C be components of
X :=

A B
B⊤C

of appropriate dimension. Then, X is positive semideﬁnite if and only if the following conditions hold:
(i) A ⪰0,
(ii) (I −AA†)B = 0,
(iii) C ⪰B⊤A†B.
The following result characterizes the rank of a block submatrix in terms of the rank of the entire
matrix (see, e.g., Puntanen and Styan 2005, Section 0.9):
Lemma C.2 (Guttman Rank Identity) Let A,B,C be components of the matrix
X :=

A B
B⊤C

of appropriate dimension. Then, we have the identity: Rank(X) = Rank(A) + Rank(C −BC†B⊤).
In general, a product of positive semideﬁnite matrices may not be positive semideﬁnite, indeed, it
may not even be symmetric. However, the following result demonstrates that a symmetric product of
PSD matrices is indeed PSD (see Meenakshi and Rajian 1999, for a proof):

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
48
Lemma C.3 (A Symmetric Product of PSD Matrices is PSD) Let X,Y ∈Sn
+ be matrices of
appropriate size, and let Z := XY . Suppose that Z = Z⊤is a symmetric matrix. Then, Z ⪰0.
The following result demonstrates that evaluating the nuclear norm of a matrix via semideﬁnite
optimization yields a singular value decomposition (see Recht et al. 2010, Proposition 2.1, for a proof)
Lemma C.4 (Nuclear norm minimization and the SVD of a matrix) An optimal solution to
min
W1∈Rn×n,W2∈Rm×m
tr(W1) + tr(W2)
s.t.

W1 X
X⊤W2

⪰0,
is attained by W1 = UΣU ⊤and W2 = V ΣV ⊤, where X = UΣV ⊤is a singular value decomposition.
D. Additional Results
D.1. Pseudocode for the In-out Method
Our main points of diﬀerence from Fischetti et al. (2017)’s implementation are twofold. First, we
optimize the outer problem over Conv(Yk
n), rather than the Boolean polytope. Second, we recognize that
the purpose of the method is to warm-start Algorithm 1’s lower bound, rather than to solve Problem
(21). In this spirit, we accelerate the in-out method by ﬁrst solving Problem (21) in one shot using
an interior point method and second using the optimal solution Y ⋆as a stabilization point. Note that
a similar method was proposed for sparse portfolio selection problems and MICO by Bertsimas and
Cory-Wright (2018).
Algorithm 3 The in-out method of Ben-Ameur and Neto (2007).
Require: Stabilization point Y ⋆, ϵ ←10−10,λ ←0.1,δ ←2ϵ, t ←1
repeat
Compute Y0,θ0 solution of
min
Y ∈Conv(Ykn),θ
θ + λ · tr(Y )
s.t.
ziθ ≥hi + ⟨Hi,Y −Yi⟩∀i ∈[t].
if Y0 has not improved for 5 consecutive iterations then
Set λ = 1
if Y0 has not improved for 10 consecutive iterations then
Set δ = 0
end if
end if
Set Yt+1 ←λY0 + (1 −λ)Y ⋆+ δI; project Yt+1 onto Conv(Yk
n).
Compute f(Yt+1),Ht+1,zt+1,dt+1.
until f(Y0) −θ0 ≤ε
return Yt

Bertsimas, Cory-Wright, and Pauphilet: Mixed-Projection Conic Optimization
49
D.2. Number of cuts generated vs. γ
Figure 8
Average number of cuts vs. γ for Algorithm 1 single-tree (left) and multi-tree (right) implementations over
20 synthetic matrix completion instances where p ∈{0.2,0.3}, r = 1 and n ∈{10,20}. The same random seeds
were used to generate random matrices completed by single-tree and multi-tree.