TITLE: Voxel-Based Solution Approaches to the Three-Dimensional Irregular Packing Problem
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2260
---

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript OPRE-2019-12-617
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular
packing problem
Carlos Lamas-Fernandez
Southampton Business School, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK C.Lamas-Fernandez@soton.ac.uk
Julia A. Bennell
Leeds University Business School, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK J.Bennell@leeds.ac.uk
Antonio Martinez-Sykora
Southampton Business School, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK A.Martinez-Sykora@soton.ac.uk
Research on the three-dimensional (3D) packing problem has largely focused on packing boxes for the
transportation of goods. As a result, there has been little focus on packing irregular shapes in the operational
research literature. New technologies have raised the practical importance of 3D irregular packing problems
and the need for eﬃcient solutions. In this work we address the variant of the problem where the aim is
to place a set of 3D irregular items in a container, while minimizing the container height, analogous to the
strip packing problem. In order to solve this problem we need to address two critical components; eﬃcient
computation of the geometry and ﬁnding high quality solutions. In this work, we explore the potential of
voxels, the 3D equivalent of pixels, as the geometric representation of the irregular items. In this discretised
space we develop a geometric tool that extends the concept of the noﬁt polygon to the 3D case. This enables
us to provide an integer linear programming formulation for this problem that can solve some small instances.
For practical size problems, we design metaheuristic optimisation approaches. Since the literature is limited,
we introduce new benchmark instances. Some are randomly generated and some represent realistic models
from the additive manufacturing area. Our results on the literature benchmark data and on our new instances
show that our metaheuristic techniques achieve the best known solutions for a wide variety of problems in
practical computation times.
Key words : 3D irregular packing, open dimension problem, voxel, metaheuristics
1

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
1. Introduction
The three-dimensional (3D) irregular packing problem consists of the eﬃcient placement of arbi-
trary 3D items within a designated volume without overlapping. While 3D packing of regular shapes
(boxes) such as the container loading problem and 2D irregular packing problems have received
a lot of attention in the literature, the 3D irregular variants have not. This problem is of great
interest to researchers due to the maturity of the ﬁeld, making this problem the next signiﬁcant
frontier, and also due to the rise in new applications, most notably those motivated by additive
layer manufacturing and 3D printing.
Problems in which the space available is scarce so not all the items can be packed are equivalent
to the well-known knapsack problem. For example, prioritizing items to be carried for emergency
services such as an ambulance or for humanitarian aid by helicopter.
Alternatively, the space may not be constrained but using more space increases the cost, so
the problem is to pack all the items using the least space. One example arises when packaging
customer orders for delivery, when the sender needs to decide what is the most suitable box or set
of boxes to pack a given set of items. Fuelled by e-commerce, the business to customer deliveries are
increasing. In this context, eﬃcient packaging naturally plays a ﬁnancial role, but also a sustainable
one (Mangiaracina et al. 2015). . In 2019 the worldwide parcel traﬃc increased to over 21 billion
parcels from 12 billion parcels delivered in 2015 (Mazareanu 2020), and being able to reduce waste
generated would have an economic beneﬁt and a signiﬁcant positive environmental impact.
A major industry that beneﬁts from eﬃcient packing algorithms in three dimensions is the
additive manufacturing (AM) industry. AM is the process of generating physical objects from
computer designs, usually by adding layers of a certain material. Among other techniques it includes
3D printing. If more than one item is printed in a single print run, a packing software is needed
to generate a layout that ensures items do not overlap and that the layout is contained within the
print area. AM is a ﬂourishing industry, that had an estimated worth of $4 billion in 2014 and is
expected to grow to over $21 billion by 2020 (Thompson et al. 2016). The resulting conﬁguration of

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
3
the printing layouts plays an important role in the estimation of the material cost and production
time for additive manufacturing (Baumers et al. 2013). One of the issues being addressed in recent
studies is focused on managing the 3D printers eﬃciently, which involves making decisions about
minimizing the extra support required, the height of the build and other aspects that depend on
the materials being used (see Griﬃths et al. (2019) or Attene (2015) for examples).
The main reason for not having eﬃcient algorithms available for solving problems that consider
3D irregular items is the lack of geometric tools available in the literature to ﬁnd good placements
and ensure the feasibility of the layouts, i.e., the non-overlapping condition of the items.
In this article we examine the problem of packing all items, referred to as small items, into a
single box-shaped container, referred to as the large object, with a ﬁxed width and length but
undetermined height. The small items are of an irregular shape and have a ﬁxed orientation.
The objective is to place all the items within the container in non-overlapping positions, while
minimizing height of the layout. According to the typology in W¨ascher et al. (2007), this is an
irregular three-dimensional open dimension problem (I3DODP). This problem is also commonly
called the strip packing problem.
The earliest papers tackling 3D packing are motivated by additive manufacturing applications
and use a polygonal mesh for the item representation. An early example is by Ikonen et al. (1997)
who proposes a genetic algorithm to pack arbitrary shaped items. Their algorithm places items
according to a certain order, selecting one of a given ﬁnite set of orientations and ‘attachment’
points. These points are the points where one item might make contact with another item, and they
are provided as part of the input data. This problem is also tackled by Dickinson and Knopf (1998),
who propose a constructive algorithm where each item is packed in a position that is selected with
the aim of maximizing the density of the packing.
Egeblad et al. (2007, 2009) also use a polygonal mesh representation in what they call a general
purpose algorithm. The heuristic works with an initial layout and explores the solution space
by translating items either vertically or horizontally. Items are permitted to lie in overlapping

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
positions during the search. A more speciﬁc application is presented in Egeblad et al. (2010), where
a combination of pre-processing techniques and bespoke heuristics is proposed to solve a practical
knapsack problem appearing in the furniture industry. Also based on polygonal mesh, Liu et al.
(2015) develops an eﬃcient constructive algorithm that allows the rotation of items based on a
minimal potential energy placement. More recently, Ma et al. (2018) consider a slightly diﬀerent
problem where the container has a ﬁxed size and the objective is to maximize its utilization by
selecting and packing a subset of items from a collection. Their approach consists of shrinking
items to a small percentage of their original size and placing them in a starting non-overlapping
position, then they deﬁne a non-overlapping space for each item, and allow them to grow, move
and rotate within that space, until all objects achieve their original size.
A diﬀerent line of research is the one explored in Stoyan et al. (2005), where they use phi-
objects to represent the geometry (Stoyan and Yaskov 1983, Scheithauer et al. 2005, Bennell
et al. 2010). Analogous to the two-dimensional case, the phi-objects are mathematical descriptions
based on parametric functions. In principle, this approach can accurately represent the irregular
item including curved surfaces. The theory is based on a few simple basic shapes called primary
phi-objects. These have formal mathematical descriptions, which are combined into parametric
functions (called phi-functions) that describe the interaction of the items given a position and
orientation. As a result they can test for overlap eﬃciently in any orientation. More complex items
are constructed through combining primary phi-objects and the associated phi-functions, which
form non linear constraints in their model. Deriving these models is complex and can be simpliﬁed
by using quasi-phi-functions, described in Romanova et al. (2018). With this representation, it is
possible to formulate most packing problems as non-linear programs. The strength of this approach
relies on their precise analytical description of the objects. However, items may need many primary
phi-objects to be represented and the complexity of the resulting models makes them hard to solve.
In general, for the instances available in the literature, the model can only ﬁnd a local optimum and
the resulting packing is not very successful compared to other simpler metaheuristic approaches,
as we will see in Section 5.1.1.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
5
Phi-objects and polygonal mesh representations both suﬀer from increasing complexity with the
irregularity of the item. For phi-objects, complicated shapes require the combining of many primary
objects to represent the ﬁnal shape, while the polygonal mesh approach needs more faces and
vertices with the more features one object has (irregularities, holes, etc.) in order to provide a good
representation. Both, the number of primary objects in a phi-object and the number of vertices
or faces in a mesh have a direct impact in the computational cost of the packing algorithms using
them. To overcome this, some researchers opt for approximating the three-dimensional models by
discrete sets of smaller regular shapes. One frequently adopted way of discretizing the shapes is to
approximate them by cubes, usually referred to as voxels.
Approximating the small items using voxels is used in Hur et al. (2001), where the authors
develop a bottom-left approach for cylinder containers, and use a genetic algorithm to search over
the space of packing sequences. Also using voxels, Jia and Williams (2001) propose a simulation-
based packing algorithm motivated by particle packing. In their algorithm, particles can randomly
move and rotate as long as they do not overlap with each other. In a later work, this algorithm
was made more computationally eﬃcient by Byholm et al. (2009). They take advantage of the
discretized space to employ some computational tricks with the shape representation. This includes,
for example, removing some voxels that are not going to play a role in the ﬁnal packing result;
resulting in reduced computational time. de Korte and Brouwers (2013) also deal with particle
packing in their investigation of the packing of spheres, which they approximate by voxels.
One important parameter aﬀecting the decomposition or discretization is the resolution, or the
size of the basic units used to approximate the item. If it is too large, the ﬁdelity of the approx-
imation will be poor and some geometrical aspects can be lost. For example, holes or concavities
smaller than a voxel cannot be represented. On the other hand, if the resolution is small, giving
high ﬁdelity, the model will require a large amount of computer memory and the packing algo-
rithms will be very slow due to more operations being performed. Some approaches (Cagan et al.
1998, Edelkamp and Wichern 2015) use tree structures as a way to overcome this problem. The

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
tree structure has very coarse representations at the top, but can be made ﬁner later in the tree if
the features require it. If the basic volume units used are cubes, these trees are called octrees and
each cube is divided in eight identical smaller cubes at each level.
In Edelkamp and Wichern (2015) they approximate shapes by spheres that are organised in a
tree structure. This representation is then used in a simulated annealing algorithm that ﬁnds 3D
printing layouts of irregular objects. The algorithm takes advantage of the use of spheres to allow
free rotation of items. Cagan et al. (1998) use rectangular solids (not necessarily cubes) for the
decomposition and develops a simulated annealing solution method based on simple movements
and rotations in order to ﬁnd eﬃcient component layout for various industrial designs (e.g. a car
engine or a heat pump).
Voxelization and octrees are used in a variety of applications due to their power for dealing
with complicated shapes, and are an active topic of research in their own right (Baert et al. 2013,
Schwarz and Seidel 2010), including closely related variations such as chain codes (Lemus et al.
2015, S´anchez-Cruz et al. 2014).
Our chosen approach is discussed in Section 2, where we introduce the problem formally, describe
our geometric approach and introduce an integer programming model. Since this model is too
complex for practical use, we also investigate metaheuristic approaches. In Section 3 we provide
the building blocks for developing metaheuristic algorithms, including a constructive algorithm
and diﬀerent local search neighborhoods. These neighborhoods explore two diﬀerent problem rep-
resentations, one based on an item sequence that is decoded by deleteda diﬀerent placement rules,
and one based on the item position in the layout. Based on these building blocks, we develop three
diﬀerent packing algorithms that are presented in Section 4.
Along with the lack of previously published work on the problem, there is also a lack of benchmark
data. We have gathered together the main data sets found in the literature, and added instances
found in online 3D printing data sets. Furthermore, we developed an instance generator to provide a
wide range of data set with speciﬁc characteristics. The generator and the benchmark instances are
described in Section 5 along with a full discussion of the results of our computational experiments.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
7
The contributions of this work are the following. We explore the potential of voxels to represent
irregular items for 3D packing problems. We develop eﬀective solution methods for the I3DODP
that can solve large problems. We address the lack of data by providing a rich set of benchmark
data sets and an instance generator. In adopting a voxel representation of the items to be packed,
we develop a new geometric tool analogous to the noﬁt polygon for two-dimensional irregular
packing, called the noﬁt voxel. Finally we provide a new mathematical programming formulation
for the I3DODP and test its capabilities.
2. Voxelised three-dimensional packing
In this section we introduce formally the optimization problem we are solving, based on a discrete
voxel space. We also discuss geometric considerations and introduce tools for handling the non-
overlap constraints.
2.1. Problem description
We have a set of n small items I = {p1,p2,...,pn} that need to be placed inside a large object C
(the container). The container has a rectangular base and a variable height (z-coordinate) and our
objective is to ﬁnd a set of n placements L = {l1,l2,...,ln} ⊂Z3 for all the items in I ensuring that
no two items overlap and that all items lay within the container, while minimizing the container
height. The orientation of the items is ﬁxed.
2.2. Voxel representation
In order to represent the irregular items from I, we divide their bounding box into identical small
cubes which are called voxels and use a binary code to distinguish which ones are part of the item
and which ones are not. Having a rectangular shape (bounding box) as a support, enables us to
encode this information in a structure analogous to a binary matrix. For each item, the voxel in
the bottom-left-back corner of its bounding box is called the reference voxel. To locate the items
in the container, it is suﬃcient to determine the position of the reference voxels. In Figure 1 we
show an example of an item and its reference voxel. We also consider the bottom-left-back corner

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
of the container as the origin of the coordinate system, so all the points inside the container have
positive coordinates.
Figure 1
Example of an irregular item represented by voxels with its reference voxel highlighted (solid black)
2.3. Constraint handling
There are two main constraints for the strip packing problem; the containment of small items
within the boundary of the container (containment constraints) and no overlap between small items
(no-overlap constraints). In this case, we also add the constraint of ﬁxed orientation of the items.
Since the containers we use are rectangular, the containment constraints are trivial. The reference
voxel of each item has a maximum permitted x and y positions, which corresponds to the size of
the container in the x or y dimension minus the magnitude of the item along that dimension. For
convenience, we set a maximum value for z that is large enough to easily contain all the small
items. We denote the positions that lay inside the container for the item pi ∈I as the set IFVpi,C,
the inner-ﬁt voxel of the item pi and the container C. Note that this is a similar concept to the
inner-ﬁt rectangle in two dimensions, see Gomes and Oliveira (2006) for details.
Non-overlapping constraints between items are, however, more diﬃcult to model, as both of
their shapes are arbitrary. If we look at the two-dimensional literature, the noﬁt polygon (NFP)
is a concept that has been consistently used in 2D irregular packing problems since it was ﬁrst
developed in the sixties by Art (1966) who described it as the envelope. Informally, the NFP
is derived from two polygons and represents the relative positions of these polygons in terms of

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
9
whether they overlap, represented by the interior of the NFP, touch, represented by the boundary
of the NFP, or are separated, represented by the outside of the NFP. A more in-depth deﬁnition
and a review of various algorithms for calculating the NFP can be found in Bennell and Oliveira
(2008). It is worth noting that NFPs have a close relationship with Minkowski sums. For two
arbitrary polygons A and B, it can be shown that A ⊕−B ={a −b : a ∈A, b ∈B} = NFPAB (See
for example Milenkovic et al. (1992) or Bennell et al. (2000)).
To test the overlap between items, we deﬁne the noﬁt voxel (NFV), which is analogous to the
union of the NFP and its interior. In general, dividing items into discrete cubes allows us to perform
very quick intersection tests to identify overlap between items. Before formally deﬁning the NFV,
we ﬁrst describe the simple overlap test for items represented by voxels.
Given two items p,q ∈I, with their reference voxels located at lp = (px,py,pz) and lq = (qx,qy,qz)
respectively, we say that they are in a non-overlapping position if either:
1. Their bounding boxes do not intersect.
2. In the intersection of their bounding boxes, no two voxels from the items coincide in the same
position. For a binary matrix where an entry is positive if it is a voxel of an item, this is equivalent
of saying no two positive values of their binary matrices are in the same position.
The second condition can be simply tested by checking the corresponding elements of the matrices
that represent the voxels of the two items and stopping at the ﬁrst coincidence. Testing overlap in
this order leads to an eﬃcient implementation as, unless two items are very close in the layout, the
ﬁrst condition, which is very simple to test, will be suﬃcient to conclude that there is no overlap
between them.
Building on this idea, it is trivial to see that if lp and lq lead to feasible positions for p and
q, then for any α = (αx,αy,αz) ∈Z3, the points lp + α = (px + αx,py + αy,pz + αz) and lq + α =
(qx + αx,qy + αy,qz + αz) also lead to feasible positions for p and q.
In other words, a non-overlapping position is maintained as long as the relative position of the
items does not change. Following this idea, we deﬁne the NFV for two items p and q, which are

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
represented by voxels, as a set of the overlapping relative positions of the items p and q. More
formally,
Definition 1. The Noﬁt voxel of p and q is a set NFVp,q ∈Z3 with the property that, if
lp = (0,0,0) and lq ∈NFVp,q, p and q intersect.
In Figure 2 we illustrate the noﬁt voxel of two irregular items.
Figure 2
Two arbitrary items, p and q and their noﬁt voxel NFVp,q
If the NFV of two items is known, it can be used to determine if two items overlap by testing
whether the reference point of q is inside the NFV. However, in Deﬁnition 1, we require that the
location of p is ﬁxed at the origin. Let us now consider the case where p is located at an arbitrary
point l′
p and q is located at l′
q. We can still use the NFV to test for overlap. In this case they
intersect only if l′
p −l′
q ∈NFVp,q. This test is more eﬃcient than the simple overlap test described
above. Since this is a recurrent test during the remainder of the paper, we introduce the simpliﬁed
notation NFVp,q(px,py,pz) for it, deﬁned in equation (1).
(qx,qy,qz) ∈NFVp,q(px,py,pz) ⇐⇒(qx −px,qy −py,qz −pz) ∈NFVp,q
(1)
To compute the NFV of two items p and q, NFVp,q, we can simply keep p ﬁxed at the origin
and perform an overlap test between p and q in all of their possible overlapping positions (i.e. the
positions where the bounding boxes of p and q overlap). When a test is positive, the point is added
to the NFVp,q and the process continues until all points are tested.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
11
Note that, if NFVp,q is known, it is trivial to calculate NFVq,p using the following property:
NFVq,p(i,j,k) = {−a : a ∈NFVp,q(i,j,k)}
(2)
Thanks to the property in equation (2), the calculation of NFVs only needs to be done once for
each pair of item types. Once the NFVs are available, the overlap checks are merely a matter of
checking if the reference voxel is in a set; provided the orientation of the items remains unchanged.
2.4. ILP formulation
In this section we describe an integer linear programming model for the problem stated in Section
2.1. The model uses binary variables to determine the reference voxel of the items and deﬁnes
constraints based on the NFV information to ensure non-overlapping.
For each item p, we deﬁne a region, B(p) ⊆IFVp,C where it can be placed. This region is a discrete
set of voxels that are identiﬁed in the model by the following binary variables:
xpijk =









1,
if p is placed in (i,j,k)
0,
otherwise
(3)
We mean ‘placed’ in the sense that, if xpijk is set to 1, the reference voxel of the item p is
located at (i,j,k). As mentioned earlier, the reference voxel is chosen to be the corner voxel of the
item’s bounding box with smallest coordinates.
The full model is as follows:
minimize H,
(4)
subject to
X
(i,j,k)∈B(p)
xpijk(hp + k) ≤H
∀p ∈I
(5)

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
X
(i,j,k)∈B(p)
xpijk = 1
∀p ∈I
(6)
xpijk +
X
(l,m,n)∈
NFVp,q(i,j,k)∩B(q)
xqlmn ≤1
∀p, q ∈I, p ̸= q, ∀(i,j,k) ∈B(p)
(7)
H ∈N
(8)
xpijk ∈{0,1}
∀p,∈I, ∀(i,j,k) ∈B(p)
(9)
Where hp is the height of item p. The ﬁrst constraint (5) sets the value of the variable H, which
is the total height of the container in voxels. It is deﬁned as being higher than the highest point
of any of the placed pieces (which is their reference voxel position plus their height). In equation
(6) we make sure that all items are placed . The sum of the placement variables for each item p
is restricted to the set B(p), thus this constraint also guarantees containment. Finally, equation
(7) uses the NFV of two items to ensure that there is no overlap between each pair of items.
There is a constraint for each position (i,j,k) where p can be placed. Then for all other items,
q, we constrain the sum of the binary variables of the position of p with the binary variables for
the position of q that belong to the NFVp,q(i,j,k). In principle, these would be the points of
NFVp,q(i,j,k); but we concern ourselves only with the ones that are also part of B(q), which also
ensures containment. Constraint (8) restricts the domain of H to natural numbers and constraints
(9) deﬁnes the placement variables as binary.
This model is an extension of the Dotted Board Model from Toledo et al. (2013) for the two-
dimensional problem and, to the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst integer linear programming
model available for the discretized I3DODP.
If we deﬁne the regions B(p) to be B(p) = IFVp,C for all items, the optimal solution of the model
would be the optimal solution of the discretized packing problem. Unfortunately, solving such a
model requires a very high computational eﬀort, which makes solving reasonable sized instances
impractical, as we will show in Section 5.2, where we provide some computational experiments
evaluating the capabilities of the model.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
13
However, we can reduce the number of variables by constraining the placement options for each
item. Given a starting layout, bounds on the number of voxels an item can move away from its
current position provide an easier to solve model. This is a common strategy known as compaction
and separation, which has been used successfully in the past in 2D irregular packing literature
in conjunction with metaheuristics (see for example Bennell and Dowsland (2001) or Gomes and
Oliveira (2006)). Models that use phi-functions follow a similar approach, see for example Stoyan
et al. (2005).
In order to use this approach to compact the layout, the model needs to be given an initial
solution and a region B(p) for each item p that bounds the movement, which is substantially smaller
than IFVp,C. Given B(p), the next step is to solve the model (4)-(9) to optimality. If the height is
reduced, the procedure has been successful. At this point, new B(p) regions can be deﬁned again,
with the aim to further reduce the overall height (H).
As a separation procedure, the initial solution must be infeasible (contain overlap). In this case
the height of the container is ﬁxed at H thus removing the constraints in (5). The regions B(p)
are deﬁned to respect the ﬁxed height and the objective function is to remove overlap and ﬁnd a
feasible solution. This separation procedure is used as one of our neighborhoods in the Variable
Neighborhood Search presented in section 4.3.
3. Building blocks of the 3D packing heuristics
In this section we examine a number of components that are the building blocks for the solution
algorithms we design to solve the I3DODP. We ﬁrst describe a constructive procedure to generate
initial solutions. Since the procedure represents the solution as a sequence of items, and determines
an item’s position using placement rules, we are able to use sequence-based neighborhoods within a
search heuristic. Given an initial solution, an alternative approach is to deﬁne neighborhoods that
work with a solution representation that uses the position of the items in a layout. This approach
usually requires a relaxation of the overlap constraint or containment constraint. For this case, we
describe neighborhoods that work on the layout of complete solutions, where a strategic oscillation

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
technique and a new objective function related to overlap guide the search.
The two approaches that we investigate align with the strategies presented in Bennell and Oliveira
(2009) for 2D irregular packing, working with sequence representations and with layout represen-
tations.
3.1. Constructive algorithm
We propose a constructive algorithm (CA) based on a bottom-left-back strategy. The idea is to place
the items one at a time, ensuring their placement minimizes ﬁrst the z coordinate, followed by the x
and then the y coordinates. For a packing problem with a collection of items I = {p1,p2,...,pn} and
a container C, let S = {s1,s2,...,sn} be an ordered sequence of the items to be placed. This sequence
could be a random permutation of I, or a speciﬁc sorting of the items, for example by decreasing
volume.
The algorithm starts by placing the ﬁrst item in the sequence, s1, at location l1 = (0,0,0). This
placement is always feasible, because of our deﬁnition of the reference points and the coordinate
system of the container. Then, the next item in the sequence, si, is placed in the bottom left back
position li = (x,y,z) such that the item lays within the container, i.e. li ∈IFVsi,C and it does not
overlap with any other placed item, i.e. li /∈NFVsj,si(lj), ∀j < i. To ﬁnd position li, the algorithm
tests points from IFVsi,C until it reaches a valid placement. If an item of the same type has been
placed earlier, the search starts from the last valid placement to avoid retesting the same points of
IFVsi,C previously found to be infeasible.
The points are evaluated starting from the lowest z values, followed by the lowest x and the
lowest y, so the ﬁrst valid position found is the one that lays at the bottom-left-back-most possible
position. This step can be modiﬁed easily if the x or y position are sought in reverse order (i.e. from
highest value to lowest); in that case the algorithm rule would be called ‘right’ instead of ‘left’ or
‘front’ instead of ‘back’. In fact, each item in the sequence can be packed using a diﬀerent rule. To
acknowledge this, we introduce the notation R = {ri} for a set of rules, where ri represents one of
the following: ‘left-back’, ‘left-front’, ‘right-back’ or ‘right-front’. A solution of the algorithm is then

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
15
given by L = CA(S,R), where items have been placed in the order determined for the sequence S,
in the bottom-most possible position and according to the corresponding rule from R.
While the algorithm is deterministic, diﬀerent sequences S and diﬀerent placement rules R can
result in diﬀerent packing layouts. This opens the possibility to search over the sequence of items to
be placed. We explore this possibility in the next section with the sequence-based neighborhoods.
3.2. Sequence-based neighborhoods
Searching over the sequence of items has been a common topic of research in 2D irregular packing
problems, see for example Gomes and Oliveira (2002), who implement a 2-exchange (swap) heuristic
to search over a item sequence. Dowsland et al. (1998) and Abeysooriya et al. (2018) use a technique
called Jostle, that constructs solutions iteratively and extracts the placement sequence from the
layout generated on the previous step.
In this work, we identify two types of sequence based neighborhoods, the sequence swap neigh-
borhood and the rule change neighborhood. In section 4.1 we describe a procedure to exploit them
in an Iterated Local Search algorithm.
The sequence swap neighborhood consists of all the solutions obtained by swapping two items
of diﬀerent type in the sequence S. If L = CA(S,R) and S = {s1,si,...,sj,...,sn}, i < j
NS(L) = {{CA(S′,R)} : S′ = {...,sj,...,si,...}∀si,sj ∈S,si ̸= sj,i < j}
(10)
The rule change neighborhood consists in changing of one rule for one item in the packing
sequence. More formally, if L = CA(S,R), then the neighborhood is deﬁned by
NR(L) = {{CA(S,R′)} : R′ = {...,ri−1,r′
i,ri+1,...} : r′
i ∈R \ ri}
(11)
Each rule is eﬀectively creating a diﬀerent construction heuristic and this space of solutions can
be searched algorithmically. This kind of search is sometimes referred to as a hyper-heuristic, see
for example Burke et al. (2010), Terashima-Mar´ın et al. (2010) for examples in 2D irregular packing
using a polygonal representation or Mundim et al. (2018) for a framework using a discretized
approach.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
3.3. Layout-based neighborhoods
A layout-based neighborhood of a solution L is a set of solutions N(L) that are reachable from
L by applying a perturbation or move. This movement is no longer in the sequence or in the set
of rules, but a change of position of one or more items in the packing layout. As opposed to the
sequence-based neighborhoods, the solutions in these neighborhoods might not always be feasible,
as some moves might introduce overlap between items.
We distinguish two types of layout-based neighborhoods. The ﬁrst type involves moving an item to
a nearby position and is called single item neighborhoods. The second type involves more dramatic
changes, such as swapping the positions of two items in the layout and is called full solution
neighborhoods. The reason for this distinction is that the single items neighborhoods are usually
quicker to evaluate and provide solutions of similar quality to the current one, since only one item
is moved. However, the full solution neighborhoods are necessary to create kicks in the solution
that help to escape local optima.
Axis aligned direction neighborhood
The axis aligned neighborhood of an item p, NA(L,p,δ) includes all the solutions of the form
L = {l1,l2,...ln} where the reference point of the item p, lp, is substituted by another point from
IFVp,C that is reachable by translating lp by a ﬁxed amount of voxels between 0 and δ, in an axis
aligned direction. More formally,
NA(L,p,δ) =
(
{l1,...,lp−1,l′
p,lp+1,...} : l′
p ∈
δ[
d=−δ
3[
i=1
{lp + dei}
\
IFVp,C
)
(12)
where ei denotes the vectors of the standard basis in R3. The parameter δ determines the number of
voxels the reference point can be displaced. The special case where we consider all the points within
the container in any axis aligned direction is denoted by δ = δmax. In this case, the neighborhood
is similar to the translation neighborhood proposed by Egeblad et al. (2007, 2009) for polyhedral
items. The Axis aligned direction neighborhood is illustrated in Figure 3.
Note that the neighbors of a feasible solution might be infeasible with respect to the overlap
constraint, but they will not violate the containment constraint, as we impose the condition that
items can only move within their inner-ﬁt voxel.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
17
Figure 3
neighborhood of axis aligned directions, δ = 1 (left) and δ > 1 (right). The red point is the original
reference point lp and the grey points are the possible reference points in the neighborhood.
Enclosing cube neighborhood
The enclosing cube neighborhood contains all the valid points in a cube centred at the reference
point and with sides of 2δ + 1 voxels, as shown in Figure 4. More formally,
NC(L,p,δ) =


{l1,...,lp−1,l′
p,lp+1,...} : l′
p ∈
[
d∈{−δ,...,δ}3
{lp + d}
\
IFVp,C



(13)
Figure 4
neighborhood of enclosing cube, δ = 1. The grey points are the reference points in the neighbors, while
the original reference point is located in the centre of the cube.
For a large δ, this is equivalent to the complete inner-ﬁt voxel of the item. In this case, the
neighborhood can be seen as an insert move. We denote this situation by δ = δmax.
item swap neighborhood
The swap neighborhood of an item is a full solution neighborhood. It represents all the possible
swaps the item can make with other items. Some of the swaps might violate the containment
constraint, since the swapped items could end up with parts outside the container. If this happens,
the item is moved inwards along the axis (one voxel at a time) until the point is in its inner-ﬁt
voxel. This position, denoted by l(q)
p
(the resulting position of p after swapping with q), is deﬁned
as follows,
l(q)
p
= arg min
l′∈IFVp,C
∥lq −l′∥1
∀p, q ∈I; p ̸= q
(14)

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Then, the neighborhood contains all the possible swaps of a item p with others,
Nswap(L,p) =

{...,lp−1,l(p)
q ,lp+1,...,lq−1,l(q)
p ,lq+1,...} : q ∈I,q ̸= p
 
(15)
3.4. Strategic Oscillation
A search algorithm using a layout-based neighborhoods is likely to produce solutions that contain
overlap. While allowing overlap helps navigate the solution space, it makes the problem eﬀectively
a bi-objective problem, since the overlap constraint is relaxed and added to the objective function.
Solutions containing overlap are not feasible with respect to the original problem so we need to
produce solutions with zero overlap without compromising on solution quality. Strategic oscillation
(Glover and Marti 2011), has been used extensively in the two and three-dimensional irregular
packing literature, see for example Bennell and Dowsland (1999), Umetani et al. (2009), Imamichi
et al. (2009) or Egeblad et al. (2009), to navigate this problem. The idea is that the algorithm
oscillates between focusing primarily on completely removing the overlap and then primarily on
reducing the height of the layout. Certain criteria allow the switch in focus during the course of
the algorithm.
In each iteration of the strategic oscillation the algorithm works on an overlapping layout with
ﬁxed height, and tries to remove overlap. Once this has been achieved or the maximum number of
local search iterations is reached, the height is modiﬁed as follows. If the solution still has overlap,
the height will increase by one voxel and the algorithm will try to resolve the overlap with more
space. If it succeeds, the height is reduced by a certain percentage (controlled by the parameter
dec p in our computational experiments) and the algorithm is run again, with the aim of ﬁnding
non-overlapping positions at a lower height.
Since the reduction of height leaves some items protruding above the top of the container,
their position needs to be adjusted. We have implemented two strategies to achieve this: move
down and random reinsert. With the move down strategy, protruding items are simply moved
downwards the minimum amount until they fully ﬁt inside the new container. Instead, with the

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
19
random reinsert protruding items are removed from the layout and inserted in a random position
of their inner-ﬁt voxel. In the computational experiments, the strategy is selected by means of the
algorithm parameter SO mode.
3.5. Objective function
While our objective is to minimize the height of the ﬁnal layout, if we search over the layout and
use strategic oscillation, intermediate solutions will have overlap. For this case, we propose an
objective function whose main goal is to understand when a solution is better than another, in
terms of leading to a non-overlapping solution. In the nesting literature, typical objective functions
include measuring the penetration depth of a pair of items (Bennell and Dowsland 1999, Umetani
et al. 2009, Imamichi et al. 2009) or the exact amount of overlap (area in 2D or volume 3D) for
each pair of items (Egeblad et al. 2009), among others. Our objective function is calculated based
on the volume of the overlap of the bounding boxes,
F(I,l1,l2,...,ln) = 1 −1
 n
2

X
i,j∈I,,i<j
V ol(B(i,li) ∩B(j,lj))
Vmax
,
(16)
where B(i,li) is the bounding box of item i located in position li and V ol() is a function that returns
the voxel volume (number of voxels) of its argument. The constant Vmax = maxi∈I V ol(B(i)) is the
maximum volume of any bounding box present in the instance and is used to scale the function
value between 0 and 1. Dividing the sum by
 n
2

, the number of pairs of items in the solution, is
used to average the overlap of the items. This function is very quick to evaluate and provides an
intuitive idea of ‘how diﬃcult’ it is to separate a pair of overlapping items.
4. Search algorithms
Using the building blocks described in the last section, we propose three diﬀerent metaheuristic
algorithms. The ﬁrst is an iterated local search, which is based on searching over the item sequence
and generating the layout by applying the constructive algorithm. The next two approaches are a

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
tabu search and a variable neighborhood search, which are based on searching over the layouts of
complete solutions.
4.1. Iterated local search
Iterated local search is a metaheuristic algorithm that iteratively searches neighborhoods, accepting
improving moves, to ﬁnd local optima. At each local optima the search moves to a diﬀerent part
of the solution space by performing a kick (Louren¸co et al. 2010).
We implement this algorithm to take advantage of the diﬀerent rules that can be used in our
constructive algorithm. The initial solution starts with a sequence of items sorted in order of
decreasing height and the solution is constructed using the left-back placement rules to place all
of the items. For the local search we use the rule change neighborhood, NR(L), that involves
changing one of the two placement rules (left/right or back/front) of an item and repacks using
the constructive algorithm.
The kicks consist of performing a number of position swaps in the item order sequence (and their
placement rules) at random. The number of swaps to be performed is controlled by an algorithm
parameter, nswaps, which is determined in Section 5.3.
While searching over the sequence can produce quick eﬃcient layouts, the solution space does not
contain all possible solutions and some good layouts might be unreachable using these techniques.
To overcome this, we propose two other algorithms that work on the layout of full solutions.
4.2. Tabu Search
Tabu search (TS), introduced by Glover (1989), is one of the ﬁrst metaheuristic and has been
successfully applied to various combinatorial optimization problems, including irregular packing
(B lazewicz et al. 1993, Bennell and Dowsland 1999). It uses neighborhoods to search the solution
space by testing all solutions in the neighborhood of the current solution and moving to the best
neighbor, whether it improves the objective function value or not. The solution resulting from the

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
21
move is added to a tabu list so it cannot be revisited for a certain number of moves. In practice,
an attribute of the move is stored as this is more eﬃcient and achieves the desired outcome.
TS lends itself to the layout representation since the voxel neighborhoods are ﬁnite and can
be evaluated in full with a low computational eﬀort. Maintaining a tabu list is an eﬀective way
to prevent items moving back and forth to the same positions. Our TS works within the strate-
gic oscillation framework searching for non-overlapping solutions between each adjustment of the
height constraint. Each height oscillation occurs after a predeﬁned maximum number of accepted
neighborhood moves or if a zero overlap solution is found by the TS.
The initial solution, L0, is produced using the constructive algorithm (Section 3.1) as L0 =
CA(S0,R0), where S0 is the sequence of items from the instance ordered by decreasing volume and
R0 is the set of rules that assigns ‘left-back’ to all the items. In the ﬁrst step the algorithm oscillates
to create some overlap, as described in Section 3.4. In each iteration, the algorithm explores the
axis aligned neighborhood of the solution, with parameter δ = d axis, whose value is determined
in the computational experiments. When a movement is performed, the opposite direction of the
movement for that item is added to the tabu list, to avoid the same item moving backwards. The
length of the tabu list, TL is also a parameter of the algorithm.
Note that to evaluate each move it is not necessary to calculate the objective function from
equation (16). Instead, it is suﬃcient to perform an update to evaluate the aﬀect of the change
in the solution quality. This test is very quick to perform, since it only involves recalculating the
overlap terms for the item that has moved. The eﬃciency of this step allows for the testing of a
large number of movements in a reasonable computational time.
To control the height, the tabu search will run on a given solution for a number movements
(determined by parameter nMoves) or until it completely removes the overlap, and then perform
the oscillation.
4.3. Variable Neighborhood Search
Having designed a number of neighborhoods, it is natural to consider implementing a Variable
Neighborhood Search algorithm (VNS). This metaheuristic, introduced by Mladenovi´c and Hansen

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
(1997), makes use of a list of neighborhoods that are explored in order, and works on the assump-
tion that a local optimum for a neighborhood might not be a local optimum in an alternative
neighborhood. VNS is implemented with strategic oscillation in the same way as TS.
The algorithm starts from an initial solution (created in the same way as in the previous section)
that contains some overlap, and searches the ﬁrst neighborhood in the list. In our implementation,
we apply a steepest descent rule, and therefore, all the solutions in the neighborhoods are evaluated
before moving to the best improving solution.
If there are no improving neighbors, the incumbent solution is labelled as a local optima for the
current neighborhood. Then, VNS selects the next neighborhood in the list and explores it until it
is again stuck in a local optima. If an improvement is found, the incumbent solution moves to it
and VNS returns to the ﬁrst neighborhood and continues the search.
When a solution is a local optima for all the neighborhoods, the algorithm applies a kick (or
a shake) and returns to the ﬁrst neighborhood in the sequence. After a certain number of kicks
(parameter nK), the algorithm performs strategic oscillation in order to increase or decrease the
maximum allowed height and the process is repeated.
We have implemented VNS with three neighborhoods that are searched in this order:
• Enclosing cube neighborhood, NC with δ = d cube
• Axis aligned neighborhood, NA with δ = d axis
• ILP model, with Bp = NC and a small δ value.
The ﬁrst two neighborhoods are explored for all the overlapping items. We have chosen to use the
cube neighborhood with a small delta ﬁrst, as it can provide very similar solutions by moving only
one item by one voxel. The axis aligned neighborhood has the capacity to reach further away points
and can often provide more dissimilar solutions, especially at early stages of the algorithm. Our
experiments found this order of the ﬁrst two neighborhood deﬁnitions to be more eﬃcient because
it ﬁnds the best local optima through comprehensively searching a small local neighborhood of
the current solution before searching more widely. When the second neighborhood deﬁnition ﬁnds

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
23
a better solution, the search returns to the focused optimization using the ﬁrst neighborhood
deﬁnition. If these neighborhoods cannot improve the solution, we run the ILP model (3)-(9). The
δ values used for the cube neighborhoods of the model are a parameter of the algorithm. We use
a diﬀerent parameter for the items that are overlapping (δ = Ov d) and for the items that are not
overlapping (δ =NOv d). Both of these values are determined in Section 5.3. To avoid spending
excessive computational time running the model, and taking into account that is only practical
when using only small δ values, we have restricted its use to only once per strategic oscillation
and only in layouts where there is at most one pair of overlapping items. The running time of the
model is restricted to a maximum of 300s.
Once we have hit a local optimum for all the neighborhoods and before oscillating, we disrupt
the solution with the aim of exploring a diﬀerent part of the solution space. This disruption, also
called a kick, is performed in two steps: a shaking of the layout and an item swap.
To perform shaking, we move all overlapping items to a random location within a neighborhood
NC. The number of voxels, δ, that deﬁnes the size of the neighborhood is set such that it increases
linearly with the number of disruptions used so far in the search. This technique allows us to have
smaller disruptions in the early stages in order to guide the algorithm quickly to good solutions.
However, in later stages of the algorithm, the disruptions are larger, allowing the search to escape
from local optima. The parameter will vary between a minimum value of δmin, which is the size
of the starting neighborhood, and a maximum value of δmax. The actual parameter used in the
iteration is calculated as δ = min(δmin,⌊ρ(δmax + 1)⌋), where ρ is the ratio between the kicks per-
formed and the maximum kicks allowed for the current height. Suitable values for δmin and δmax
are explored and selected in the computational experiments in Section 5.3.
The second step of the kick consists of swapping two overlapping items. To avoid the costly proce-
dure of testing all possible swaps, we limit the amount of tests. We test the swap of each item in
the layout with a number of items from the overlap list, determined by the parameter test swaps.
The overlapping items are chosen at random and avoiding items of the same type. In total we test a

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
number between 1 and n×test swaps swaps, and perform the one that returns the best objective
function, even if it does not improve the incumbent solution.
These two steps complement each other. The shaking part creates many overlapping positions
and enables the search to explore movements of items that might otherwise stay in non-overlapping
positions and prevent the solution improving. The swap part produces a larger change in the layout,
that might be diﬃcult to obtain with moving items one at a time. Note that creating many overlaps
will create a greater opportunity for swapping items to succeed than if we apply these two steps
in a opposite order.
Each iteration of the VNS consists of a number of local searches followed by a kick. Therefore,
in each iteration we will ﬁnd many local optima, possibly all of them containing overlap, for the
same container height. Since the kick involves swapping one or more pairs of items, there is a risk
that these swaps might not be beneﬁcial in the long term. To avoid this situation, the kick is not
always applied to the incumbent solution, but to the best of the local optima found for the current
height. By doing this, item swaps that do not lead to an improvement are not carried forward in
the search.
5. Computational experiments
In this section we evaluate the performance of the proposed voxel-based algorithms. In Section 5.1
we describe the instances used for testing. In Section 5.2 we explore the limits of the ILP model
to solve instances to optimality. In Section 5.3 we describe how we have performed the parameter
conﬁguration for the metaheuristic algorithms, along with the best conﬁguration for each algorithm.
Finally in Section 5.4 we compare the performance between the algorithms and also against the
state of the art in the literature.
5.1. Test Instances
We test our algorithms across a range of diﬀerent instances to compare their performance in
diﬀerent scenarios. We found that in the 3D literature researchers mainly use simple shapes, such as

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
25
convex polyhedra (Stoyan et al. 2005, Pankratov et al. 2015), or non-convex shapes that are deﬁned
by very few vertices (Stoyan et al. 2004, Egeblad et al. 2009, Liu et al. 2015). In our experiments, we
solve some of these instances and adapt one popular instance from the two-dimensional literature
with similar properties, shapes0 from Oliveira et al. (2000). In order to test our algorithms more
thoroughly, we also propose a set of randomly generated instances, called blobs, and two examples
of complex realistic instances. Unlike standard academic instances, the blobs data sets are designed
to include more challenging shapes, such as “smooth” surfaces or holes.
In Table 1 we summarise some of the key diﬀerences of these instances
Table 1
Instances solved and their features
Instance
Source
Convex Holes Items (types)
Stoyan2
Stoyan et al. (2005)


12 (7)
Stoyan3
Stoyan et al. (2005)


25 (7)
Mergedi
Egeblad et al. (2009)


15 - 75 (15)
Experiment1
Liu et al. (2015)


36 (5)
Experimenti
Stoyan et al. (2004)


20 - 50 (10)
Blobsi
Generated


20 (10)
Shapes 3D
Adapted


43 (4)
Engine
Realistic


97 (56)
Chess
Realistic


32 (6)
5.1.1. Instances from the literature
To test our algorithms, we have collected the available
instances from the literature, which tend to be simpler shapes. The ﬁrst instance is a set of convex
polyhedra that has been introduced by Stoyan et al. (2005) and later used in Egeblad et al. (2009).
It consists of seven convex shapes of similar volume that are repeated a number of times each.
Stoyan et al. (2005) deﬁned three sets of items Example1, Example2 and Example3, but we only
solve the latter two, since Example1 contains one item that has a dimension coinciding exactly

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
with the width of the container and it becomes infeasible with our voxelization parameters. We
call these instances Stoyan2 and Stoyan3
In order to ﬁnd more challenging instances, Egeblad et al. (2009) mixed this set with some items
available in the work of Ikonen et al. (1997), creating the Mergedi instances, that we solve as well.
The other instances we consider are a set of non-convex polyhedra from Stoyan et al. (2004)
(Experiment2 to Experiment5), that has been later solved by Liu et al. (2015) and a similar set of
polyhedra proposed by Liu et al. (2015), Experiment1. However in the original work Experiment1
has been solved only when allowing rotation, and therefore we do not solve exactly the same
problem, since our orientations are ﬁxed.
These instances are originally represented using the polygonal mesh approach and therefore it
is necessary to convert them to voxels before applying our algorithms. To perform this process, we
have used the binvox software package (Nooruddin and Turk 2003, Min 2004 - 2019), where we
apply the exact setting, to ensure the voxelized representation overestimates the original one and
therefore our solutions are always feasible. One important parameter used in the conversion is the
resolution, i.e. the size of the voxels used in the converted shapes. In order to solve each instance
with the same resolution, we have chosen a voxel size such that the largest side of the container is
voxelized with 150 voxels. Where there are several instances containing common items, we chose
the largest side of the largest container among the instances so that the items have a common
voxelization. This means that the smaller containers in the group of instances might no get an
exact voxelization and therefore we round the dimensions down, ending up with a slightly smaller
container. 150 voxels is chosen as it seemed a reasonable compromise between accuracy and solving
speed. Nevertheless, as it will be shown in Section 5.4 the resolution chosen plays a key role in
both the solution time and the quality of the results.
5.1.2. A simpler instance
To complete the tests with simpler shapes, we have also adapted
a classical instance from the two-dimensional irregular packing literature, the set shapes0 from
Oliveira et al. (2000). This set consists of four simple distinct shapes (one convex and three non-
convex) and has been widely used in the research of the strip packing problem. To adapt these

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
27
ﬁgures to 3D we maintained the original proportions of the original shapes and voxelized them in
a grid of one unit. For two of the shapes, we preserved their symmetry along the third axis. For
the remaining two, we extruded the shape along the third axis so they had a size of 6 voxels. We
call our instance Shapes 3D and the ﬁnal result can be seen in Figure 5. The container for this set
has sides 20 × 20 and we maintained the same item description (43 items in total) and ﬁxed the
orientation.
Figure 5
Instance Shapes 3D
5.1.3. Realistic instances
We also solve two instances based on models downloaded from
a popular 3D printing online community. In order to solve a meaningful problem, we chose two
designs that have shapes with a certain complexity and that are themselves a collection of diﬀerent
parts. We chose a realistic model of an engine by Harrell (2015) (See Figure 6 for an example of
an item already voxelized) and a chess set by Edwards (2014).
Both of these instances were available as triangular mesh ﬁles. We converted them using the
same process as described in Section 5.1.1, but as there was no container size provided, we chose
the resolution diﬀerently. Based on the size of the items and since they were available in diﬀerent
scales, we decided to pack the Engine in a container with a base of 500 × 500 voxels, where one
voxel represents 6 units and the Chess set in a container of size 50×50, where one voxel is mapped
to one unit of the original model.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Figure 6
Example item from the Engine instance
5.1.4. Randomly generated instances
Our random instance generator extends to three
dimensions the shape generation approach presented in Robidoux et al. (2011). We illustrate some
of its steps in Figure 7 in an example to generate a 2D shape, since it is easier to appreciate in two
dimensions. The following steps below describe the method for a 3D item:
Step 1 Start with a three-dimensional matrix of zeros, that will be the container of the future
item.
Step 2 Randomly assign 1 to the value of some elements in the matrix (Figure 7 (a)).
Step 3 Connect the points in a random order with discretized lines of a certain thickness. The
last point is connected with the ﬁrst in order to create a loop (Figure 7) (b)
Step 4 Apply a Gaussian blur to the matrix. This step changes the values of the elements so
they are between 0 and 1 (Figure 7) (c)
Step 5 To convert to binary values again, apply a threshold, where values less than a parameter
(around 0.005) are set to zero and values over that parameter are set to one (Figure 7) (d).
There are a few parameters that can be controlled in this method. The ﬁrst of them is the size
of the matrix where the points are drawn. A larger size will mean a smoother shape, but more
costly to compute. We also need to decide how many and how to select the random elements that
are initially set to one. More points give more opportunities for the shape to have irregularities,
but too many will ﬁll up the space of the shape too much and it can lose some interesting features,
such as holes. For sampling the points, we have chosen a random uniform distribution in a cube,

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
29
Figure 7
Example of the steps to generate a ‘blob’ in two dimensions. In (a) 9 points are drawn randomly, in (b)
they are connected in a closed loop, in (c) a Gaussian blur is applied (the values between 0 and 1 are
represented by the shade of grey) and in (d) values are set to either 0 or 1, depending on a threshold
value.
but there are other possible distributions. Robidoux et al. (2011) suggest using distributions in a
disc (uniform or normal) if one wishes to get rotation invariant shapes, but this is not relevant for
our purposes.
The way the points are connected can also impact the shape. In our case we use straight lines,
but other methods such as splines could give more smooth results. Another decision is how to add
‘thickness’ to these lines. Looking again at Figure 7 (b), we see that the lines in that case have
more than one pixel in thickness. To explain this, let us think about the matrix as a grid of squares
(or cubes, in 3D). When connecting two points, we ﬁrst paint the squares of the grid intersected
by the segment that connects the centre of the two points. By painting here we mean setting to 1
the corresponding matrix elements. To add ‘thickness’, we also paint the squares surrounding this
initial line, if they are within a certain distance from it in any axis aligned direction. This distance
is another parameter, that we call the thickness parameter. This results in painting with a kind

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
of cross-hairs, the same concept as depicted in the neighborhood from Figure 3. Finally, both the
standard deviation of the Gaussian blur and the threshold have also an impact on the outcome.
Following this technique, we have generated nine instances in total, with three diﬀerent sizes
and three shape styles for each size. We hand-picked the parameters in order to deﬁne the three
diﬀerent styles, that we have called ‘round’, where items are closer to spheres or ellipsoids; ‘peaked’,
where shapes have more pronounced concavities and more frequently holes; and ‘neutral’, which
is somehow a middle ground between the two. In Figure 8 we show one item representing each
diﬀerent style. The full description of the parameters used is reported in Table 2, where intervals
indicate that the parameter has been randomly chosen in that interval.
Figure 8
Three items from the medium instances with style ‘round’ (left), ‘neutral’ (centre) and ‘peaked’ (right)
The matrix size in Table 2 is indicative, as applying the Gaussian blur might set to positive
some values outside the original cube where the points were sampled (this happens, for example,
if one of the points was in the corner of the cube). To acknowledge this fact and ensure the shapes
remained smooth, we allowed a maximum size of 100 × 100 × 100 for any shape, which seemed
suﬃcient to avoid such cases.
Based on the size of the largest item from each set, we chose the size of the container base to be
(in voxels) 78 × 78 for the small instances, 84 × 84 for the medium instances and 90 × 90 for the
large instances.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
31
Table 2
Parameters used to generate the blobs instances
Name
Size
Style
Matrix size
Points
Thickness
Filter σ Threshold
blobs1
Small
Round
25 × 25 × 25
[2,20]
3
[3,5]
0.05
blobs2
Small
Neutral 25 × 25 × 25
[2,15]
[1,3]
[1,2]
0.01
blobs3
Small
Peaked
25 × 25 × 25
[3,7]
1
[1,2]
0.005
blobs4
Medium
Round
35 × 35 × 35
[4,30]
[4,5]
[4,5]
0.05
blobs5
Medium Neutral 35 × 35 × 35
[4,25]
[3,4]
[2,3]
0.01
blobs6
Medium
Peaked
35 × 35 × 35
[3,10]
[1,3]
[1,2]
0.005
blobs7
Large
Round
45 × 45 × 45
[4,40]
[4,5]
[4,5]
0.05
blobs8
Large
Neutral 45 × 45 × 45
[4,3]
[3,4]
[2,3]
0.01
blobs9
Large
Peaked
45 × 45 × 45
[3,14]
[1,3]
[1,2]
0.005
5.2. Testing the ILP model
The model presented in Section 2.4 can provide an optimal solution if solved to optimality. However,
the large number of variables for the proposed instances makes it often impractical to solve. In order
to test its boundaries, we have chosen the four items from the Shapes 3D instance and generated
allof the 155 instances that feature each item type repeated between 0 and 3 times, and whose total
number of items is between four and seven. The container size was set to 20 × 20 voxels. We have
then solved them for a maximum of 10 hours computational time, using IBM® ILOG® CPLEX®
12.6.1 and providing the bottom-left-back upper bound.
In eight of the instances the bottom left back algorithm found a solution such that the height
used corresponds to the height of the largest item, and therefore, the solution is optimal. In Table
3 we can observe that the percentage of solved instances clearly decreases when adding items, to
the point that only 43% of the instances with seven items can be solved in the given time. In
Figure 9 we show one instance with seven items solved to optimality. The gap obtained when the

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
32
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Table 3
Summary of the results achieved by solving the ILP model on instances with between four and seven
items. Opt denotes the number of instances solved to optimality in each set.
Items Instances Opt Percentage
4
31
27
87%
5
40
30
75%
6
44
26
59%
7
40
17
43%
Total
155
100
65%
instances were not solved to optimality is usually large, which suggest that the diﬃculty of solving
the derived models increases quickly.
Figure 9
Initial solution from bottom left back (left, 16 voxels height) and optimal solution (right, 12 voxels
height) for one instance with seven items. Solving time was 78 s.
5.3. Metaheuristic algorithms conﬁgurations
In this section we describe the parameters we have used to conﬁgure our algorithms for the com-
putational experiments. The conﬁguration was done by using the software package “irace” L´opez-
Ib´a˜nez et al. (2016) with a budget of 1000 one-hour runs for each method. The single parameter
tested for ILS is reported in Table 4.
In Tables 5 and 6 we report the tests performed for TS and VNS respectively. Note that the
parameters for Strategic Oscillation (SO mode and dec p) have been tested independently for the

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
33
Table 4
Parameter tested for the ILS and the best values found by irace.
Parameter Description
Tested Values Best
n swaps
Number random item swaps per-
formed between iterations
[1,25] ⊂N
4
both methods, as they could (although they do not, in this case) diﬀer on their best value for
diﬀerent search strategies.
Table 5
Parameters tested for the TS algorithm and the best values found by irace. In strategic oscillation MD
stands for move down, and RR stands for random reinsert
Parameter Description
Tested Values
Best
nMoves
Number of tabu search movements
performed before strategic oscilla-
tion
10i, i = 2,3,4,5,6
104
d axis
Parameter
δ
used
for
the
axis
aligned neighborhood (NA)
1,3,5,10,∞
∞
TL
Lenght of the tabu list
[1,30] ⊂N
13
SO mode
Strategy used to relocate protruding
items during strategic oscillation
MD, RR
MD
dec p
Percentage of height reduced in
strategic oscillation
[1,25] ⊂R
7%
The large value of test swaps suggests that it is beneﬁcial testing as many swaps as possible
during the kick in VNS. The values of the parameters found by irace are the ones we use in the
remainder of the computational experiments.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
34
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Table 6
Parameters tested for the VNS and the best values found by irace. In strategic oscillation MD stands
for move down, and RR stands for random reinsert
Parameter Description
Tested Values Best
nK
Number of kicks before strategic
oscillation
[1,100] ⊂N
78
K dmin
Value of δmin in VNS kicks
[1,3] ⊂N
1
K dmax
Value of δmax in VNS kicks
[2,10] ⊂N
8
SO mode
Strategy used to relocate protruding
items during strategic oscillation
MD, RR
MD
dec p
Percentage of height reduced in
strategic oscillation
[1,25] ⊂R
7%
test swaps
Number of swaps tested for each
item during the kick
[1,50] ⊂N
48
d cube
Parameter δ
used for the cube
neighborhood (NC)
[1,10] ⊂N
5
d axis
Parameter
δ
used
for
the
axis
aligned neighborhood (NA)
1,3,5,10,∞
∞
Ov d
When running the model, δ value
used for the cube neighborhood of
overlapping items
[1,4] ⊂N
1
NOv d
When running the model, δ value
used for the cube neighborhood of
non overlapping items
[1,2] ⊂N
2

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
35
5.4. Algorithm comparison
We have implemented all our algorithms in C++ and run them in a single 2.6 GHz core with
16 GB of memory, part of the IRIDIS HPC facility. All of our experiments allow one hour of
computational time and we report both the best and the average results obtained after 10 runs.
Since all the methods tested use noﬁt voxels, they have been pre-calculated and the generation
and loading time is not included in the reported time of the algorithms.
It is worth noting that as result of the voxelization of items, we may be packing slightly larger
items into a slightly smaller container. This has two consequences. First, some conﬁgurations of the
items that may be feasible in a mesh representation may not be feasible in the voxel representation
with a given ﬁdelity, which may include the best layout in the literature. Second, comparing
solutions with the literature on the basis of volume utilisation no longer makes sense as the total
volume of the items is not the same. For example, for the instance Merged1, the total volume of
our voxelized version of the items is 15% larger than the original. To address the second point, all
our experiments compare the height of the packing layout.
The results for the blobs instances are shown in Table 7. We can observe that VNS obtains on
average the best results. The average height is 162.64, which is 1.7% better than the TS and 8%
better than the ILS. As for the best results, in seven out of nine instances the VNS obtained the
best solution. This pattern is also observed in the Experiment set (Table 9), where VNS is again
superior to all the other methods. All three voxel-based methods obtain the best result in the
literature for these instances. The same trend is repeated on the realistic instances and the adapted
Shapes, reported in Table 8. All methods here obtain the same value for Shapes 3D, although ILS
seems to be more consistent. For the more realistic instances Chess and Engine VNS obtains both
the best and most consistent results.
In Figure 10 we show some of the best results found for this group of instances and in Table 9
we report the results for the Experiment instances.
All voxel based methods perform better than both HAPE3D (Liu et al. 2015) and the phi-
function based methods (Stoyan et al. 2004). Among them, VNS has the best and most consistent
results. In Table 10 we report the results for the Stoyan and Merged instances.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
36
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Table 7
Comparison of results (ﬁnal height, in voxels) for the blobs instances
Instance
ILS
TS
VNS
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
blobs1
79
79.64
75
76.90
74
74.90
blobs2
64
65.91
59
60.90
59
59.60
blobs3
47
47.73
44
45.20
44
44.50
blobs4
211
214.18
202
205.60
187
191.70
blobs5
221
228.91
206
211.30
202
205.00
blobs6
91
94.82
88
89.10
86
88.00
blobs7
337
343.36
309
323.40
312
323.50
blobs8
357
368.82
329
338.10
330
340.50
blobs9
146
149.36
136
138.60
133
136.10
Av.
176.97
165.46
162.64
Table 8
Comparison of results (ﬁnal height, in voxels) for the blobs instances
Instance
ILS
TS
VNS
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Shapes
52
52.73
52
53.00
52
53.20
Engine
78
79.36
77
78.70
75
78.10
Chess
144
145.55
139
141.40
131
135.10
While the voxel based methods obtain better results than the phi-functions, the algorithm
3DNest, based on a polygonal mesh obtains slightly better results for all instances but one. We
note that 3DNest algorithm permits a small overlap between items (0.1%). In order to distinguish
whether the diﬀerences in quality for the Merged instances could be linked to the resolution chosen

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
37
Figure 10
Best result obtained by ILS for Shapes 3D (left, height of 52 voxels); by TS for Engine (centre, height
of 77 voxels); and by VNS for Chess (right, height of 131 voxels).
Table 9
Comparison of results (ﬁnal height) for the instances found by St04 (Stoyan et al. 2004) and HAPE3D
(Liu et al. 2015)
Instance
ILS
TS
VNS
St04 HAPE3D
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Best
Exp1
36.40 38.58
34.13
35.12
34.27
35.37
-
31.2*
Exp2
29.40 31.10 28.47 30.17 28.47 29.40
32
36.9
Exp3
42.70 46.05
41.77
43.54 41.30 42.65
49
55.6
Exp4
62.30 65.35
56.23
59.62 54.83 59.52 63.21
71.8
Exp5
77.00 81.41
74.20
76.16 72.33 76.81
78.7
92
* The result of 31.2 for the instance Exp1 is obtained by allowing 8 diﬀerent rotations, which are not allowed in the other
algorithms.
when voxelizing the items, we performed another set of tests where VNS uses ﬁner resolutions and
longer search times. We considered two extra resolutions, ﬁne and extra-ﬁne, where the largest side
of the largest container base is voxelized with 200 and 250 voxels respectively, and a maximum
time computational time of four hours. The results for these extended tests are shown in Table 11.
These illustrate how increasing the accuracy of the representation closes the gap between 3DNest
and VNS, and with ﬁner resolutions VNS is able to improve the average solution quality by 1.4%.
As a result, we are ﬁnding the best known solutions for the largest instances (60 and 75 items)

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
38
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Table 10
Comparison of results (ﬁnal height) for the instances found in St05 (Stoyan et al. 2005) and 3DNEST
(Egeblad et al. 2009)
Instance
ILS
TS
VNS
St05 3DNEST
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Avg
Best
Best
Example2
22.72 23.30 21.33 21.60
21.23
21.70 30.92
19.83
Example3
34.99 35.65 30.93 32.35 29.76 31.53 45.86
29.82
Merged1
20.52 21.19 18.47 19.72
18.30
18.67
-
16.99
Merged2
24.62 25.58 22.40 23.27
22.40
22.64
-
21.97
Merged3
28.73 29.48 27.02 28.16
24.62
26.26
-
24.04
Merged4
30.61 31.86 28.73 30.27
28.56
29.44
-
27.80
Merged5
34.20 35.65 30.61 31.70
30.61
31.12
-
30.13
Table 11
Extended results for the Merged instances, using more time and ﬁner resolutions for VNS
Instance VNS - Standard
VNS - Fine
VNS - Extra-ﬁne
3DNest
Merged1
18.30
17.95
17.13
16.99
Merged2
22.40
22.19
22.06
21.97
Merged3
24.62
24.24
24.32
24.04
Merged4
28.56
28.21
26.47
27.80
Merged5
30.61
30.27
29.24
30.13
Av.
24.90
24.57
23.84
24.17
while being within less than 1% of the height in the three smaller instances. Since VNS does better
on larger problems, this suggests our approach is more scalable.
The best layouts obtained for each resolution for the instance Merged5 can be seen in Figure 11.
6. Conclusion
In this article we explore the potential of voxel based approaches for solving the three-dimensional
irregular open dimension problem. We develop the concept of noﬁt voxel, in which we base our

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
39
Figure 11
Best layouts found for the Merged5 instance with three diﬀerent resolutions: standard (left, height of
30.61), ﬁne (centre, height of 30.27) and extra-ﬁne (right, height of 29.24, best known value for this
instance).
algorithms. The usage of voxels and the noﬁt voxel allow for a quick and robust way of dealing
with complex items in packing problems.
With these tools at hand, we formulate the problem as an ILP model that is solved to optimality
for small instances, but can also be used with a compaction/separation strategy. We propose a
constructive algorithm and an Iterated Local Search that extends the quality of the constructive
algorithm. To further improve the packing quality, we propose two metaheuristic techniques that
search over the space of solutions containing overlap. We collected a set of instances from the
literature and added our own to create a benchmark set of instances with diﬀerent characteris-
tics where we could test our algorithms. We show that both metaheuristic techniques are very
competitive, even when compared to more complex and accurate geometrical representations, such
as the polygonal mesh or the phi-functions. The choice of voxels and the noﬁt voxel to represent
and pack the items is backed by our computational experiments, where we show that our results
outperform most of the pre-existing literature. The only exception is the algorithm 3DNest, which
ﬁnds similar quality solutions than Variable neighborhood Search with a ﬁne resolution. This does
also show, however, that the ability of voxels to use diﬀerent representation accuracy depending
on the quality/speed of packing required, makes voxel-based approaches more suitable for real-
world problems, where the items to be packed might be of higher complexity than the standard

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
40
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
academic instances. Finally, we are able to solve eﬃciently real-life instances containing complex
geometries as typically used in the 3D printing industry, where we show that both the Tabu Search
and the Variable Neighborhood Search algorithms can ﬁnd competitive results, with signiﬁcant
improvement over our constructive-based Iterated Local Search.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
41
References
Abeysooriya RP, Bennell JA, Martinez-Sykora A (2018) Jostle heuristics for the 2D-irregular shapes bin
packing problems with free rotation. International Journal of Production Economics 195:12–26, ISSN
09255273, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2017.09.014.
Art R (1966) An approach to the two dimensional irregular cutting stock problem. Tech. Rep. 36.Y08, IBM
Cambridge Scientiﬁc Centre URL http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/97782.
Attene M (2015) Shapes In a Box: Disassembling 3D Objects for Eﬃcient Packing and Fabrication. Computer
Graphics Forum (8).
Baert J, Lagae A, Dutr´e P (2013) Out-of-core construction of sparse voxel octrees. Proceedings - High-
Performance Graphics 2013, HPG 2013, 27–32, ISBN 9781450321358 (ISBN), ISSN 14678659, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12345.
Baumers M, Tuck C, Wildman R, Ashcroft I, Rosamond E, Hague R (2013) Transparency Built-in:
Energy Consumption and Cost Estimation for Additive Manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Ecology
17(3):418–431, ISSN 15309290, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00512.x.
Bennell J, Oliveira J (2008) The geometry of nesting problems: A tutorial. European Journal of
Operational Research 184(2):397–415, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0377221706012379.
Bennell J, Scheithauer G, Stoyan Y, Romanova T (2010) Tools of mathematical modeling of arbitrary
object packing problems. Annals of Operations Research 179(1):343–368, ISSN 02545330, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10479-008-0456-5.
Bennell JA, Dowsland KA (1999) A tabu thresholding implementation for the irregular stock cutting problem.
International Journal of Production Research 37(18):4259–4275, ISSN 0020-7543, URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1080/002075499189763.
Bennell JA, Dowsland KA (2001) Hybridising Tabu Search with Optimisation Techniques for Irregular Stock
Cutting. Management Science 47(8):1160–1172, ISSN 0025-1909, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/
mnsc.47.8.1160.10230.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
42
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Bennell JA, Dowsland KA, Dowsland WB (2000) The irregular cutting-stock problem - a new procedure for
deriving the no-ﬁt polygon. Computers and Operations Research 28(3):271–287, ISSN 03050548, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0548(00)00021-6.
Bennell Ja, Oliveira JF (2009) A tutorial in irregular shape packing problems. The Journal of the Operational
Research Society 60:S93–S105, ISSN 0160-5682, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/jors.2008.169.
B lazewicz J, Hawryluk P, Walkowiak R (1993) Using a tabu search approach for solving the two-dimensional
irregular cutting problem. Annals of Operations Research 41(4):313–325, ISSN 02545330, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02022998.
Burke E, Hyde M, Kendall G, Woodward J (2010) A genetic programming hyper-heuristic approach for
evolving 2-D strip packing heuristics. IEEE Transactions on evolutionary computation 14(6):942–958,
URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=5491153.
Byholm T, Toivakka M, Westerholm J (2009) Eﬀective packing of 3-dimensional voxel-based arbitrarily
shaped particles. Powder Technology 196(2):139–146, ISSN 00325910, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.powtec.2009.07.013.
Cagan J, Degentesh D, Yin S (1998) A simulated annealing-based algorithm using hierarchical models for
general three-dimensional component layout. Computer-Aided Design 30(10):781–790, ISSN 00104485,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4485(98)00036-0.
de Korte A, Brouwers H (2013) Random packing of digitized particles. Powder Technology 233:319–324,
ISSN 00325910, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2012.09.015.
Dickinson JJK, Knopf GKG (1998) Serial packing of arbitrary 3D objects for optimizing layered manufac-
turing. Proc. SPIE, volume 3522, 130–138, ISSN 0277786X, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.
325756.
Dowsland KA, Dowsland WB, Bennell JA (1998) Jostling for position: Local improvement for irregular
cutting patterns. Journal of the Operational Research Society 49(6):647–658, ISSN 14769360, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2600563.
Edelkamp S, Wichern P (2015) Packing Irregular-Shaped Objects for 3DPrinting. H¨olldobler S, Kr¨otzsch M,
Pe˜naloza R, Rudolph S, eds., KI 2015: Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 38th Annual German Confer-

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
43
ence on AI, volume 9324 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing), ISBN 9783319244884, ISSN 16113349, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24489-1.
Edwards T (2014) Classic Chess Set from glChess. URL https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:322616.
Egeblad J, Garavelli C, Lisi S, Pisinger D (2010) Heuristics for container loading of furniture. European
Journal of Operational Research 200(3):881–892, ISSN 0377-2217, URL http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.01.048.
Egeblad J, Nielsen BK, Brazil M (2009) Translational packing of arbitrary polytopes. Computational Geom-
etry 42(4):269–288, ISSN 09257721, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comgeo.2008.06.003.
Egeblad J, Nielsen BK, Odgaard A (2007) Fast neighborhood search for two- and three-dimensional nesting
problems. European Journal of Operational Research 183(3):1249–1266, ISSN 03772217, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.11.063.
Glover F (1989) Tabu search-part I. ORSA Journal on computing URL http://pubsonline.informs.org/
doi/abs/10.1287/ijoc.1.3.190.
Glover F, Marti R (2011) Tabu search. Panos M Pardalos DZD, Graham R, eds., Handbook of Com-
binatorial Optimization, chapter Tabu Searc, URL http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/
0-387-33416-5_3.
Gomes A, Oliveira JF (2002) A 2-exchange heuristic for nesting problems. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 141(2):359–370, ISSN 03772217, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(02)
00130-3.
Gomes AM, Oliveira JF (2006) Solving Irregular Strip Packing problems by hybridising simulated annealing
and linear programming. European Journal of Operational Research 171(3):811–829, ISSN 03772217,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2004.09.008.
Griﬃths V, Scanlan JP, Eres MH, Martinez-Sykora A, Chinchapatnam P (2019) Cost-driven build orientation
and bin packing of parts in Selective Laser Melting (SLM). European Journal of Operational Research
273(1):334–352, ISSN 0377-2217, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2018.07.053.
Harrell E (2015) Toyota 4 Cylinder Engine 22RE, Complete working model. URL http://www.thingiverse.
com/thing:644933.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
44
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Hur SM, Choi KH, Lee SH, Chang PK (2001) Determination of fabricating orientation and packing in SLS
process. Journal of Materials Processing Technology 112(2-3):236–243, ISSN 09240136, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0924-0136(01)00581-7.
Ikonen I, Biles W, Kumar A, Wissel J, Ragade R (1997) A Genetic Algorithm for Packing Three-
Dimensional Non-Convex Objects Having Cavities and Holes. Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
national Conference on Genetic Algorithms, East Lansing, Michigan, Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers 591–598, URL http://www.academia.edu/download/39497284/A_Genetic_Algorithm_for_
Packing_Three-Di20151028-15046-1htxzp4.pdf.
Imamichi T, Yagiura M, Nagamochi H (2009) An iterated local search algorithm based on nonlinear pro-
gramming for the irregular strip packing problem. Discrete Optimization 6(4):345–361, ISSN 15725286,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.disopt.2009.04.002.
Jia X, Williams R (2001) A packing algorithm for particles of arbitrary shapes. Powder Technology
120(3):175–186, ISSN 00325910, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0032-5910(01)00268-6.
Lemus E, Bribiesca E, Gardu˜no E (2015) Surface trees – Representation of boundary surfaces using a tree
descriptor. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 31:101–111, ISSN 10473203,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2015.06.004.
Liu X, Liu JM, Cao AX, Yao ZL (2015) HAPE3D—a new constructive algorithm for the 3D irregular
packing problem. Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering 16(5):380–390, ISSN
2095-9184, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1631/FITEE.1400421.
L´opez-Ib´a˜nez M, Dubois-Lacoste J, P´erez C´aceres L, Birattari M, St¨utzle T (2016) The irace package:
Iterated racing for automatic algorithm conﬁguration. Operations Research Perspectives 3:43–58, ISSN
22147160, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2016.09.002.
Louren¸co HR, Martin OC, St¨utzle T (2010) Iterated Local Search: Framework and Applications. 363–397
(Springer, Boston, MA), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1665-5{_}12.
Ma Y, Chen Z, Hu W, Wang W (2018) Packing Irregular Objects in 3D Space via Hybrid Optimization.
Computer Graphics Forum 37(5):49–59, ISSN 0167-7055, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.
13490.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
45
Mangiaracina R, Marchet G, Perotti S, Tumino A (2015) A review of the environmental implications of
B2C e-commerce: a logistics perspective. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management (6).
Mazareanu E (2020) Parcel traﬃc worldwide by sector 2015-2019 . Statista, URL https://www.statista.
com/statistics/737418/parcel-traffic-worldwide-by-sector/.
Milenkovic V, Daniels K, Li Z (1992) Placement and Compaction of Nonconvex Polygons for Clothing
Manufacture. Fourth Canadian Conference on Computational Geometry,, 1–8, number August (St.
John’s, Newfoundland), URL http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.49.
4310&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Min P (2004 - 2019) binvox. URL http://www.patrickmin.com/binvox or https://www.google.com/
search?q=binvox.
Mladenovi´c N, Hansen P (1997) Variable neighborhood search. Computers & Operations Research
24(11):1097–1100, ISSN 03050548, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0548(97)00031-2.
Mundim LR, Andretta M, Carravilla MA, Oliveira JF (2018) A general heuristic for two-dimensional nesting
problems with limited-size containers. International Journal of Production Research 56(1-2):709–732,
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1394598.
Nooruddin FS, Turk G (2003) Simpliﬁcation and repair of polygonal models using volumetric techniques.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 9(2):191–205.
Oliveira JF, Gomes AM, Ferreira JS (2000) TOPOS – A new constructive algorithm for nesting problems.
OR Spektrum 22(2):263, ISSN 01716468, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002910050105.
Pankratov AV, Romanova TE, Chugay AM, Problems E, Acad N (2015) Optimal packing of convex polytopes
using quasi-phi-functions. Journal of Mechanical Engineering 18(2):55–64.
Robidoux N, Stelldinger P, Cupitt J (2011) Simple random generation of smooth connected irregular shapes
for cognitive studies. Proceedings of The Fourth International C* Conference on Computer Science
and Software Engineering - C3S2E ’11, 17–24 (New York, New York, USA: ACM Press), ISBN
9781450306263, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1992896.1992899.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
46
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
Romanova T, Bennell J, Stoyan Y, Pankratov A (2018) Packing of concave polyhedra with continuous
rotations using nonlinear optimisation. European Journal of Operational Research 268(1):37–53, ISSN
0377-2217, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.EJOR.2018.01.025.
S´anchez-Cruz H, L´opez-Valdez HH, Cuevas FJ (2014) A new relative chain code in 3D. Pattern Recognition
47(2):769–788, ISSN 00313203, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2013.08.010.
Scheithauer G, Stoyan YG, Romanova TY (2005) Mathematical Modeling of Interactions of Primary Geo-
metric 3D Objects. Cybernetics and Systems Analysis 41(3):332–342, ISSN 1060-0396, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10559-005-0067-y.
Schwarz M, Seidel HP (2010) Fast parallel surface and solid voxelization on GPUs. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/1882261.1866201.
Stoyan YG, Gil N, Pankratov A, Scheithauer G (2004) Packing non-convex polytopes into a parallelepiped.
Technical Report June, URL http://www.math.tu-dresden.de/~scheith/ABSTRACTS/PREPRINTS/
04-non-conv.pdf.
Stoyan YG, Gil NI, Scheithauer G, Pankratov A, Magdalina I (2005) Packing of convex polytopes into
a parallelepiped. Optimization: A Journal of Mathematical Programming and Operations Research
54(2):215–235, ISSN 0233-1934, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02331930500050681.
Stoyan YG, Yaskov GN (1983) Mathematical methods for geometric design. Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference PROLAMAT 82, 67–86, URL https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?cluster=
12557682819935042194&hl=en&as_sdt=2005&sciodt=0,5#0.
Terashima-Mar´ın H, Ross P, Far´ıas-Z´arate CJ, L´opez-Camacho E, Valenzuela-Rend´on M (2010) Generalized
hyper-heuristics for solving 2D Regular and Irregular Packing Problems. Annals of Operations Research
179(1):369–392, ISSN 0254-5330, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10479-008-0475-2.
Thompson MK, Moroni G, Vaneker T, Fadel G, Campbell RI, Gibson I, Bernard A, Schulz J, Graf P,
Ahuja B, Martina F (2016) Design for Additive Manufacturing: Trends, opportunities, considerations,
and constraints. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 65(2):737–760, ISSN 17260604, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2016.05.004.

Lamas-Fernandez, Bennell and Martinez-Sykora: Voxel-based solution approaches to the 3D irregular packing problem
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-12-617
47
Toledo FM, Carravilla MA, Ribeiro C, Oliveira JF, Gomes AM (2013) The Dotted-Board Model: A new MIP
model for nesting irregular shapes. International Journal of Production Economics 145(2):478–487,
ISSN 09255273, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.04.009.
Umetani S, Yagiura M, Imahori S, Imamichi T, Nonobe K, Ibaraki T (2009) Solving the irregular strip
packing problem via guided local search for overlap minimization. International Transactions in Oper-
ational Research 16(6):661–683, ISSN 09696016, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-3995.
2009.00707.x.
W¨ascher G, Haußner H, Schumann H (2007) An improved typology of cutting and packing problems. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research 183:1109–1130, ISSN 03772217, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ejor.2005.12.047.