TITLE: Seeding with Costly Network Information
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2290
---

Appearing in Operations Research: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2290
Seeding with Costly Network Information
Dean Eckles1, Hossein Esfandiari2, Elchanan Mossel3, M. Amin Rahimian4
1Sloan School of Management, MIT
2Google Research
3Department of Mathematics, MIT
4Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh
eckles@mit.edu, esfandiari@google.com, elmos@mit.edu, rahimian@pitt.edu
We study the task of selecting k nodes, in a social network of size n, to seed a diﬀusion with maximum
expected spread size, under the independent cascade model with cascade probability p. Most of the previous
work on this problem (known as inﬂuence maximization) focuses on eﬃcient algorithms to approximate
the optimal seed set with provable guarantees given knowledge of the entire network; however, obtaining
full knowledge of the network is often very costly in practice. Here we develop algorithms and guarantees
for approximating the optimal seed set while bounding how much network information is collected. First,
we study the achievable guarantees using a sublinear inﬂuence sample size. We provide an almost tight
approximation algorithm with an additive ϵn loss and show that the squared dependence of sample size on
k is asymptotically optimal when ϵ is small. We then propose a probing algorithm that queries edges from
the graph and use them to ﬁnd a seed set with the same almost tight approximation guarantee. We also
provide a matching (up to logarithmic factors) lower-bound on the required number of edges. This algorithm
is implementable in ﬁeld surveys or in crawling online networks. Our probing takes p as an input which may
not be known in advance, and we show how to down-sample the probed edges to match the best estimate of
p if they are collected with a higher probability. Finally, we test our algorithms on an empirical network to
quantify the tradeoﬀbetween the cost of obtaining more reﬁned network information and the beneﬁt of the
added information for guiding improved seeding strategies.
Key words : Inﬂuence maximization, submodular maximization, query oracle, viral marketing
1. Introduction
Decision-makers in marketing, public health, development, and other ﬁelds often have a limited
budget for interventions, such that they can only target a small number of people for an intervention.
Thus, in the presence of social or biological contagion, they strategize about where in a network to
intervene — often where to seed a behavior (e.g., product adoption) by engaging in an intervention
(e.g., giving a free product) (Banerjee et al. 2019, Domingos and Richardson 2001, Godes and
Mayzlin 2009, Hinz et al. 2011, Kempe et al. 2003, Libai et al. 2013). The inﬂuence maximization
problem is to choose a set of k seeds with maximum expected spread size, given a known network
and model of diﬀusion (Domingos and Richardson 2001). Following the seminal work of Kempe
et al. (2003) — who showed NP-hardness and eﬃcient approximation through submodular inﬂuence
1
arXiv:1905.04325v5 [cs.SI] 21 May 2022

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
2
maximization — a huge literature is devoted to developing fast algorithms that can be applied to
massive scale social networks (e.g., Chen et al. 2009, Wang et al. 2012).
In this work, we address the problem of inﬂuence maximization when the social network is
unknown and so network information needs to be acquired through costly eﬀort. This has applica-
tions in development economics — e.g., adoption of microﬁnance (Banerjee et al. 2013) and insurance
(Cai et al. 2015); public health — e.g., adoption of water puriﬁcation methods and multivitamins
(Kim et al. 2015), spreading information about immunization camps (Banerjee et al. 2019), prevent-
ing misinformation about drug side eﬀects (Chami et al. 2017), increasing HIV awareness among
homeless youth (Yadav et al. 2017), and adoption of contraception (Behrman et al. 2002); and educa-
tion — e.g., reducing bullying and conﬂict among adolescents (Paluck et al. 2016). In these settings,
data about network connections is often acquired through costly surveys. In practice, collecting the
entire network connection (edge) data can be diﬃcult, costly, or even impossible. To reduce the cost
of such surveys a few seeding strategies have been proposed to avoid collecting the entire network
information by relying on stochastic ingredients, such as one-hop targeting, whereby one targets
random network neighbors of random individuals (Chami et al. 2017, Chin et al. 2021, Kim et al.
2015). Moreover, such methods have the advantage of scalability, since they can be implemented
without mapping the entire network. This is also important in online social networks with billions
of edges, where working with the entire contact lists might be impractical or limited by rate limits
for third parties crawling these networks. Although the importance of inﬂuence maximization with
partial network information has been noted and there are a few papers considering this problem
(Mihara et al. 2015, 2017, Stein et al. 2017, Wilder et al. 2018), none of these previous works come
with provable performance guarantees for general graphs.
To limit access of seeding algorithms to network information, we use an edge query model and
provide tight guarantees of what is achievable with a bounded number of queries. We organize our
edge queries by sequentially probing the graph nodes: we probe each node by revealing its incident
edges with independent cascade probability p, proceed to probe its revealed neighbors, and repeat.
Our approximation algorithm uses the revealed network information to seed k nodes with guarantees
that match hardness lower bounds (up to logarithms).
We begin our analysis by a thought experiment (Section 2.1): assuming that network information
is made available through “inﬂuence samples”, i.e., by seeding random nodes and observing their
spread outcomes, how many inﬂuence samples do we need to collect? We show that to seed k nodes
in a network of size n with tight approximation guarantees, it is necessary (up to logarithms) and
suﬃcient to collect O(k2 log n) inﬂuence samples. In Section 3, we provide our main results by show-
ing that the same approximation guarantees can be achieved using O(pn2 log4 n) edge queries (with
a matching lower bound). Our probing mechanism for edge queries makes use of the independent

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
3
cascade probability p to sample edges; therefore, in subsection 3.5, we study what happens when
the probe and seed cascade probabilities (denoted by p′ and p, respectively) are diﬀerent. We point
out the hardness of giving general guarantees when p′ ̸= p and propose a post-processing solution to
correct for this discrepancy as long as p′ > p, i.e., the edge data are collected with suﬃciently high
probability. In Section 4, we use our bounded-query framework to resolve a trade-oﬀbetween the
cost of acquiring network information and its beneﬁt in increasing expected spread size. We provide
discussion and concluding remarks in Section 5. Detailed comparisons with related works are pro-
vided in Appendix A. Detailed proofs are presented in Appendix B. In Appendix C, we discuss the
extension of our results to other inﬂuence models including independent cascade on directed graphs
(Appendix C.1) and the linear threshold model, for which we provide approximation guarantees
using only O(nk2 log n) edge queries (Appendix C.2).
1.1. Main contributions
We consider the independent cascade (IC) model of social contagion that is fairly well-studied
since its use by Kempe et al. (2003). In this model, network edges are “active” with probability p
independently of each other and all nodes with active connections to other active nodes become
active. Motivated by applications to product and technology adoption, we refer to active nodes as
adopters. Starting from a set of initial adopters, the adoption propagates through the network and
the process terminates after a ﬁnite number of steps. Following the independent cascade model,
every adopter has a single chance to activate each of its neighbors independently with probability
p. The k-inﬂuence maximization problem, or k-IM in short, refers to the choice of k initial adopters
to maximize expected adoptions under this diﬀusion model. Let OPT be the optimum value for this
problem. A µ-approximation algorithm outputs a set of k initial adopters to guarantee that the
expected number of adoptions is at least µOPT. In this work, we assume a query oracle access to
the network graph and study the k-IM problem with a limited number of queries.
We begin with a hypothetical scenario assuming that we can pay a cost to seed a random node and
learn the outcome of the spreading process (e.g., imagine distributing traceable coupons to random
individuals and asking them to pass the coupons to their friends; or a social network marketing
ﬁrm that measures its audience by seeding ads and promotional goods randomly). We only learn
the identity of the ﬁnal adopters and do not use any information about the network edges through
which the inﬂuence spreads. We collect several independent cascade outcomes by repeating this
process and refer to them as “inﬂuence samples”. We use these inﬂuence samples to seed k nodes
with optimality guarantees. We ﬁrst show that an additive loss (e.g., ϵn) is necessary, given o(n)
inﬂuence samples (Theorem 1, Subsection 2.1):

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
4
Hardness of approximation with o(n) influence samples. Let µ > 0 be any constant.
There is no µ-approximation algorithm for inﬂuence maximization using o(n) inﬂuence samples.
Interestingly, we show that O(k2 log n) inﬂuence samples are enough to provide a k-IM solution with
almost tight approximation guarantees. For example, if ﬁnding a single seed on a star (k = 1), with
high probability all random samples are leaves of the star. However, based on the O(log n) spread
outcomes our algorithm ﬁnds and seeds the center of the star. We also show that the quadratic
order dependence on k is the best possible. The following is a formal summary of our results from
Theorems 2 and 3 in Subsection 2.1:
Approximation guarantees with bounded number of influence samples. For
any
arbitrary 0 < ϵ ≤1, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm for k-inﬂuence maximization that
covers (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn nodes in expectation using no more than Oϵ(k2 log n) inﬂuence samples.
Moreover, there can be no approximation algorithms that provide µOPT −ϵn guarantees for k-IM
using o(k2) inﬂuence samples for a ﬁxed 0 < µ < 1 and 0 < ϵ < µ/k.
Notice that our bound on the number of inﬂuence samples depends logarithmically on n, therefore,
when k is poly-logarithmic we only use poly-logarithmic number of inﬂuence samples which is
exponentially lower than the best known bound of O(knlog n) for sample complexity of inﬂuence
maximization on general graphs (Sadeh et al. 2020, Section 2). We point out that our order n
improvement is only possible because we allow for an additive loss in our approximation guarantee.
Detailed comparisons with this and other related works are presented in Appendix A.
Our main contribution is to show that similar approximation guarantees are possible as we bound
the total number of edge queries, i.e., queries of the form (v,i) that return the i-th neighbor of node
v with arbitrarily ordered neighborhoods. We propose a probing procedure to sequentially reveal
random neighborhoods of the nodes, resulting in a snowball-like sampling of the network edges.
Notice that a single simulation of the independent cascade model over the entire network (without
using our subsampling and stopping constraints) requires Ω(pn2) edge queries. In fact, we show that
in the worst case one needs to query Ω(n2) edges to guarantee that the expected number of covered
nodes is at least a constant fraction of the optimum (Theorem 4, Section 3):
Hardness of approximation with o(n2) edge queries. Let µ be any constant. There is no
µ-approximation algorithm for inﬂuence maximization using o(n2) edge queries.
We avoid the above impossibility by allowing for an ϵn additive loss in our approximation guar-
antee. Subsequently, one natural question that arises is to study the relation between the required
number of queries and the cascade probability. In particular, is it possible to ﬁnd an approxi-
mately optimal seed set using sub-quadratic number of queries when p is desirably small? We

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
5
resolve this question positively by showing that our probing scheme approximately preserves the
greedy solution to the k-IM problem, achieving a (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn guarantee using no more than
Oϵ(pn2 log4 n+√kpn1.5 log5.5 n+knlog3.5 n) edge queries. We also provide a matching lower bound
(up to logarithms) to show that the linear order dependence on p is tight. The following is a formal
restatement of our results in Theorems 6 and 7 of Subsection 3.4.
Approximation guarantees with bounded number of edge queries. For any arbitrary
ϵ > 0, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm for inﬂuence maximization that covers (1 −
1/e)OPT−ϵn nodes in expectation, using Oϵ(pn2 log4 n+√kpn1.5 log5.5 n+knlog3.5 n) queries, where
OPT is the expected number of nodes covered by the optimum solution to k-IM. Moreover, there
can be no approximation algorithms that provide µOPT −ϵn guarantees for k-IM using o(pn2) edge
queries for a ﬁxed 0 < µ ≤1 and ϵ < µ2/18.
To achieve this result, we apply some subsampling techniques with stopping constraints that
enable us to approximately simulate Oϵ(k log n) independent cascades, starting from a random sam-
ple of Oϵ(k log n) initial nodes and using only Oϵ(pn2 log4 n + √kpn1.5 log5.5 n + knlog3.5 n) edge
queries. We specify the dependence of the Oϵ terms on ϵ when presenting our main results in Section
3. Of note, our subsampling technique makes critical use of the independent cascade probability p
when deciding how many edges to query in the neighborhood of each node. In practice, the true
value of p is often subject to signiﬁcant uncertainty. We address the dependency of our edge queries
on p with a hardness result in Section 3.5 and discuss how potential discrepancies may be corrected
if p is unknown at data collection but measurable afterwards.
The most closely related result that provides approximation guarantees for k-IM with limited
queries to an unknown graph is due to Wilder et al. (2018), who propose an algorithm for input
graphs that are drawn from a particular family of stochastic block models. Their algorithm, which
is tailored to that speciﬁc random graph model, consists of taking a random sample of T nodes and
exploring their extended neighborhoods in R steps of a random walk. The outcome of the random
walks is used to estimate the block sizes of each of the T nodes, and this is achieved by revealing
no more than TR ∈O(log6 n) nodes. The k nodes in the seed set are selected from the initial T
samples, such that the k largest blocks are seeded uniformly at random. Unlike Wilder et al. (2018),
we do not make any assumptions about inputs, so our results are applicable to general graphs.
In the following subsection, we put our contributions in perspective by discussing related bodies
of literature. Detailed discussions of methodologically relevant work are provided in Appendix A.
Our main results in Section 3 are presented for undirected graphs. In Appendix C.1, we provide
the extension of the edge query model to directed graphs and show that the same approximation
guarantees and query bounds hold true when nodes are queried for their inﬂuencers (their incoming
edges).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
6
1.2. Related work
Motivated by the diﬃculties of acquiring complete network data, we are interested in methods for
targeting in networks without making explicit use of the full graph. Such methods have roots in
multiple applied problems — vaccination (Cohen et al. 2003) and disease surveillance (Christakis
and Fowler 2010) — in addition to seeding. One approach that has received substantial attention is
a “one-hop” strategy [sometimes called “nomination” (Kim et al. 2015) or “acquaintance targeting”
(Chami et al. 2017, Cohen et al. 2003)] that selects as seeds the neighbors of random nodes. This
approach exploits a version of the friendship paradox that states: “the friend of a random individual
is expected to have more friends than a random individual,” (Feld 1991, Lattanzi and Singer 2015).
For example, Kim et al. (2015) report on the results of ﬁeld experiments that target individuals for
delivery of public health interventions (spreading adoption of multivitamins and a water puriﬁca-
tion method). For one product, they argue that one-hop targeting (whereby a random individual
nominates a friend to be targeted) leads to increased adoption rates, compared with random or in-
degree targeting. Some other empirical work has been less encouraging (Chin et al. 2021, cf. Kumar
and Sudhir 2019). While there are results about how these short random walks aﬀect the degree
distribution of selected nodes (Kumar et al. 2018), one-hop seeding currently lacks any theoretical
guarantees under models of contagion. Furthermore, given the collection of data about the network
neighborhoods of k nodes, it is natural to ask whether this data can be more eﬀectively used than
just locally taking a random step, ignoring data collected from the other k −1 neighborhoods.
To address the challenges of seeding when obtaining network information is costly, we oﬀer a
framework for inﬂuence maximization using a bounded number of queries to the graph structure.
In this framework, we investigate the expected spread size versus the increasing number of queries
as we obtain more information about the network. In related work, Akbarpour et al. (2020) study
the value of network information for seeding interventions. We provide a detailed comparison with
this work in Section 4, after clarifying our modeling assumptions and results.
In another related work, Manshadi et al. (2020) study a model of spread where individuals contact
their neighbors independently at random, and each contact leads to an adoption with some ﬁxed
probability. The contacts occur repeatedly; therefore, every cascade eventually spreads to the entire
population. They characterize the time to reach a fraction of adopters as well as the contact cost
(number of contacts made), in a random graph with a given degree distribution. They also propose
optimal seeding strategies that only use the degree information. However, this model is not directly
comparable to the inﬂuence maximization setup that we study. In our model, the realization of the
inﬂuences is random and adoption spreads only through the realized edges. For us, the objective is
to maximize the expected spread size and the incurred cost is in acquiring information about the
inﬂuence structure (who inﬂuences whom).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
7
Particularly relevant to our present study is recent work on inﬂuence maximization for unknown
graphs (Mihara et al. 2015, 2017, Stein et al. 2017, Wilder et al. 2017a, 2018). Mihara et al. (2015) use
a biased snowball sampling strategy to greedily probe and seed nodes with the highest degree; they
later propose to improve their heuristic by including random jumps that avoid excessive local search
in their snowball sampling strategy (Mihara et al. 2017). Stein et al. (2017) explore applications
of common heuristics and known algorithms in scenarios where parts of the network is completely
unobservable. Although simulations of inﬂuence spread on synthetic and real social networks provide
some evidence, none of these results come with provable performance guarantees in general graphs.
To the best of our knowledge, the only available guarantee for inﬂuence maximization with unknown
graphs is due to Wilder et al. (2018). However, as discussed above (section 1.1), this algorithm and
analysis is tailored to graphs generated from a particular family of stochastic block models (roughly
speaking, they use the outcome of the queries to estimate the size of each block and choose nodes
to seed the largest blocks). Such an analysis does not apply to general graphs and the techniques
that we use to provide performance guarantees for general graphs are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
We rely on sketching techniques to summarize inﬂuence functions using a bounded number of
queries; in Subsection 3.3, we adopt high-level ideas from Bateni et al. (2018, 2017) for construction
of our sketch (see Lemma 4). Cohen et al. (2014) also develop a sketch-based algorithm for inﬂuence
maximization to bound the running time with approximation guarantees. In other related work,
Borgs et al. (2014) give a quasi-linear time algorithm for inﬂuence maximization based on reversed
inﬂuence samples that use O(k(n + m)log n) edge queries, where m is the size of the input edge
set. Although these algorithms achieve fast (nearly best possible) inﬂuence maximization, they may
query all edges multiple times on some inputs because they are not directly concerned with limiting
query access to unknown graphs. In Appendix A, we give a detailed comparison with these and
other relevant works that are based on (reverse) inﬂuence sampling.
Our inﬂuence maximization guarantees also relate to the recent developments in stochastic sub-
modular maximization (Karimi et al. 2017), as well as optimization from samples (Balkanski et al.
2017a, 2016). The key diﬀerence is that in our algorithms we make explicit use of the combinatorial
structure of the collected data. This is in contrast to the optimization from samples framework,
where only the sampled values of the submodular function are observed. Consequently, we are able
to provide guarantees for arbitrary inputs, and avoid some of the limitations of the optimization
from samples (cf. Balkanski et al. 2017b). We provide more details about our relationship with this
literature in Appendix A.
Some prior work has addressed lack of perfect knowledge about the spreading process by learn-
ing the inﬂuence model and potentially heterogeneous probabilities of spreading along each edge
(Gomez-Rodriguez et al. 2012, Goyal et al. 2010). However, rather than attempting to learn the

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
8
model parameters from existing data, we are interested in data collection as an active, costly pro-
cess that is performed to inform seeding interventions. To this end, we oﬀer a methodology that
coordinates data collection and inﬂuence maximization by limiting queries to the social network
graph. In other online learning and bandit-based approaches, the learner can select diﬀerent seed
sets at each stage and receives feedback from seeding in previous stages (Wen et al. 2017, Wu et al.
2019). This is also related to adaptive seeding, where the initial choice of seeds inﬂuences what
becomes available for seeding in a followup stage (Feng et al. 2020, Horel and Singer 2015, Seeman
and Singer 2013). The ability to seed nodes adaptively makes such setups incomparable to ours —
and inapplicable when practical considerations demand commencing seeding simultaneously.
2. Problem setup and preliminary results
Consider a graph G = (V,E) with the set of nodes V, the set of edges E and a seed set S ⊆V.
Starting from the seeded nodes in S, adoption spreads along the edges of E with independent
cascade probability p according to the IC model in Section 1.1. Given S, for v ∈V, let φ(v,S) be
the probability that v adopts when the nodes in S are seeded. The inﬂuence function, Γ, maps each
seed set, S, to its value, Γ(S) = P
v∈V φ(v,S), which is the expected number of nodes that adopt if
the nodes in set S are seeded.
Definition 1 (k-IM). Given graph G, the k-inﬂuence maximization (k-IM) problem is to choose
a seed set S ⊂V with card(S) = k to maximize Γ(S). We use Λ = arg maxS,card (S)=k Γ(S) to denote
any such solution and use OPT = Γ(Λ) to denote the optimal value.
Definition 2 (Approximations). Given graph G, any Λα ⊂V, card(Λα) = k, satisfying Γ(Λα) ≥
αOPT is an α-approximate solution to k-IM.
An important result in inﬂuence maximization is that Γ is a non-negative, monotone, submod-
ular set function (Kempe et al. 2003, 2005, 2015, Mossel and Roch 2010). Subsequently, it can be
approximately maximized by sequentially selecting k seeds with the largest marginal gains, i.e., the
greedy algorithm, which makes O(nk) oracle calls to Γ and achieves a 1 −(1 −1/k)k ≥(1 −1/e)
approximation guarantee (Nemhauser et al. 1978). The greedy algorithm sets a gold standard for
inﬂuence maximization that is NP-hard to improve upon — indeed, k-IM generalizes the maximum
coverage problem and suﬀers its hardness of approximation beyond a 1 −(1 −1/k)k factor. Here,
we achieve roughly the same guarantee without oracle access to Γ and using only a limited number
of queries to the graph G. In our approach, rather than optimizing the inﬂuence function on the
original graph, we do so on a subgraph that is properly sampled from the original graph. As its main
property, we show that for the appropriate choice of α and ϵ, an α-approximate solution to k-IM

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
9
on this subgraph has an inﬂuence on the original graph that is lower-bounded by αOPT −ϵn. We
can thus achieve similar worst-case guarantees using only partial information about the network.
Accessing the input graph by performing edge queries is a common technique in sublinear time
algorithms that inspect only a small portion of their input before providing an output (Alon et al.
2000, 2009, Chazelle et al. 2005, Esfandiari and Mitzenmacher 2018, Indyk 1999). Formally, we
assume that the input graphs are represented by an adjacency list deﬁned as a collection of lists,
{(Nν,card(Nν)),ν ∈V}, where each list, Nν, consists of all the neighbors of node ν in some arbitrary
(but ﬁxed) order, and is accompanied by its length. Our query oracle model is deﬁned such that
given a vertex ν and an index 1 ≤i ≤card(Nν), the algorithm can query who is the i-th neighbor
of ν (Gonen et al. 2011):
Definition 3 (Edge Query). Given a vertex ν ∈V and an index i ∈{1,...,card(Nν)}, an edge
query with parameters (ν,i) reveals the i-th neighbor of ν.
We use edge queries as part of a probing mechanism, whereby a node is asked to reveal her
neighbors each with probability p. Formally, probing node ν is deﬁned as follows:
Definition 4 (Probing). Given a vertex ν ∈V, a probing with parameters (ν,p) performs a
sequence of (ν,i) edge queries for every index i that remains after eliminating the elements of the
index set {1,...,card(Nν)}, independently at random, with probability 1 −p.
Of note, the total number of edge queries that are performed as a result of a (ν,p) probing is a
binomial random variable with size parameter card(Nν) and success probability p. In addition to
probing nodes and running edge queries, our algorithm also needs a subsample of initial nodes that
are chosen at random without replacement from the node set. Given this initial sample, we repeatedly
probe the extended neighborhoods of the initial sample using edge queries. In our analysis, we
bound the total number of edge queries that our algorithm makes in order to achieve the desired
approximation guarantees. We also provide a query complexity lower-bound to show that the probing
algorithm is order optimal for achieving the desired approximation guarantees, with as few queries
as possible.
Although accessing the input graph locally by revealing the ordered neighborhoods of its nodes is
a common query oracle model, our probing setup is also motivated by practical methods of network
sampling such as snowball sampling, link-tracing, and respondent-driven sampling (RDS) that are
popular in public health surveillance, social policy research, sociology, and survey design applications
(Heckathorn and Cameron 2017). The principle utility of such methods is in constructing samples of
hidden (hard to reach) populations (e.g., when estimating prevalence of HIV among drug injectors).
In these situations, research begins with a convenience sample of initial subjects which is then

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
10
Figure 1
Using f(n) ∈o(n) inﬂuence samples on a graph comprised of a clique of size g(n) =
p
n/f(n) and
n −g(n) isolated nodes, one cannot achieve an approximation factor that is better than o(1).
expanded by tracing their network links in waves, until the target sample size is attained (Heckathorn
and Cameron 2017, Salganik and Heckathorn 2004, cf. Goel and Salganik 2010). Following our
probing procedure, researchers can decide which links to trace in the neighborhood of a probed node,
randomly by simulating independent biased coin ﬂips with head probability p. More broadly, our
PROBE algorithm (Algorithm 2, Section 3) can be integrated with social network data collection
software — e.g., the Trellis mobile platform (Lungeanu et al. 2021) used in Kim et al. (2015) and
other studies — to generate survey sampling plans for researchers in the ﬁeld.
2.1. Approximation guarantee with a bounded number of inﬂuence samples
To demonstrate the challenges of seeding with partial network information, we present a thought
experiment whereby one can pay a cost to learn the outcome of a spreading process when a single
node is seeded. Imagine giving out coupons (or lottery tickets) to random individuals and observing
their usage spread as a way of collecting network information. Formally, we deﬁne an “inﬂuence
sample” as the outcome of seeding a random node:
Definition 5 (Influence Sample). Each inﬂuence sample consists of all nodes that become
active, after a single node is chosen uniformly at random (with replacement) and seeded.
As a theoretical exercise, we ask how many inﬂuence samples we need to collect to be able to
provide a k-IM approximate solution. We ﬁrst show that one cannot hope to provide a constant factor
approximation guarantee, µOPT, for any µ > 0, using o(n) inﬂuence samples. Our hard example
consists of a graph with a small clique and many isolated nodes (Figure 1). In such a structure,
using o(n) inﬂuence samples one is unlikely to observe the small clique and cannot achieve better
than an o(1) approximation factor. This example is similar to one in Wilder et al. (2018, Theorem
1), but we improve their O(n1−ϵ) lower bound to o(n). The proof details are in Appendix B.1.
Theorem 1. Let 0 < µ < 1 be any constant. There is no µ-approximation algorithm for inﬂuence
maximization using o(n) inﬂuence samples.
Knowing that a multiplicative approximation guarantee is impossible with o(n) inﬂuence samples,
we next ask how many inﬂuence samples we need for providing a (1−1/e)OPT−ϵn guarantee with
ﬁxed ϵ > 0. Algorithm 1 provides such a guarantee using kρ ∈Oϵ(k2 log(nk)) inﬂuence samples,

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
11
where ρ = ρn,k
ϵ
= ⌈(81k/ϵ3)log(6nk/ϵ)⌉is the number of inﬂuence samples we collect to choose one
seed. The total number of inﬂuence samples that we use in Algorithm 1 is
T n,k
ϵ
= kρn,k
ϵ
= k
81k log(6nk/ϵ)
ϵ3

∈O
k2 log n
ϵ3
+ k2 log(1/ϵ)
ϵ3

·
(1)
Algorithm 1: INF-SAMPLE(ρ,k)
Input: Inﬂuence sampling access to graph G, sample size ρ, and seed set size k
Output: Λ⋆, approximate seed set of size k with value at least (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn
1 Initialize Λ⋆←∅.
2 for i from 1 to k do
3
Collect ρ inﬂuence samples and call them Ai
1, ..., Ai
ρ.
// Discard the influence samples that intersect with already chosen seeds (Λ⋆):
4
for j from 1 to ρ do
5
if Ai
j ∩Λ⋆̸= ∅then
6
Ai
j ←∅.
7
end
8
end
// Choose the i-th seed based on the remaining influence samples:
9
for u ∈V \ Λ⋆do
10
for j from 1 to ρ do
11
Xi
u,j ←1{u ∈Ai
j}.
12
end
13
Xi
u ←Pρ
j=1 Xi
u,j.
14
end
15
v⋆←arg maxu∈V\Λ⋆Xi
u.
16
Λ⋆←Λ⋆∪{v⋆}.
17 end
18 return Λ⋆·
The following theorem formalizes our guarantees for Algorithm 1. Its proof is in Appendix B.2.
The main idea is that nodes that appear in many inﬂuence samples are good candidates for seeding
since they are reached by many random nodes. For example, in Figure 2 the black node is the only
node that appears in all inﬂuence samples and is the best candidate for seeding. To prevent overlap
with the previously chosen seeds, at each step we discard those inﬂuence samples that contain any
of the already chosen seeds (belonging to Λ⋆). The crux of the argument is in realizing that (n/ρ)Xi
u
is an unbiased estimator of the expected marginal gain from adding u to the seed set. By controlling

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
12
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 2
Three inﬂuence samples are depicted in (A) red, (B) orange, and (C) blue. In each inﬂuence sample,
the random initial node is marked in the same color as the cascade. The node that appears most across
diﬀerent samples is marked in black. The dotted segments are not observed in the samples.
Figure 3
Using o(k2) inﬂuence samples on a graph comprised of k stars of size n/k each, with cascade probability
p = 1/k, one cannot achieve a µOPT −ϵn approximation guarantee for ϵ < µ/k.
the deviation of Xi
u from E[Xi
u], we can approximate every step of the greedy algorithm by choosing
u from V \ Λ⋆to maximize Xi
u.
Theorem 2. For any arbitrary 0 < ϵ ≤1, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm for inﬂuence
maximization that covers (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn nodes in expectation in O(k2 log(n/ϵ)/ϵ3) time, using
no more than k ⌈81k log(6nk/ϵ)/ϵ3⌉∈O(k2 log(n/ϵ)/ϵ3) inﬂuence samples.
We end this section by a lower bound on the required number of inﬂuence samples for achieving
the (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn approximation guarantee. In particular, we show that the k2 asymptotic
rate for T n,k
ϵ
in (1) is optimal for ϵ < µ/k. Our hard example consists of a collection of k stars of
size n/k each, with independent cascade probability p = 1/k; see Figure 3. The optimum achieves
k(n/k2) = n/k expected spread size by seeding the centers of each of the k stars. In Appendix B.3,
we show that any algorithm that uses o(k2) inﬂuence samples can at most discover a small expected
fraction of the center nodes, and therefore, fails to guarantee a µOPT −ϵn expected spread size
when ϵ < µ/k.
Theorem 3. Fix 0 < µ < 1 and 0 < ϵ < µ/k. There can be no approximation algorithms that provide
µOPT −ϵn guarantees for k-IM using o(k2) inﬂuence samples.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
13
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 4
Three example cascades obtained through edge queries, depicted in (A) red, (B) orange, and (C) blue.
All cascades start from the same random initial nodes which are marked in the same color as the
cascades. The node that is marked in black scores as high as or higher than other nodes across the three
cascades. The dotted sections consist of unsampled edges and nodes.
While these results characterize the challenges of seeding with limited network information, inﬂu-
ence samples are often not a practical query model in a number of settings of interest and do
not readily extend to directed graphs (Appendix Appendix C.1). Thus, we turn to another, more
widely-applicable query method.
3. Approximation guarantees with bounded edge queries
In this section, we present an algorithm to perform edge queries by probing the extended neighbor-
hood of a random subsample of the network nodes (Algorithm 2: PROBE), as well as an algorithm
to output an approximate seed set, given the outcome of the edge queries (Algorithm 3: SEED).
The main idea of the PROBE algorithm is to simulate multiple independent cascades starting from
a set of random initial nodes; by querying each node about its neighbors and repeating the same
for the revealed neighbors, neighbors of neighbors, etc. The SEED algorithm takes in the output
of the PROBE algorithm and chooses seeds that are connected to the most initial nodes along the
queried edges. In Figure 4, we depict an example of three cascades that are obtained through edge
queries. Consider the node that is marked in black. Its queried connected component has three
initial nodes in 4(A), two initial nodes in 4(B), and one initial node in 4(C). The value of each
connected component is the number of initial nodes in that component and adding them gives the
total value of the marked node: 1 + 2 + 3 = 6. To prevent overlap with already chosen seeds, we set
the value of a connected component to zero once one of its nodes is seeded. Using these valuations,
the SEED algorithm approximates the greedy algorithm by sequentially adding the most valuable
candidates to the seed set and updating the value of the connected components.
Our analysis consists of a (1−1/e)OPT−ϵn lower bound on the expected spread size of the chosen
seed set, as well as upper bounds on the total number of edges that are queried by the PROBE
algorithm and the subsequent run-time of the SEED algorithm. Before digging any further into the

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
14
Figure 5
To lower-bound the required number of edge queries, our hard example consists of 9/µ2 cliques, 3/µ of
which are connected in a circle. An algorithm that makes o(n2) edge queries may detect the connected
cliques with probability at most µ/3. The expected performance of any such algorithm is worse than a
factor µ of the optimum.
analytical details, let us provide a companion hardness result that parallels Theorem 1 for inﬂuence
samples, showing that a multiplicative approximation guarantee is, in general, not achievable using
a nontrivial number of edge queries (thus the additive loss in our lower bound). We provide a
hard example containing (9/µ2)
 nµ2/9
2

edges for which one cannot provide a µ-approximation while
querying o(n2) edges. To this end, we consider an arbitrary algorithm that makes less than Cµn2
edge queries, for some constant Cµ that is speciﬁed in Appendix B.4. Our hard example consists
of a collection of 9/µ2 cliques of size nµ2/9 each. We choose 3/µ of these cliques at random and
connect them as in Figure 5. With k = p = 1, an optimal algorithm will seed one of the nodes in
the connected cliques and achieves (3/µ)(nµ2/9) = nµ/3 spread size. However, an algorithm that
makes less than Cµn2 queries cannot detect the connected clique with probability more than µ/3. In
Appendix B.4, we show that the expected spread size from seeding the output of any such algorithm
is less than nµ2/3, i.e., less than a factor µ of the optimum.
Theorem 4. Let 0 < µ ≤1 be any ﬁxed constant. There can be no µ-approximation algorithm for
inﬂuence maximization using o(n2) edge queries.
The hallmark of our analysis is in identifying an auxiliary submodular function, Γδ : 2V →R,
to approximate our submodular function of interest Γ : 2V →R. The approximation is such that
|Γδ(S) −Γ(S)| ≤ϵn for all seed sets S of size k, with high probability. Here ϵ is the quality of
approximation and it depends on δ, which parameterizes the approximator (Γδ). Following the
notation introduced in Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, we use Λδ and Λ to denote the maximizers of Γδ and Γ
with constrained size k. The following Lemma (proved in Appendix B.5) is true for any set function
Γ and its approximator Γδ. It allows us to bound the loss that is incurred from optimizing Γδ in
place of Γ.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
15
Lemma 1. Consider set functions Γδ and Γ that map subsets of V to R with their respective max-
imum values, OPTδ and OPT, on subsets of size k. Assume that for all seed sets of size k, S,
we have |Γδ(S) −Γ(S)| ≤ϵn. Let Λ′
δ be any approximate maximizer of size k for Γδ, satisfying
Γδ(Λ′
δ) ≥αOPTδ −βn. Then Λ′
δ also satisﬁes Γ(Λ′
δ) ≥αOPT −(β + (α + 1)ϵ)n.
We start with a random set of nρ = O(k log n) initial nodes and ﬁx them for the subsequent steps
(Subsection 3.1). We then proceed to perform edge queries by probing their extended neighborhoods
repeatedly (Subsection 3.2). In this way, we obtain T = O(k log n) cascades all starting from the
same set of initial nodes (see Figure 4). In Subsection 3.3, we argue that one does not need to
continue probing the extended neighborhood of an initial node if the size of its revealed connected
component is large enough (Lemma 4). This is a key observation that allows us to upper-bound the
total number of edge queries in Theorem 5. In Subsection 3.4, we propose the SEED algorithm to
choose k seeds (approximately optimally), based on the outcome of the edge queries (the output of
PROBE), and prove a (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn approximation guarantee with bounds on the number of
edge queries (Subsection 3.4.1; Theorem 5) and the run time (Subsection 3.4.2; Theorem 7).
Recall from Section 2 and Deﬁnition 3 (edge queries) that each probing consists of independent
random draws from the probed node’s ordered neighborhood. Even if a node is probed more than
once across diﬀerent cascades, ﬁeld survey researchers who devise their sampling plans based on
the PROBE algorithm would only need to trace each revealed link once (having identiﬁed the
unique links beforehand by recording T random draws from an ordered set). After the ﬁeld survey is
concluded, the data from all traced links can be collected to reconstruct the output of the PROBE
algorithm based on the outcome of the random draws. In our analysis, we upper bound the total
number of queries that the PROBE algorithm makes in all of the T cascades; therefore, the practical
cost of tracing links during a ﬁeld survey would be lower when the same edges appear in multiple
cascades (e.g., the incident edge to the black node in Figure 4B is queried again in Figure 4C). In
other applications — e.g., for a web crawler that follows the PROBE algorithm to mine data from
online social networks (Catanese et al. 2011), bounding the total number of queried edges is a direct
concern not only for scalability, but also to control the data collection costs and time.
3.1. Sampling the initial nodes
Recall our goal is to choose a seed set that (approximately) maximizes the inﬂuence function Γ.
In this subsection, we show that we can estimate the value of Γ by choosing a large enough set of
nodes uniformly at random. To begin, ﬁx 0 < ρ < 1 and choose ⌈nρ⌉nodes uniformly at random.
We call these the initial nodes and denote them by Vρ. Given Vρ, for any set S ⊂V we estimate the
value of Γ(S) = P
v∈V φ(v,S) by:
Γρ (S) := 1
ρ
X
v∈Vρ
φ(v,S)·
(2)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
16
That is, we approximate the expected size of the cascade using the adoption probabilities of these
initial nodes. To proceed, also deﬁne
ρn,k
ϵ,δ := (2 + ϵ)(kδ log n + log 2)
2ϵ2n
·
In the next Lemma, we bound the diﬀerence between Γ and Γρ for ρ ≥ρn,k
ϵ,δ . The proof is in
Appendix B.6. In the proof, we use a standard concentration argument to control the deviation of
Γρ(S) from Γ(S) for a ﬁxed S, and then a union bound to make the inequality true for any S.
Lemma 2 (Bounding the sampling loss). Let ρn,k
ϵ,δ ≤ρ ≤1. With probability at least 1−e−δ, for
all seed sets S of size k we have |Γρ(S) −Γ(S)| ≤ϵn.
3.2. Probing the extended neighborhoods of the initial nodes
Note that our deﬁnition of Γρ in (2) is in terms of φ(v,S), which can only be computed given the
knowledge of the entire graph. However, when access to graph information is restricted (network
information is made available only through edge queries) we need to replace φ(v,S) by a proper
estimate. To this end, we sample the graph edges through the probing procedure introduced in
Section 2. Consider the ⌈nρ⌉initial nodes in Vρ. For each initial node, we probe its neighborhood,
keeping the edges with probability p. We then proceed to probe the neighborhoods of the revealed
nodes, etc. We never probe a node more than once, and each edge receives at most one chance of
being sampled. The probing stops after a ﬁnite number of steps (bounded by n). We repeat this
probing procedure T times and obtain T subsampled graphs that we denote by G(1)
ρ ,...,G(T )
ρ
.
We can now estimate φ(v,S) for v belonging to Vρ using the T subsampled graphs G(1)
ρ ,...,G(T )
ρ
as follows. For i = 1,...,T, and v ∈Vρ, set Y (i)(v,S) = 1 if v has a path to S in G(i)
ρ , otherwise set
Y (i)(v,S) = 0. Our estimate of φ(v,S) for v ∈Vρ and S ⊂V is
φ(T )(v,S) := 1
T
T
X
i=1
Y (i)(v,S).
(3)
We can similarly construct an estimate for the inﬂuence function that we want to optimize:
Γ(T )
ρ (S) := 1
ρ
X
v∈Vρ
φ(T )(v,S)·
(4)
To proceed, deﬁne
T n,k
ϵ,δ :=
3(δ + log 2)(k + 1)log n
ϵ2

·
Our next result bounds the diﬀerence between Γ(T )
ρ
and Γρ for T ≥T n,k
ϵ,δ . In the proof, we use
concentration and union bound to ensure that φ(T )(v,S) remains close to φ(v,S) for all v ∈Vρ and
S ⊂V. The proof details are in Appendix B.7.
Lemma 3 (Bounding the probing loss). Let T ≥T n,k
ϵ,δ . With probability at least 1 −e−δ, for all
sets S of size k we have |Γ(T )
ρ (S) −Γρ(S)| ≤ϵn.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
17
3.3. Limiting the probed neighborhoods
Here we consider a variation of the probing procedure described in the previous subsection whereby
we stop probing when we hit a threshold τ of nodes in a connected component. Note that the
probing may stop even before hitting τ nodes if no new edges are activated. Limiting the probed
neighborhoods in this manner helps us bound the total number of edges that are used in our sketch
(see Subsection 3.4.1 and Theorem 5). In fact, we show that it is safe to stop probing as soon as
there are τ = τ n,k
ϵ
nodes in a connected component where τ n,k
ϵ
:= ⌈−(nlog ϵ)/(ϵk)⌉.
Let us denote the T subsampled graphs obtained through limited probing by G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ . More-
over, let Γ(T )
ρ,τ be our estimate of the inﬂuence function that is constructed based on G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ
in the exact same way as in (3) and (4). This new estimator is, itself, a submodular function since
it can be expressed as a sum of coverage functions. Our following result ensures that by optimizing
Γ(T )
ρ,τ instead of Γ(T )
ρ , we do not loose more than (1−ϵ) in our approximation factor. The proof follows
a probabilistic argument similar to Bateni et al. (2017, Lemma 2.4). The crux of the argument is
in constructing a random set whose expected value on Γ(T )
ρ,τ is no less than 1 −ϵ of the optimum on
Γ(T )
ρ . We do so by starting from the optimum set on Γ(T )
ρ
and replacing ϵk of its nodes at random.
Taking τ large enough allows us to argue that any node whose connections are aﬀected by limiting
the probed neighborhoods should belong to a large component, of size τ = τ n,k
ϵ
, and such large com-
ponents are likely to be covered by one of the ϵk random nodes. The complete proof is in Appendix
B.8.
Lemma 4 (Bounding the loss from limited probing). For 0 < ρ < 1 and 0 < ϵ ≤1, consider
the limited probing procedure with the probing threshold set at τ = τ n,k
ϵ
. Then any α-approximate
solution to k-IM for Γ(T )
ρ,τ is an α(1 −ϵ)-approximate solution to k-IM for Γ(T )
ρ .
Algorithm 2 summarizes the limited probing procedure for performing edge queries on the input
graph (G). The output is a sketch comprised of the T independent subsampled graphs (G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ )
that fully determine the estimator Γ(T )
ρ,τ .
3.4. Inﬂuence maximization on the sampled graph
Lemmas 2, 3, and 4 provide the following appropriate choices of the PROBE algorithm parameters
ρ, T and τ:
ρ = ρn,k
ϵ,δ = (2 + ϵ)(δk log n + log 2)
2ϵ2n
∈O
δk log n
ϵ2n

,
T = T n,k
ϵ,δ =
3(δ + log 2)(k + 1)log n
ϵ2

∈O
δk log n
ϵ2

,
τ = τ n,k
ϵ
=
−nlog ϵ
ϵk

·
(5)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
18
Algorithm 2: PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p)
Input: Edge query access to graph G, cascade probability p and probing parameters ρ, T
and τ
Output: Subsampled graphs G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ and initial node set Vρ
1 Choose ⌈nρ⌉nodes uniformly at random without replacement and call them Vρ.
2 for i from 1 to T do
3
Initialize X ←∅, V(i)
ρ,τ ←Vρ, E(i)
ρ,τ ←∅and G(i)
ρ,τ ←(V(i)
ρ,τ,E(i)
ρ,τ).
// Construct G(i)
ρ,τ by probing the unexplored nodes (V(i)
ρ,τ \ X):
4
while V(i)
ρ,τ \ X ̸= ∅do
5
Draw a node, ν, randomly from V(i)
ρ,τ \ X add it to the explored nodes: X ←X ∪{ν}.
6
Draw a random integer according to Binomial(card(Nν),p) distribution and call it I.
7
Draw a random subset of size I from {1,...,card(Nν)} and call it I.
8
while size of the connected component of ν in G(i)
ρ,τ is less than τ do
9
Draw an index, ι, randomly from I and remove it: I ←I \ {ι}.
10
Perform a (ν,ι) edge query to graph G to reveal the ι-th neighbor of ν and call it
νι.
11
if νι ̸∈X then
// Add the newly discovered node and edge to G(i)
ρ,τ:
12
V(i)
ρ,τ ←V(i)
ρ,τ ∪{νι}
13
E(i)
ρ,τ ←E(i)
ρ,τ ∪{ν,νι}
14
end
15
end
16
end
17
G(i)
ρ,τ ←(V(i)
ρ,τ,E(i)
ρ,τ).
18 end
19 return G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ and Vρ.
The following lemma (proved in Appendix B.9) combines our results so far (Lemmas 1 to 4) to show
that with ρ, T and τ set according to (5) any α-approximate solution, Λ⋆, to k-IM on Γ(T )
ρ,τ satisﬁes
Γ(Λ⋆) ≥α′OPT −ϵ′n for appropriate choices of α′ and ϵ′; thus providing an approximate solution
to the original k-IM problem on Γ.
Lemma 5 (Bounding the total approximation loss). Consider any 0 < ϵ,α < 1, and ﬁx ρ =
ρn,k
ϵ,δ , T = T n,k
ϵ,δ and τ = τ n,k
ϵ
according to (5). Moreover, let α′ = α(1 −ϵ) and ϵ′ = 2(α(1 −ϵ) + 1)ϵ.
With probability at least 1−2e−δ, any α-approximate solution to the k-IM problem on Γ(T )
ρ,τ has value
at least α′OPT −ϵ′n on the original problem.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
19
In Subsection 3.4.1, we bound the total number of edges that are queried by PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p).
The output of the PROBE algorithm is the set of T subsampled graphs (G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ). From these
T subsampled graphs, we construct the estimator, Γ(T )
ρ,τ , and then use a submodular maximization
algorithm to ﬁnd a (1 −1/e −ϵ)-approximate solution to k-IM on Γ(T )
ρ,τ for any ϵ > 0. In Subsection
3.4.2, we describe a fast implementation of submodular maximization on the sketch (the output of
PROBE) that runs in Oϵ(pn2 log4 n + √kpn1.5 log5.5 n + knlog3.5 n) time.
3.4.1. Bounding the total number of edge queries
Our edge query upper bound includes
the following terms:
En,k
ϵ,p := pτ n,k
ϵ
(τ n,k
ϵ
−1)/2 ∈O
pn2 log2(1/ϵ)
ϵ2k2

,
(6)
Cn,k
ϵ,δ := nρn,k
ϵ,δ T n,k
ϵ,δ

1 + En,k
ϵ,p +
q
δ(τ n,k
ϵ
log n + log T n,k
ϵ,δ )En,k
ϵ,p

∈O
δ2 log2(1/ϵ)
ϵ6
pn2 log2 n + δ3 log1.5(1/ϵ)
ϵ5.5
p
kpn1.5 log2.5 n + δ2
ϵ4 k2 log2 n

.
In Theorem 5, we bound the total number of edge queries, denoted by q, in terms of En,k
ϵ,p and Cn,k
ϵ,δ .
Our proof in Appendix B.10 relies critically on how we limit the probed neighborhoods (Subsection
3.3). Roughly speaking, the output of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) consists of at most nρT components of size
no more than τ (barring the less than nρT edges that may connect them). Moreover, since each
edge is revealed with probability p, the expected number of edges in each of these components is at
most pτ(τ −1)/2. Subsequently, concentration allows us to give a high probability upper bound on
the total number of edges that appear in the output of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p). We can, similarly, also
bound the total number of edges that are queried but discarded since they have been pointing to
already probed nodes (see steps 10 and 11 of the PROBE algorithm).
Theorem 5 (Bounding the edge queries). Consider any 0 < ϵ,α < 1, ﬁx ρ = ρn,k
ϵ,δ , T = T n,k
ϵ,δ
and τ = τ n,k
ϵ
according to (5), and denote the total number of edge queries during a single run of
PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) by q. For n ≥√δ + log T with probability at least 1 −3e−δ, q can be bounded as
follows:
q ≤Qn,k
ϵ,δ := 2Cn,k
ϵ,δ +

2 +
√
2

T n,k
ϵ,δ n
q
δ + log T n,k
ϵ,δ
∈O
δ2 log2(1/ϵ)
ϵ6
pn2 log2 n + δ3 log1.5(1/ϵ)
ϵ5.5
p
kpn1.5 log2.5 n + δ2
ϵ4 k2 log2 n
+δ1.5 log0.5(1/ϵ)
ϵ2
k
p
log knlog n
p
log log n

⊂Oϵ,δ

pn2 log2 n +
p
kpn1.5 log2.5 n + knlog2 n

.
(7)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
20
It is worth highlighting that to provide our main approximation guarantee in Theorem 7, we set
δ = 2log n; see Appendix B.12. In Appendix B.11, we prove a matching (up to logarithmic factor)
lower bound by giving a hard example where it is impossible to provide a µOPT −ϵn approximate
guarantee using o(pn2) edge queries. We allow p to vary with n and prove the hard case for k = 1 and
p ∈Ω(log n/n), whereby the ﬁrst term in (7) is dominant and we have Qn,k
ϵ,δ ∈Oϵ,δ(pn2 log2 n); of note,
replacing p ∈O(log n/n) in (7) yields Qn,k
ϵ,δ ∈Oϵ,δ(knlog3 n). Our hard example builds on our previous
construction in Figure 5, which is a variant of the so-called “caveman graph” where edges are rewired
to link diﬀerent cliques. In Appendix B.11, we provide a construction consisting of 9/µ2 cliques, 3/µ
of which are connected around a circle, by choosing −p−1 log(γµ/6) edges randomly from each clique
and rewiring them to connect to the next clique on the circle, while preserving the node degrees.
Here 0 < γ < µ/6 is a constant that is chosen arbitrarily and then ﬁxed. With k = 1, an optimal
algorithm seeds one of the nodes in the 3/µ connected cliques and achieves an expected spread size of
at least n(1−γ)µ/3. To show that no approximation algorithm can provide a µOPT−ϵn guarantee
using o(pn2) edge queries, we consider an arbitrary algorithm that makes less than pCϵ
µ,γn2 edge
queries, where Cϵ
µ,γ is a constant that is speciﬁed in Appendix B.11. The probability that such an
algorithm detects the 3/µ connected cliques is at most µ/3 −3ϵ/µ. Hence, the expected spread size
from seeding the output of such an algorithm cannot exceed n(1−γ)µ2/3−ϵn which is strictly less
than µOPT −ϵn.
Theorem 6. Let 0 < µ ≤1 be any constant. There can be no approximation algorithms that provide
µOPT −ϵn guarantees for k-IM using o(pn2) edge queries when ϵ < µ2/18.
Of note, the upper bound (µ2/18) on ϵ in Theorem 6 is necessary for limiting the probability
of querying a rewired edge from the connected cliques. An upper bound of µ/3 −3ϵ/µ > 0 on this
probability implies an overall µOPT −ϵn upper bound on the performance of any algorithm on
this hard input. It seems unavoidable that this hardness should hold only for small ϵ relative to
µ, however, the exact quadratic dependence on µ may be improvable with a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
construction.
3.4.2. Bounding the total running time
In this subsection, we provide a fast implementa-
tion of our algorithm for inﬂuence maximization on the sampled graph. In fact, we can achieve a
running time that is linear in the number of queried edges. First note that Γ(T )
ρ,τ is, by deﬁnition, a
coverage function, ergo a submodular function. Hence, we can use the randomized greedy algorithm
of Mirzasoleiman et al. (2015) to provide a (1 −1/e −ϵ) approximation guarantee. We start with
Λ⋆←∅and as in any greedy algorithm, we only use two types of operations:
• We query the marginal increase of a node v on the current set Λ⋆, denoted by:
∆(v|Λ⋆) := Γ(T )
ρ,τ (Λ⋆∪{v}) −Γ(T )
ρ,τ (Λ⋆).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
21
• We choose a node v⋆with maximal marginal increase and add it to the seed set:
Λ⋆←Λ⋆∪{v⋆}.
The only diﬀerence is that the search for the node v⋆is restricted to a subset R of size (n/k)log(1/ϵ)
that is drawn uniformly at random from V \ Λ⋆.
Algorithm 3: SEED(ϵ,k)
Input: Subsampled graphs G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ and initial node set Vρ
Output: Λ⋆, (1 −1/e −ϵ)-approximate solution to k-IM for ΓT
ρ,τ
1 Initialize Λ⋆←∅.
2 Find the connected components of G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ .
3 Initialize the value of every connected component to be equal to the number of its nodes in
Vρ.
4 for i from 1 to k do
// Selecting the i-th seed following a randomized greedy step:
5
Choose a subset R from V \ Λ⋆randomly with card(R) = (n/k)log(1/ϵ).
6
for v ∈R do
7
Set ∆(v|Λ⋆) equal to the sum of the values of the connected components containing v.
8
end
9
v⋆←arg maxv∈R ∆(v|Λ⋆).
10
Λ⋆←Λ⋆∪{v⋆}.
11
Update the values of the connected components containing v⋆to zero.
12 end
13 return Λ⋆.
In Algorithm 3: SEED(ϵ,k), we provide eﬃcient implementations for the above operations. Our
implementations are based on the structure of Γ(T )
ρ,τ , as determined by the T subsampled graphs
(G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ). First using a graph search (e.g., DFS) we ﬁnd the connected components of each of
the T subsampled graphs and count the number of initial nodes (belonging to Vρ) in each connected
component. We refer to this count for each connected component as the “value” of that component.
The main idea is that maximizing Γ(T )
ρ,τ is equivalent to ﬁnding a seed set, Λ⋆, such that the total
value of all connected components containing at least one seed in Λ⋆is maximized. If a connected
component already contains (i.e., is covered by) some nodes in Λ⋆, then the marginal increase due
to that component should be zero. This is achieved by setting the value of a component to zero
after adding a seed from that component to Λ⋆— see step 11 of Algorithm 3.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
22
In Algorithm 4 we run PROBE and SEED under the right parameter setting to achieve a (1 −
1/e)OPT−ϵ′n approximation guarantee for inﬂuence maximization. Theorem 7 formalizes our guar-
antees by combining our conclusions from Lemma 5 and Theorem 5, as well as the analysis of the
performance of fast submodular maximization (randomized greedy) in Mirzasoleiman et al. (2015).
The proof is in Appendix B.12.
Algorithm 4: k-IM with a bounded number of edge queries
Input: Edge query access to graph G on n nodes and an approximation loss ϵ′ > 0
Output: An approximate k-IM solution, Λ⋆, satisfying Γ(Λ⋆) ≥(1 −1/e)OPT −ϵ′n
// Setting the parameters (ϵ,δ,ρ,T,τ):
1 ϵ ←ϵ′/7·
2 δ ←2log n·
3 ρ ←(2 + ϵ)(δk log n + log 2)/(2ϵ2n)·
4 T ←⌈3(δ + log 2)(k + 1)log n/ϵ2⌉·
5 τ ←⌈nlog(1/ϵ)/(ϵk)⌉·
// Running PROBE followed by SEED:
6 Run PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) with edge query access to graph G to obtain G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ and Vρ.
7 Run SEED(ϵ,k) with G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ and Vρ as inputs to obtain Λ⋆.
8 return Λ⋆.
Theorem 7. For any 0 < ϵ′ ≤1 and n ≥(30/ϵ′)2, there exists an algorithm for inﬂuence maxi-
mization that covers (1−1/e)OPT−ϵ′n nodes in expectation with Oϵ′(pn2 log4 n+√kpn1.5 log5.5 n+
knlog3.5 n) expected run time and using no more than Oϵ′(pn2 log4 n+√kpn1.5 log5.5 n+knlog3.5 n)
edge queries in expectation; the dependence of the constant factors on ϵ′ is the same as (7) with
ϵ = ϵ′/7.
3.5. Discrepancy between the query and cascade probabilities
So far we have assumed that the cascade probability (p) is known or otherwise available to perform
PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) in step 6 of Algorithm 4. While p can be measured beforehand, in practice,
such measurements are subject to signiﬁcant uncertainty. Even when the network is fully observed,
there can be uncertainty about p (Chen et al. 2016, He and Kempe 2016); however, here p plays a
role in data collection, so it is important to consider whether other values of p can be entertained
after data collection. Motivated by the possibility that p may be unknown and our best estimate
of p can change after the fact (i.e., after data collection), let us assume that the edge data is

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
23
collected according to PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p′) where the “probe probability” (p′) is diﬀerent from the
target cascade probability (p). Note that the setting of PROBE parameters (ρ, T and τ) in steps
1 to 5 of Algorithm 4 is not dependent on p′. Let G′(1)
ρ,τ, ..., G′(T )
ρ,τ be the subsampled graphs output
by PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p′). The following hardness result shows that when p is unknown, controlling the
discrepancy between the query and seed cascade probabilities by a multiplicative ratio (i.e., requiring
|max{p,p′}/min{p,p′}| < 1 + δ) is not enough for providing general µOPT −ϵn approximation
guarantees:
Theorem 8. Fix 0 < µ < 1 and 0 < δ < 1. Let p′ and p be the independent cascade probabili-
ties for probing and seeding. There can be no approximation algorithms that provide µOPT −ϵn
guarantees for k-IM when the querying and seeding cascade probability are diﬀerent, p ̸= p′, with
max{p,p′}/min{p,p′} = 1 + δ, cδ = 1 + (δ −δ2)/2 and
ϵ <
8µ(δ −δ2)cδ
41(2 −µ) + 16(δ −δ2)cδ
.
Stability and robustness of inﬂuence maximization are well-studied in light of uncertain cascade
probabilities (Chen et al. 2016, He and Kempe 2016, 2018, Wilder et al. 2017b). Chen et al. (2016,
Theorem 3) use phase transition behavior in Erdős-Rényi graphs to show that an O(1/n) additive
perturbation is enough to reduce the robust ratio (deﬁned as the maximum over all seed sets of
the minimum of approximation ratio of a seed set over the parameter range) to O(log n/n). In
Appendix B.13, we use a similar construction to prove Theorem 8. Let us denote ˆp = max{p,p′}
and ˇp = min{p,p′}. Our hard example consists of a clique, G1, of size 2ϵn/µ, and a second subgraph,
G2, that is obtained from the realization of a random graph with edge probability (1 −δ/2)/(nϵ,µˇp)
on the remaining nϵ,µ := (1 −2ϵ/µ)n nodes. We choose ˇp = Ω(log n/n) such that active edges on G1
constitute a connected component of size of ϵn, with high probability as n →∞. However, when the
cascade probability is ˇp, the active edges on G2 constitute a random graph with edge probability
(1 −δ/2)/nϵ,µ so that the the largest connected component on G2 is with high probability O(log n).
For k = 1, it is optimal to choose one of the 2ϵn/µ nodes in G1 as the seed when the cascade
probability is ˇp. On the other hand, if the cascade probability is ˆp = (1 + δ)ˇp, then the active edges
induce a random graph with edge probability cδ/nϵ,µ on G2 where cδ = 1 + (δ −δ2)/2 > 1. With
high probability as n →∞, this random graph contains a giant connected component of size fδn,
satisfying fδ = 1 −e−fδcδ > 1 −e−cδ > 2ϵn/µ. In Appendix B.13, we use common techniques from
connectivity analysis of random graphs and the emergence of the giant connected component therein
to bound the expected spread size from seeding a node in either of the two subgraphs (G1 and
G2). Subsequently, we show that for ϵ suﬃciently small, any k-IM approximation algorithm that
provides a µOPT −ϵn guarantee, should necessarily seed G1 when the cascade probability is ˇp and

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
24
G2 when the cascade probability is ˆp. Therefore, no such approximation algorithm exists when when
the probe and cascade probabilities are diﬀerent, i.e., with ˆp ̸= ˇp = 1 + δ > 1.
If p is known and the PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p′) data is collected such that p′ > p, then one can use a
simple pruning procedure to correct for the diﬀerence between p′ and p by removing the edges of
G′(1)
ρ,τ, ..., G′(T )
ρ,τ independently with probability 1 −p/p′. Given the output of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p′),
the algorithm in Appendix B.14 performs such a pruning and returns a corrected set G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ
that exactly simulates the output of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p). On the other hand, the dependent sampling
process by which G′(1)
ρ,τ, ..., G′(T )
ρ,τ are generated prevents us from using a similar post-processing
(e.g., by combining G′(1)
ρ,τ, ..., G′(T )
ρ,τ into union graphs) when p′ < p. The reason is that diﬀerent edges
have diﬀerent probability of appearing in a subsampled graph (G′(i)
ρ,τ), depending on their network
location and realization of other edges in G′(i)
ρ,τ — edges that are connected to more inﬂuential nodes
or other queried edges are more likely to be queried. In practical applications of edge queries (e.g.,
when running surveys to help diﬀuse health interventions), one can incentivize survey participants
to reveal more edges and trace enough of them to ensure p′ > p, albeit at an increased cost.
4. Costs and beneﬁts of network information
We can study the value of network information by examining how the expected spread size changes
as more queries are used to select the seeds; that is, we can vary T and ρ in our algorithms. In
this section, simulations of spread sizes with increased queries on an empirical network indicate the
existence of an inﬂection point, whereby the ﬁrst few queries improve the performance signiﬁcantly
before hitting a notably diminished returns. When this is the case, we can extract the beneﬁts of
the network information using just a few queries.
In particular, we conduct simulations with the Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) Face-
book social network, with 41,536 nodes, average degree 65.59, and a total of 1,362,220 edges. It is
the largest network in a collection of Facebook social networks in 100 U.S. colleges and universities
described by Traud et al. (2012). Note that although the social network is known by the platform in
advance, the friends lists are not available to, e.g., the electronic commerce companies that operate
on the Facebook platform and can be collected through costly eﬀort.
Figure 6 shows the performance of Algorithms 2 and 3 (PROBE & SEED) on the Penn State
Facebook social network. Running the PROBE algorithm with higher values of T leads to discovery
of more nodes and edges from the social network. The vertical axes show the mean spread sizes from
seeding the output of Algorithm 3 for each T using 50 random inputs. Recall that each input is a set
of T probed samples G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ that is obtained through Algorithm 2. The output performance
improves with increasing T, since with more nodes and edges revealed, the output seed set can be
better optimized; nevertheless, there are diminishing returns to the increasing network information.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
25
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
20
40
60
6
9
12
15
0
10
20
30
edges queried (mean %)
T
spread size (mean %)
k
G
10
4
2
(A) nρ = 10
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
20
40
60
6
9
12
15
0
10
20
30
edges queried (mean %)
T
spread size (mean %)
k
G
10
4
2
(B) nρ = 100
Figure 6
The mean spread sizes from seeding the output of Algorithm 3 applied to the Penn State Facebook
social network as T is increased for (A) 10 and (B) 100 initial nodes. To estimate the inﬂuence of
each output seed set, we average the spread sizes over 500 independent cascades with p = 0.01. To
generate the T subsampled graphs (G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ) that are input to the SEED algorithm, we run the
PROBE algorithm starting from nρ initial nodes, randomly chosen, and vary T over a logarithmic scale:
T ∈{0,1,2,3,4,5,7,8,10,13,16,20,24,30}. Note that the T = 0 case corresponds to random seeding
(using no network information at all). For each T, we run the PROBE algorithm 50 times to generate
50 random inputs for the SEED algorithm. The vertical axes in (A) and (B) show the mean spread sizes
and 95% conﬁdence intervals that are computed over the 50 outputs of the SEED algorithm for each T.
Their top axes show the average number of revealed edges that is computed over the 50 random inputs
for each T. The complete-information, greedy baseline at each k is marked by a dashed line.
Figure 6B shows that we can extract the beneﬁts of complete network information using just T = 30
iterations: with enough information, the mean spread size from seeding the output of the algorithm
saturates at the complete-information (deterministic) greedy algorithm output, and acquiring more
network information does not improve the performance beyond that.
It is worth noting that the random variations in the algorithm output — hence, the width of the
conﬁdence intervals — also decreases with the increasing network information in the input. There
are two sources of randomness in the SEED algorithm’s performance: T < ∞and ρ < 1. The output
variance for large T remains non-vanishing in Figure 6A; however, increasing the number of initial
nodes, i.e., the size of the sample set (card(Vρ) = nρ), from 10 nodes in Figure 6A to 100 nodes in
Figure 6B allows us to remove the remnant randomness from the algorithm output at large T.
Our algorithms and these simulation results add important nuance to recent discussions of the
value of network information. Akbarpour et al. (2020) show that, for special classes of random graph
inputs, seeding k+x nodes at random (using no information about the network) for some x ∈ω(1) is
enough to outperform the optimum spread size with k nodes, as the network size increases (n →∞).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
26
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0
2000
4000
0
10
20
30
T
mean profit
k
●
10
4
2
(A) CS = 100, CT = 200
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
10
20
30
T
mean profit
k
●
10
4
2
(B) CS = 200, CT = 100
Figure 7
The mean proﬁt from seeding the output of Algorithm 3, given the cost of seeds (CS per seed), iterations
cost (CT per iteration), and unit revenue per adopter. The vertical axis shows the mean proﬁts and
conﬁdence intervals that are computed from 50 executions of the algorithms with increasing T and 100
initial nodes. (7A) When CS = 100 and CT = 200, the maximum expected proﬁt is achieved at k = 10
with no queries. (7B) Increasing the cost of seeds to CS = 200 and decreasing the cost of iterations to
CT = 100 changes the optimal operating point to k = 2 seeds with T = 13 iterations.
They conclude that the beneﬁts of acquiring network information to identify the optimal k seeds
can be oﬀset by seeding a few more nodes at random (without using any network information). We
complement the results of Akbarpour et al. (2020) in two ways. First, we measure how many queries
are needed to yield the same expected spread sizes achievable using full knowledge of the network.
Second, in our framework we can make the trade-oﬀbetween acquiring network information and
using more seeds explicit by seeding more nodes and reducing the number of queries to keep the
performance ﬁxed. If we assume a cost, CS, for each seeded node and another cost, CT, for running
each PROBE iteration, and a unit revenue per each adoption, then there is a number of iterations
that is expected proﬁt maximizing for a given number of seeds. In Figure 7, the maximum expected
proﬁt for CS = 100 and CT = 200 is achieved with k = 10 and T = 0 iterations, i.e., randomly seeding
with the largest seed set size considered (Figure 7A). However, increasing the cost of the seeds to
CS = 200 and decreasing the cost of the iterations to CT = 100 reverses this result (Figure 7B), and
the optimum operating point shifts to k = 2 and T = 13.
5. Discussion and future directions
We addressed the problem of choosing the k most inﬂuential nodes when the social network is
unknown and accessing it is costly. We analyzed two ways of acquiring network information by
observing inﬂuence spread of random nodes (inﬂuencing sampling) and by revealing the identity of

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
27
neighboring nodes in an adjacency list (edge queries). We provided polynomial-time algorithms with
almost tight approximation guarantees using a bounded number of queries to the graph structure
(Theorems 2 and 7). We also provided hardness results to show that multiplicative approximation
guarantees are generally impossible (Theorems 1 and 4) and to lower-bound the query complexity
and show tightness of our query bounds for providing approximation guarantees with an additive
loss (Theorems 3 and 6). Finally, we showed the utility of our bounded-query framework for studying
the trade-oﬀbetween the cost of acquiring more network information and the beneﬁt of increasing
the spread size.
The preceding results were for the independent cascade model over undirected graphs with a homo-
geneous cascade probability. In Appendix C.1, we discuss the extension of our results to directed
graphs. In Appendix C.2, we explain how our techniques can be applied to other commonly posited
models of diﬀusion, and in particular, we prove the following extension for the linear threshold
model (Kempe et al. 2015):
Theorem 9. For any arbitrary 0 < ϵ ≤1, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm for inﬂuence
maximization under the linear threshold model that covers (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn nodes in expectation
in O(nk2 log(n/ϵ)/ϵ3) time, using no more than nk⌈81k log(6nk/ϵ)/ϵ3⌉∈O(nk2 log(n/ϵ)/ϵ3) edge
queries.
Results that address problem of seeding with partial network information are nascent and we fore-
see many directions for future research in this area. It is possible to provide tighter approximation
guarantees or better query bounds if the input graph follows a known distribution, e.g., the stochas-
tic block model (Wilder et al. 2018) or if individuals can directly report on who is inﬂuential by,
e.g., recalling frequent origins of past cascades (Banerjee et al. 2019, Flodgren et al. 2011). Thus, an
important venue for future work is to explore other ways of acquiring information about the graph
structure. For example, one can draw inspiration from the graph sampling literature to devise new
query methods (Leskovec and Faloutsos 2006) to obtain subsampled graphs that preserve enough
network information to perform inﬂuence maximization satisfactorily. We are particularly interested
in queries that measure the spread of inﬂuence subject to time constraints. This is especially relevant
in practice when spending time on data collection is costly and decision-makers have preference for
earlier rather than later adoptions (Libai et al. 2013) or prefer diﬀusions among certain subgroups
more than others. We speculate that operational considerations such as unequal, time-critical adop-
tions and privacy concerns in data collection open new venues for future methodological and applied
works that build on the same foundation as ours.
Broadly, our results highlight the importance of thinking through data collection in conjunction
with planned interventions. Natural sampling methods can be re-designed to optimize for interven-
tion outcomes (Algorithms 1 and 2). Beyond the co-design of sampling and targeting algorithms

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
28
presented here, it is important to plan the data collection eﬀorts with attention to their intervention
contexts. For example, in the absence of reliable information about the spread, collecting network
data without attention to diﬀusion parameters can lead to unsatisfactory outcomes (Theorem 8).
Our lower bounds (Theorems 3 and 6) point to the implied cost of data collection, which in practice
can pose a major bottleneck. Notwithstanding, explicit understanding of these costs helps practi-
tioners in value of information analysis and in deciding on how to allocate their limited resources
between data collection and increased intervention (Section 4). Future work can bring out other
trade-oﬀs that are inherent in this co-design framework, e.g., by focusing on the privacy costs of
data collection and its beneﬁts to various subgroups (measured in terms of the intervention out-
comes). With the increasing prevalence of data-driven intervention designs and policy practices,
understanding such trade-oﬀs has important implications for social welfare.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the research assistantship of Md Sanzeed Anwar through the support
from the Institute for Data, Systems, and Society at MIT. The authors would like to thank the two anonymous
reviewers and the associate editor whose close reading of the paper and thoughtful comments were instrumen-
tal to the development of the paper through its revisions. Eckles acknowledges a grant from Amazon, which
partially supported Rahimian while at MIT. Mossel is supported by ONR grant N00014-16-1-2227, NSF
grant CCF-1665252 and ARO MURI grant W911NF-19-0217. Rahimian acknowledges computing hardware,
software, and research consulting provided through the Pitt Center for Research Computing (Pitt CRC).
The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
29
Appendix A: Additional related work
Our INF-SAMPLE algorithm uses O(k2 log n) inﬂuence samples to seed k nodes approximately
optimally (Theorem 2). Our (1−1/e)OPT−ϵn approximation guarantee for INF-SAMPLE matches
the (1−1/e)OPT multiplicative factor that is tight for k-IM but suﬀers an ϵn additive loss. Theorem
1 shows that the additive loss is impossible to avoid with a sub-linear sample size. Theorem 3 shows
that even an ϵn additive guarantee is impossible if the number of samples is sub-quadratic in k,
therefore, the quadratic order dependence of sample size on k is also hard to improve. In the PROBE
algorithm, we organize our edge queries to approximately simulate T ∈O(k log n) independent
cascades each starting from the same set of nρ ∈O(k log n) randomly sampled nodes. The nuanced
implementation of PROBE allows us to construct these simulations using only a bounded number of
edge queries, while still preserving enough information in its output to select k seeds approximately
optimally by applying the SEED algorithm (Theorem 7).
Since an earlier version of the present work (Eckles et al. 2019), sample complexity of inﬂuence
maximization is treated thoroughly by Sadeh et al. (2020). Through a careful analysis, Sadeh et al.
(2020) are able to upper-bound the variance of the number of adopters at a ﬁxed diﬀusion step
in term of the expected number of adopters and the diﬀusion step. This variance upper bound
allows them to eﬃciently control the estimation error of the spread sizes by relaxing the relative
error requirements when seed sets produce small spreads. Subsequently, Sadeh et al. (2020) give a
sample complexity bound of O(ktlog n) where t is the number of diﬀusion steps. This is the best
known upper bound on the number of simulations required for achieving tight k-IM approximation
guarantees but is still super-linear in the worst-case because the number of diﬀusion steps t can be
of the order of the network size n. It is worth noting that the O(ktlog n) bound applies to i.i.d.
simulations of the spread and is achieved using an adaptive sample size — their implementation
of the approximate greedy algorithm uses O(k3tlog n) simulations, and they are not directly con-
cerned with limiting access to the input graph. On a broader scope, reverse inﬂuence sampling, i.e.,
collecting inﬂuence samples on the transposed graph with edge directions reversed — proposed by
Borgs et al. (2014) — has been successfully applied in the design of k-IM algorithms with practical
eﬃciency and near-optimal run time (Nguyen et al. 2016, Tang et al. 2015, 2014). For undirected
graphs we can collect our inﬂuence samples on the original graph (as opposed to its transpose),
and by allowing for an ϵn additive loss, we can achieve our (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn guarantee on gen-
eral graphs using O(k2 log n) inﬂuence samples; thus avoiding the linear dependence on n which is
prohibitive when network information is limited and costly.
More broadly, the inﬂuence sampling framework relates to recent advances in application of
stochastic oracles for submodular maximization with imperfect information. Karimi et al. (2017)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
30
consider a class of discrete optimization problems where the objective function is expressed as
an expectation over submodular functions and can be estimated by sample averaging but is not
explicitly available and cannot be used as a black box oracle for the greedy algorithm. Their approach
is by lifting the objective function into the continuous domain using a concave upper-bound on its
multilinear extension. The concave upper-bound is guaranteed to be no more than e/(e −1)-times
the optimization objective and can be maximized eﬃciently through projected stochastic gradient
ascent. The ﬁnally transfer the solution back to the discrete domain using a randomized rounding
technique that preservers the quality of approximation in expectation. The fast convergence result
of Karimi et al. (2017) applies to the total number of gradient steps required for maximizing the
concave relaxation of the objective function and is given by T = ⌈B2ρ2/ϵ2⌉where ϵ is an additive
loss in the approximation guarantee, ρ is a bound on the gradient norms, and B is a bound on
the norm of the continuous optimization variable (Karimi et al. 2017, Theorem 2). In the case of
k-IM on an n node network while subgradients can be estimated by BFS on inﬂuence samples, with
ρ = √n and B =
√
k, we need a total of T = O(nk) stochastic gradient steps, thus suﬀering the same
prohibitive linear dependence on n (Karimi et al. 2017, Lemma 4).
Another related body of literature studies optimizing submodular functions based on input-output
data pairs that are sampled from a distribution over feasible inputs (e.g., uniformly over all input sets
of size k). In the k-IM setup, this learning-theoretic framework implies that the observed data consist
of pairs of initial nodes and expected number of adopters for cascades initiated from those nodes.
Balkanski et al. (2017b) show hardness of approximation for maximizing coverage functions under
cardinality constraints (including k-IM) using polynomially many samples from any distribution,
whereas for monotone submodular functions with bounded curvature more positive results can be
achieved with polynomial sample size (Balkanski et al. 2016). Our inﬂuence sampling framework is
principally diﬀerent from the learning-theoretic framework of optimization from samples because we
cannot observe the exact value of the inﬂuence function but instead see a random realization of the
adopters for each input. Moreover, each inﬂuence sample starts from a random initial node and our
inputs are not constrained to be subsets of size k. Balkanski et al. (2017a) consider an adaptation
of the optimization from samples framework to k-IM where each sample consists of the number of
adopters in a random cascade. They oﬀer an algorithm to list nodes in the order of their decreasing
expected marginal contributions to a random set, and then iteratively remove those whose marginal
contribution signiﬁcantly overlaps with an earlier node on the list. Estimating marginal contributions
in this framework requires polynomially many samples (Balkanski et al. 2017a, Lemma 15; the exact
dependence on n is not clariﬁed but O(n) appears to suﬃce), while the performance guarantees are
applicable only to stochastic block model random input graphs, (Balkanski et al. 2017a, Theorems
6 and 12).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
31
Appendix B: Proofs & other mathematical details
B.1. Proof of Theorem 1: Hardness of approximation with inﬂuence samples
Pick an arbitrary function f(n) ∈o(n), and let g(n) =
p
n/f(n). Note that g(n) ∈ω(1). Consider an
algorithm Alg that uses f(n) inﬂuence samples. Whe show that Alg cannot be a µ-approximation.
Our hard example consists of a clique of size g(n), chosen uniformly at random, and n−g(n) isolated
nodes and we aim to seed one node (Figure 1). One can bound the probability that Alg queries a
node from the clique by
1 −

1 −g(n)
n
f(n)
= 1 −

1 −g(n)
n

n
g(n)2
≤1 −

1 −1
e

1
g(n)
.
Moreover, since g(n) ∈ω(1) we have 1 −
 1 −1
e

1
g(n) ∈o(1). If Alg does not see a node via inﬂuence
samples, it seeds one of the nodes of the clique with probability at most
g(n)
n−f(n) ∈o(1). There-
fore, the expected number of nodes covered by Alg is at most o(1)g(n) + 1, which means that the
approximation factor of Alg is o(1)g(n)+1
g(n)
∈o(1) as claimed.
B.2. Proof of Theorem 2: Approximation guarantees with bounded inﬂuence samples
Recall our notation in the INF-SAMPLE algorithm. The output of the algorithm, Λ⋆, is a set of k
nodes that are chosen, one by one, in k iterations. Let us use Λ⋆i to denote the ﬁrst selected i seeds.
In the i-th iteration, we choose ρ initial nodes at random (with replacement) and collect inﬂuence
samples. We use Ai
j to denote the j-th inﬂuence sample collected during the i-th iteration. We reset
Ai
j to ∅if it contains any of the i −1 nodes selected in the previous iterations. We consider the
pool of candidates, u ∈V \ Λ⋆i−1, and choose the i-th seed to be the one that appears in the most
Ai
j’s. To put this in mathematical notation, let Xi
u,j = 1{u ∈Ai
j} be the indicator that u belongs to
Ai
j, and set Xi
u = Pρ
j=1 Xi
u,j to count the number of times that u appears in any of the subsets Ai
1,
..., Ai
ρ. Subsequently, in step i, we choose v⋆= arg maxu∈V\Λ⋆i−1 Xi
u and add it to Λ⋆.
We analyze the iterations of Algorithm 1 and show that for ϵ′ = ϵ/3 and ρ = ρn,k
ϵ
=
⌈3k log(2nk/ϵ′)/ϵ′3⌉, the output of INF-SAMPLE(ρ,k) satisﬁes the desired approximation guar-
antee. Let us deﬁne random variable N i
u to be the expected number of nodes that are covered by
Λ⋆i−1 ∪{u} but not by Λ⋆i−1. Note the probability that Xi
u,j = 1 is equal to N i
u/n. Therefore, we
have E[(n/ρ)Xi
u] = E[N i
u]. Moreover, notice that choosing ν⋆∈V \Λ⋆i−1 to maximize E[N i
u] is equiv-
alent to one step of the greedy algorithm. This is equivalent to choosing ν⋆∈V \Λ⋆i−1 to maximize
E[Xi
u], since E[(n/ρ)Xi
u] = E[N i
u].
Next note that due to submodularity, the marginal values only decrease as we add more elements.
Hence, if we stop at the i-th iteration satisfying E[N i
u] < ϵ′n/k for all candidates u ∈V \ Λ⋆i−1,
then in total we do not loose more than k(ϵn/k) = ϵn. For the sake of analysis, let us assume that
the algorithm stops when E[N i
u] < ϵ′n/k for all u, i.e., the algorithm stops if it selects k seeds or

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
32
E[N i
u] < ϵ′n/k for all u, whichever comes ﬁrst. This allows us to lower-bound the expected spread size
from seeding the output of Algorithm 1. In reality, any additional node that the algorithm selects
will only improve the expected spread size of its output. Henceforth, without loss of generality, we
assume that maxu E[N i
u] ≥ϵ′n/k which means that we have E[Xi
u] ≥ϵ′ρ/k.
Recall that Xi
u is the sum of i.i.d. binary random variables Xi
u,j. Hence, by the Chernoﬀbound
we have
P

|Xi
u −E[Xi
u]| ≥ϵ′E[Xi
u]

≤2exp

−ϵ′2E[Xi
u]
3

E[Xi
u] ≥ϵ′ρ/k
≤2exp

−ϵ′3ρ
3k

ρ =
81k log(6nk/ϵ)
ϵ3

=
3k log(2nk/ϵ′)
ϵ′3

= ϵ′
nk·
Union bound over all u ∈V and 1 ≤i ≤k provides that with probability at least 1−ϵ′, (1−ϵ′)E[Xi
u] ≤
Xi
u ≤(1+ϵ′)E[Xi
u] for all u and i. This implies that the seed that our algorithm selects has marginal
increase at least
1−ϵ′
1+ϵ′ ≥1 −2ϵ′ times that of the greedy algorithm. Such an algorithm is called
(1−2ϵ′)-approximate greedy in Golovin and Krause (2011) and it is proven to return a (1−1/e−2ϵ′)-
approximate solution Badanidiyuru and Vondrák (2014), Golovin and Krause (2011), Kumar et al.
(2015). Therefore, we can bound the expected value of the output solution of INF-SAMPLE(ρ,k)
as follows:
E[Λ⋆] ≥(1 −ϵ′)[(1 −1/e −ϵ′)OPT −ϵ′n]
≥(1 −ϵ′)[(1 −1/e)OPT −2ϵ′n]
≥(1 −1/e)OPT −3ϵ′n = (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn.
B.3. Proof of Theorem 3: Lower-bounding the required number of inﬂuence samples
Fix any 0 < µ < 1, 0 < ϵ < µ/k, and set β = 0.5(µ −kϵ −1 −2/k). Consider our hard example
in Figure 3 with n > k2. Note that given the complete network information in this example, the
optimum strategy is to seed the k centers of each of the k stars, which achieves OPT = k(n/k2) = n/k
expected spread size. Let Alg be any algorithm that seeds optimally using less than βk2 inﬂuence
samples. We will show that the expected spread size from seeding the output of Alg is strictly less
than µOPT−ϵn. To upper-bound the expected spread size from seeding the output of Alg, consider
a reduction from the following problem, which we call SEED-STAR:
Problem 1 (SEED-STAR). The input graph is restricted to be a collection of k stars of size n/k
each (as in Figure 3), and the algorithm observes a ﬁxed number of inﬂuence sample from the input
graph. Furthermore, if an inﬂuence sample contains the center of a star subgraph, then the entire
star subgraph is revealed to the algorithm. Given the inﬂuence samples and revealed star subgraphs,
the SEED-STAR problem is to choose k seeds such that their expected spread size is maximal.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
33
Let Alg′ be any optimal algorithm using less than βk2 inﬂuence samples for the SEED-STAR
problem. Consider the outputs of Alg and Alg′ on the hard example in Figure 3. Because both Alg
and Alg′ seed optimally given βk2 inﬂuence samples, and Alg′ has strictly more information than
Alg, the expected spread size from seeding the output of Alg′ is at least as large as Alg; hence,
it suﬃces to upper-bound the expected spread size from seeding the output of Alg′. Note that an
optimal seed set of size k for Alg′ should include the centers of all the revealed stars. If less than k
stars are revealed, then it is optimal for Alg′ to choose the remaining seeds randomly from among
the sampled leaf nodes that do not belong to any of the revealed stars. Any such leaf node will
contribute
1 + 1
k + 1
k2
n
k −2

< 1 + 1
k + n
k3 .
Because there at most k such leaf nodes the total contribution of the leaf nodes to the expected
spread size of the out of Alg′ is at most k + 1 + n/k2. Next we show that the probability of a new
star being revealed to Alg′ as a result of an inﬂuence sample is always strictly less than 2/k. To see
why, note that if the initial node of the inﬂuence sample belongs to a previously seen star then this
probability is zero. Conditioned on the initial node belonging to a new star, then inﬂuence sample
will reveal the star if it is its center node, which happens with probability k/n, or if it is a leaf
node and its incident edge is activated, which happens with probability at most 1/k. Hence, the
probability of a new start being revealed at any inﬂuence sample is upper-bounded by
k
n + 1
k < 2
k,
where the last inequality is because of the assumption n > k2. Therefore, the expected number of
stars that are revealed by βk2 inﬂuence samples is at most 2βk. Any such star contributes n/k2 to
expected spread size of the output of Alg′. We can thus upper-bound the expected spread size from
seeding the output of Alg′, as therefore Alg, as follows:
(2βk) n
k2 + k + 1 + n
k2 < ((2β + 1)k + 2) n
k2 = µOPT −ϵn,
using n > k2 in the last inequality. The proof follows as with Alg being optimal, no algorithms can
provide an approximation guarantee that exceeds µOPT−ϵn, using less than βk2 inﬂuence samples
on this example.
B.4. Proof of Theorem 4: Hardness of approximation with edge queries
We present our hard example for k = 1 and p = 1. Moreover, for simplicity of presentations we
assume that 3/µ, 1/µ2, and µ2n/9 are integers. Consider the following two graphs.
• G: This graph consists of 9/µ2 cliques, each of size µ2n/9.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
34
• G′:
This graph is constructed from G via the following random process. We select
3
µ
clusters uniformly at random. Then we select one edge from each selected cluster uni-
formly at random. Let (v1,u1),(v2,u2),...(v3/µ,u3/µ) be the list of the selected edges. we
remove (v1,u1),(v2,u2),...(v3/µ,u3/µ) and replace them by (u1,v2), (u2,v3), ..., (u3/µ−1,v3/µ),
(u3/µ,v1). Note that this process connects all of the selected clusters while preserving the node
degree (see Figure 5).
Let Alg be an arbitrary (potentially randomized) algorithm for inﬂuence maximization that queries
less than (µ3/27)
 µ2n/9
2

edges. Note that with k = 1 an optimum seed on G′ spreads to OPT = µn/3
nodes. Next we show that the expected spread size form seeding the output of Alg on G′ is less than
µ2n/3, which means that Alg is not an µ-approximation algorithm. This implies that there is no
µ-approximation algorithm that queries less than (µ3/27)
 µ2n/9
2

∈Oµ(n2) edges as claimed.
We use the result of Alg on G to analyze the run of Alg on G′. Note that due to symmetric
construction of G we can assume that Alg seeds one of the nodes of G uniformly at random. Observe
that the expected spread size of a random seed in G′ is

1 −3/µ
9/µ2
 µ2n
9
+ 3/µ
9/µ2
3
µ
µ2n
9
≤2µ2n
9
·
Moreover, note that the run of Alg on G and G′ is the same unless Alg queries one of the positions
(i.e., edges) that we change in G to construct G′. In what follows, we upper-bound the probability
that Alg queries one of the changed positions in G by µ/3. This implies that Alg cannot be a
µ-approximation because its expected spread size is strictly less than µOPT:

1 −µ
3
 2µ2n
9
+ µ
3
3
µ
µ2n
9
< µ2n
3
= µOPT.
To ﬁnish the proof, we need to bound the probability that Alg queries one of the changed positions
in G. Let Ai be the (possibly random) number of edges that Alg queries from the i-th clique. Recall
that by assumption, Alg queries less than (µ3/27)
 µ2n/9
2

edges. Hence, with probability one (with
respect to randomness of Alg), we have Ai < (µ3/27)
 µ2n/9
2

. Therefore, the total probability (with
respect to randomness of Alg and G′) that Alg queries a changed position in the i-th clique is
upper-bounded by
(µ3/27)
 µ2n/9
2

 µ2n/9
2

= µ3
27·
By a union bound over all 9/µ2 cliques we can upper-bound the probability that Alg queries a
changed position by (9/µ2)(µ3/27) = µ/3, as claimed. This completes the proof of the theorem.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
35
B.5. Proof of Lemma 1: Combining additive and multiplicative approximation loss
Starting with an approximate solution satisfying Γδ(Λ′
δ) ≥αOPTδ −βn on the one hand, we have
Γ(Λ′
δ) + ϵn ≥Γδ(Λ′
δ),
(8)
since |Γδ(Λ′
δ) −Γ(Λ′
δ)| ≤ϵn.
On the other hand, consider Λδ and Λ, which are the optimum seed sets for Γδ and Γ, respectively.
By assumption we have Γδ(Λ′
δ) ≥αΓδ(Λδ) −βn, and since, by optimality of Λδ for Γδ, Γδ(Λδ) ≥
Γδ(Λ), we get
Γδ(Λ′
δ) ≥αΓδ(Λ) −βn ≥αΓ(Λ) −(β + αϵ)n
(9)
where, in the last inequality, we have again invoked the |Γδ(Λ) −Γ(Λ)| ≤ϵn property. The proof is
complete upon combining (8) and (9) to get that Γ(Λ′
δ) ≥αΓ(Λ) −(β + (α + 1)ϵ)n.
B.6. Proof of Lemma 2: Sub-sampling the node set
Fix a seed set S and let
(2 + ϵ)(δ′ + log 2)
2nϵ2
≤ρ ≤1.
We use a Hoeﬀding-Bernstein bound to claim that with probability at least 1 −e−δ′ we have
|Γρ(S) −Γ(S)| ≤ϵn.
(10)
Let Xv be the random variable that is zero if v is not in Vρ and φ(v,S) otherwise. Consider their
summation and note that
X
v∈V
Xv =
X
v∈Vρ
φ(v,S) = ρΓρ (S).
Hoeﬀding-Bernstein inequality (van der Vaart and Wellner 1996, Lemma 2.14.19) provides that
P



1
nρ
X
v∈Vρ
φ(v,S) −1
nΓ(S)

≥ϵ

= P[|Γρ(S) −Γ(S)| ≥ϵn]
≤2exp

−
2nρϵ2
2σ2
n + ϵ∆n

,
(11)
where ∆n = maxv∈V φ(v,S) −minv∈V φ(v,S) ≤1 and
σ2
n = 1
n
X
v∈V

φ(v,S) −1
nΓ(S)
2
= 1
n
X
v∈V
φ(v,S)2 −
 1
nΓ(S)
2
≤1
n
X
v∈V
φ(v,S) −
 1
nΓ(S)
2
= ℓ−ℓ2 ≤ℓ≤1.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
36
In the last equality, we used the notation ℓ:= (1/n)P
v∈V φ(v,S) = (1/n)Γ(S). The bound in (11)
subsequently simpliﬁes
P[|Γρ(S) −Γ(S)| ≥ϵn] ≤2exp

−2nρϵ2
2 + ϵ

.
Using nρ ≥(2 + ϵ)(δ′ + log 2)/2ϵ2, we get that for all δ′ > 0
P[|Γρ(S) −Γ(S)| ≥ϵn] ≤2exp(−(δ′ + log 2)) = e−δ′.
(12)
To complete the proof we use a union bound to claim that (10) holds for all choices of the seed
set S simultaneously. To claim a union bound over all
 n
k

choices of the seed sets S, it suﬃces to
choose δ′ = kδ log n in (12).
B.7. Proof of Lemma 3: Probing the extended neighborhoods
We
begin
by
considering
a
ﬁxed
S ⊂V.
Recall
Γ(T )
ρ (S) = (1/ρ)P
v∈Vρ φ(T )(v,S)
and
φ(T )(v,S) = (1/T)PT
i=1 Y (i)(v,S) for v ∈Vρ. When v ∈Vρ is ﬁxed, the Bernoulli variables
Y (1)(v,S),...,Y (T )(v,S) are independent and identically distributed with mean φ(v,S). By Chernoﬀ
bound to φ(T )(v,S), we get that:
P
φ(T )(v,S) −φ(v,S)
 > ϵ

≤2exp(−ϵ2T/3), for any ﬁxed v ∈Vρ.
Using T = T n,k
ϵ,δ , by union bound over the choice of
 n
k

seed sets S ⊂V, card(S) = k, and n nodes
v ∈V, we obtain that:
P
φ(T )(v,S) −φ(v,S)
 > ϵ, for all S and v

≤2exp(−δ −log 2) = e−δ.
The proof is complete upon considering the summation over v ∈Vρ:
P
Γ(T )
ρ (S) −Γρ(S)
 ≤ϵn, for all S

=
P



X
v∈Vρ
φ(T )(v,S) −
X
v∈Vρ
φ(v,S)

≤ϵnρ, for all S

≥
P
φ(T )(v,S) −φ(v,S)
 ≤ϵ, for all S and v

≥1 −e−δ.
B.8. Proof of Lemma 4: Limiting the size of the probed neighborhoods
Following the notation in Deﬁnition 1, let us use Λ(T )
ρ
and OPT(T )
ρ
to denote the maximizer of Γ(T )
ρ
and its maximal value subject to the size constraint: card(Λ(T )
ρ ) = k. Similarly, let us denote the
optimal solution to k-IM on Γ(T )
ρ,τ and its value by Λ(T )
ρ,τ and OPT(T )
ρ,τ , respectively. Moreover, following
Deﬁnition 2, let us use Λα,(T )
ρ
and Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
to denote the α-approximate solutions to k-IM on Γ(T )
ρ
and
Γ(T )
ρ,τ , respectively. Our goal is to show that for τ = τ n,k
ϵ
any Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
is also Λα(1−ϵ),(T )
ρ
.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
37
It is useful to think of G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ as subgraphs of G(1)
ρ ,...,G(T )
ρ
. An immediate consequence of
this observation is that for any set of nodes S, we have Γ(T )
ρ
(S) ≥Γ(T )
ρ,τ (S). We call the imaginary
process whereby G(i)
ρ,τ is obtained after removing some nodes and edges from G(i)
ρ
a τ-cutting, and
subsequently, we refer to G(i)
ρ,τ and G(i)
ρ
as the cut and uncut copies, respectively. Finally, it is also
useful to deﬁne φ(T )
τ
(v,S) in the exact same way as (3) but using the τ-cut copies G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ .
The proof follows (Bateni et al. 2017, Lemma 2.4) closely. In particular, we ﬁrst note that it
suﬃces to show the existence of a set L, card(L) = k satisfying Γ(T )
ρ,τ (L) ≥(1 −ϵ)OPT(T )
ρ . Because if
there exists such a set L, then for any α-approximate solution Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
we can write (recall Γ(T )
ρ
(S) ≥
Γ(T )
ρ,τ (S) for all S):
Γ(T )
ρ
 Λα,(T )
ρ,τ

≥Γ(T )
ρ,τ
 Λα,(T )
ρ,τ

≥αΓ(T )
ρ,τ
 Λ(T )
ρ,τ

≥αΓ(T )
ρ,τ (L) ≥(1 −ϵ)αOPT(T )
ρ ,
implying that Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
is also Λα(1−ϵ),(T )
ρ
. To show the existence of such a set L we use a probabilistic
argument by constructing a random set L, satisfying E

Γ(T )
ρ,τ (L)
 
≥(1 −ϵ)OPT(T )
ρ . The set L is
constructed is as follows: Starting from Λ(T )
ρ , remove ϵk of its nodes randomly, and replace them with
ϵk nodes chosen uniformly at random from V. To see why E

Γ(T )
ρ,τ (L)
 
≥(1 −ϵ)OPT(T )
ρ , consider
OPT(T )
ρ
= 1
ρ
X
v∈Vρ
φ(T )  v,Λ(T )
ρ

, and E

Γ(T )
ρ,τ (L)
 
=
X
v∈Vρ
E

φ(T )
τ
(v,L)
 
.
The inequality, E

Γ(T )
ρ,τ (L)
 
≥(1 −ϵ)OPT(T )
ρ , would follow if for any node v ∈V we have,
E

φ(T )
τ
(v,L)
 
≥(1 −ϵ)φ(T )(v,Λ(T )
ρ ) + ϵ ≥φ(T )(v,Λ(T )
ρ ).
It only remains to verify the truth of the former inequality, E

φ(T )
τ
(v,L)
 
≥(1−ϵ)φ(T )(v,Λ(T )
ρ )+ϵ.
First note that E

φ(T )
τ
(v,L)
 
represents the probability of node v being connected to one of the
nodes in the random set L averaged over the T subsampled graphs (G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ). Consider each
of the T copies in our uncut sketch, G(1)
ρ ,...,G(T )
ρ
, and the connections between node v and the
optimal set Λ(T )
ρ
in these uncut copies. If these connections remain unchanged in the τ-cut copies
G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ , then with probability at least (1 −ϵ) they remain unchanged after ϵk nodes in Λ(T )
ρ
are randomly replaced. If, however, any of these connections are aﬀected by the τ-cutting, then this
is an indication that v belongs to a connected component of size τ n,k
ϵ
. This connected component
is large enough to contain one of the ϵk random nodes of L with probability at least ϵ. Indeed, the
probability that none of the τ n,k
ϵ
= ⌈nlog (1/ϵ)/(ϵk)⌉nodes is chosen is upper-bounded by ϵ:

1 −τ n,k
ϵ
n
ϵk
≤

1 −log(1/ϵ)
ϵk
ϵk
≤e−log(1/ϵ) = ϵ.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
38
B.9. Proof of Lemma 5: Total approximation loss from subsampling and limited probing
Following the notation in the proof of Lemma 4 (Appendix B.8), consider any Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
. Lemma 4
implies that Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
is also Λ(1−ϵ)α,(T )
ρ
because the loss in approximation factor from limited probing
is at most (1−ϵ) when τ = τ n,k
ϵ
. Next note that Lemma 3, together with Lemma 1, implies that for
T = T n,k
ϵ,δ with probability at least 1 −e−δ, the value of Λ(1−ϵ)α,(T )
ρ
for Γρ can be lower-bounded as
follows: Γρ(Λ(1−ϵ)α,(T )
ρ
) ≥(1 −ϵ)αOPTρ −((1 −ϵ)α + 1)ϵn. Finally, another application of Lemma 1
with Lemma 2 yields that with at least 1 −e−δ probability, Γ(Λ(1−ϵ)α,(T )
ρ
) ≥(1 −ϵ)αOPT −2((1 −
ϵ)α + 1)ϵn. The proof is complete upon combining the preceding statements to get that, with total
probability at least 1 −2e−δ, Γ(Λα,(T )
ρ,τ
) ≥(1 −ϵ)αOPT −2((1 −ϵ)α + 1)ϵn.
B.10. Proof of Theorem 5: Upper-bounding the total number of edges queries
To begin, we bound the total number of edges used in our sketch, i.e., the T subsampled graphs
(G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ). Let us also denote the set of all edges that appear in our sketch by ET. Fix a choice
of τ nodes in one of the subsampled graphs. Let X be the number of edges between these τ nodes.
Note that X is a random variable and its distribution is ﬁxed by PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p). Using the
Chernoﬀupper tail bound and the fact that E[X] ≤p
 τ
2

, we can upper-bound X as follows:
P
h
X ≥pτ(τ −1)/2 + δ′p
pτ(τ −1)/2
i
≤P
h
X ≥E[X] + δ′p
E[X]
i
≤e−δ′2/4·
(13)
Recall from (6) that En,k
ϵ,p = pτ n,k
ϵ
(τ n,k
ϵ
−1)/2 = p
 τ
2

with τ = τ n,k
ϵ
. Setting τ = τ n,k
ϵ
and
δ′ = 2
q
(τ n,k
ϵ
log n + log T)δ ≥2
s
δ log

T
 n
τ n,k
ϵ

,
in (13) is enough to ensure that, by union bound, with probability at least 1 −e−δ for any subset
of size τ n,k
ϵ
in all of the T subsampled graphs, we have X ≤X, where
X := En,k
ϵ,p +
q
δ(τ n,k
ϵ
log n + log T)En,k
ϵ,p ·
(14)
Next note that starting from any of the nρ nodes in Vρ we never hit more than τ nodes following
the limited probing procedure — see the “while loop” condition in step 8 of the PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p)
algorithm. Moreover, the only way for the connected component of one of the nρ initial nodes in
G(i)
ρ,τ to get larger than τ is if an edge is added which combines two connected components each
containing at least one node in Vρ. Upon inclusion of any such edge in G(i)
ρ,τ, no further edges will be
added to the corresponding connected component because of the “while loop” condition in step 8
of PROBE. Hence, there could be at most nρ such edges in each of the subsampled graphs, and in
total there are at most nρT such edges in our sketch. Upon removing all such edges, any connected

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
39
component in the remainder of our sketch will have size at most τ and their total number is always
less than nρT. Given (14), we can bound the total number of edges in our sketch by nρT + nρTX.
More precisely, with probability at least 1 −e−δ, we have:
card(ET) ≤nρT(1 + X) = Cn,k
ϵ,δ ,
(15)
where ρ = ρn,k
ϵ,δ , T = T n,k
ϵ,δ , τ = τ n,k
ϵ
, and Cn,k
ϵ,δ is deﬁned in (6).
Note that during the construction of G(i)
ρ,τ, if the revealed neighbor (νι) in step 10 of the PROBE
algorithm is previously probed, then the following “if statement” in step 11 prevents the queried edge
from being added to G(i)
ρ,τ. Such edges are queried but not added to G(i)
ρ,τ because they have already
got their chance of appearing in G(i)
ρ,τ once (during the probing of νι). We can bound the number of
such edges in each copy as follows. Let A(i)
e
be the indicator variable for the event that both nodes
incident to edge e are probed; let B(i)
e
be the indicator that edge e is queried on its second chance,
i.e., when the second of the two nodes incident to e is probed. Finally, let C(i)
e
be the indicator
that edge e is queried when the second of its two incident nodes is probed, conditioned on both of
its incident nodes being probed (i.e., B(i)
e
conditioned on A(i)
e = 1). The edges e for which B(i)
e = 1,
are those which are queried but do not appear in G(i)
ρ,τ. In (15) we bound the total number of edges
belonging to ET, i.e., the edges that are queried and appear in one or more of the T subsampled
graphs. Our next goal is to provide a complementary bound on P
i
P
e B(i)
e , thus controlling the
total number of edge queries.
We begin by noting that B(i)
e = P
e A(i)
e C(i)
e . The indicator variables C(i)
e ,e ∈E, are i.i.d. Bernoulli
variables with success probability p. Using the Chernoﬀupper tail bound, conditioned on the real-
izations of A(i)
e
for all e ∈E, we have:
P
"X
e
A(i)
e C(i)
e ≥p
X
e
A(i)
e + 2n
p
δ + log T
#
≤exp

−
4n2 (δ + log T)
2

pP
e A(i)
e + n√δ + log T



≤exp(−δ −log T) = 1
T e−δ,
(16)
where in the last inequality we have used pP
e A(i)
e ≤n2 and √δ + log T ≤n. Union bound over
i = 1,...,T provides that with probability at least 1 −e−δ, for all i:
X
e
B(i)
e =
X
e
A(i)
e C(i)
e ≤p
X
e
A(i)
e + 2n
p
δ + log T.
(17)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
40
To proceed, for any edge e, let D(i)
e
be the indicator of the event that edge e gets at least one
chance to appear in G(i)
ρ,τ, i.e., at least one of the nodes incident to e are probed. Note that, by
deﬁnition, A(i)
e ≤D(i)
e
for all i and e; hence, replacing in (17) yields:
X
e
B(i)
e ≤p
X
e
D(i)
e + 2n
p
δ + log T,
(18)
with probability at least 1−e−δ for all i. In the next step, let E(i)
e
be the indicator of the event that
edge e is reported on its ﬁrst chance — i.e., the ﬁrst time that one of its incident nodes is probed.
Note that E(i)
e = 1 , e ∈E, are those edges which are queried and appear in G(i)
ρ,τ. Hence, from (15)
we have:
X
i
X
e
E(i)
e = card(ET) ≤Cn,k
ϵ,δ ,
(19)
with probability at least 1 −e−δ. Finally, let F (i)
e
be the indicator of the event that edge e is
reported on its ﬁrst chance, conditioned on at least one of its incident nodes being probed (i.e., E(i)
e
conditioned on D(i)
e = 1). By deﬁnition, F (i)
e
are i.i.d. Bernoulli variables with success probability
p, and E(i)
e = D(i)
e F (i)
e . Similarly to (16), using a Chernoﬀlower tail bound we can guarantee that,
with high probability, P
e E(i)
e = P
e D(i)
e F (i)
e
is not much smaller than pP
e D(i)
e . Subsequently, we
can upper-bound P
e B(i)
e
in (18) in terms of P
e E(i)
e . These details are spelled out next.
Application of the Chernoﬀlower tail bound to P
e E(i)
e = P
e D(i)
e F (i)
e , yields:
P
"X
e
E(i)
e =
X
e
D(i)
e F (i)
e
≤p
X
e
D(i)
e −n
p
2(δ + log T)
#
≤exp
 
−n2 (δ + log T)
pP
e D(i)
e
!
≤exp(−δ −log T) = 1
T e−δ,
where in the second inequality we use pP
e D(i)
e ≤n2. Union bound over i = 1,...,T provides that
with probability at least 1 −e−δ, for all i:
p
X
e
D(i)
e ≤
X
e
E(i)
e + n
p
2(δ + log T).
(20)
Combing (18) and (20) and taking the summation over i = 1,...,T gives that with probability at
least 1 −2e−δ:
X
i
X
e
B(i)
e ≤
X
i
X
e
E(i)
e +

2 +
√
2

Tn
p
δ + log T.
(21)
To complete the proof, we combine (19) and (21) to get the claimed upper bound on the total
number of edge queries:
q =
X
i
X
e
B(i)
e + card(ET) ≤2Cn,k
ϵ,δ +

2 +
√
2

T n,k
ϵ,δ n
q
δ + log T n,k
ϵ,δ ,
with probability at least 1 −3e−δ.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
41
B.11. Proof of Theorem 6: Lower-bounding the required number of edge queries
For this proof, we expand on our construction in Appendix B.4. We set k = 1 and prove the hardness
result for ﬁxed 0 < µ < 1 and 0 ≤ϵ < µ2/18, while assuming that 3/µ, 1/µ2, and nµ2/9 are all
integers for simplicity, without any loss in generality. We present our hard example for
p > 9
µ2
log n + c
n
and n > (18e¯c/µ2)4,
(22)
where ¯c = c + log(γµ/3)/c, c is a constant satisfying c > max{5 + 2log 2,1 −log(γ/6),−log(γµ/3)},
and 0 < γ < µ/6 is a constant that is ﬁxed arbitrarily. Note that p is allowed to vary with n subject
to (22). As in Appendix B.4, we rely on a modiﬁcation of a collection of 9/µ2 cliques by connecting
3/µ of them at random around a circle. One key diﬀerence in our construction here is that rather
than connecting each clique to the next one by rewiring a single link (as in Figure 5), we do so
using a collection of −p−1 log(γµ/6) edges, where 0 < γ < µ/6 is a ﬁxed constant. Let graph G be
the collection of 9/µ2 isolated cliques, each of size µ2n/9. We construct G′, our hard input graph,
from G via the following random process:
1. Select 3/µ cliques at random and label them by i = 1,2,3,...,3/µ.
2. Select
one
edge
from
each
of
the
3/µ
selected
cliques
uniformly
at
random.
Let
(v1,u1),(v2,u2),...(v3/µ,u3/µ) be the list of the ﬁrst 3/µ selected edges.
3. Remove (v1,u1),(v2,u2),...(v3/µ,u3/µ) and replace them by (u1,v2), (u2,v3), ..., (u3/µ−1,v3/µ),
(u3/µ,v1). Note that this process connects all of the selected clusters while preserving the degree
distribution (see Figure 5).
4. Repeat this process until −p−1 log(γµ/6) edges are chosen from each clique, i, and rewired to
connect to the proceeding clique, i + 1: 1 →2 →3 →... →i →i + 1 →... →3/µ →1.
We refer to these 3/µ cliques in graph G′ as rewired cliques; see Figure 5. Let Alg be an arbitrary
(potentially randomized) algorithm for inﬂuence maximization that queries less than pCϵ
µ,γn2 edges,
where
Cϵ
µ,γ =
−(µ6 −9µ4ϵ)
14580log(γµ/6).
We are interested in the run of Alg on G′. Note that with k = 1 the optimum on G′ is to seed one of
the nµ/3 nodes in the rewired cliques. The gist of our proof here is the same as the one in Appendix
B.4: we show that the optimum seed on G′ induces an expected spread size of at least (1 −γ)nµ/3;
on the other hand, seeding the output of any algorithm that queries less than pCϵ
µ,γn2 edges of G′,
induces an expected spread size that is at most (1 −γ)µ2n/3 < µOPT.
To begin, note that the active edges on each clique constitute an Erdős-Rényi random graph with
edge probability p on nµ2/9 nodes, except for the 3/µ rewired cliques. The edge probability, p,

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
42
satisfying (22) is large enough to induce a connected random graph on each of the 9/µ2−3/µ isolated
cliques (with high probability as n →∞). Similarly, since only, −p−1 log(γµ/6) ∈O(n/log n), of
the
 nµ2/9
2

edges in each of the 3/µ cliques are randomly chosen and rewired, the induced random
graphs on each of the 3/µ rewired cliques are also going to be connected with high probability as
n →∞. Hence, any time that a node in any of the cliques is activated, all of the nodes in that clique
are going to be activated. Formally, the probability that a pair of nodes in any of the clique are
connected by an active edge can be lower-bounded as follows:
9(log n + c)
nµ2
−−p−1 log(γµ/6)
 nµ2/9
2

= 9(log n + c)
nµ2
+
2(9/µ2)log(γµ/3)
(log n + c)(nµ2/9 −1)
n > ec
> 9(log n + c)
nµ2
+ (9/cµ2)log(γµ/3)
(nµ2/9 −1)
n > nµ2/9 −1
> 9(log n + c)
nµ2
+ (9/c)log(γµ/3)
nµ2
= log n + ¯c
¯n
=: ¯p,
where ¯c = c + log(γµ/3)/c is a constant term that is corrected for the eﬀect of the −p−1 log(γµ/6)
edges that are removed at random from each of the 3/µ rewired cliques and ¯n = nµ2/9 is the size
of each clique. Note that by assumption we have c > −log(γµ/3) which implies that c −1 < ¯c < c.
These edges are used to construct the graph G′ by connecting the rewired cliques together (Figure
5). Our next lemma allows us to upper-bound the probability that the active edges on a ﬁxed clique
do not constitute a connected graph.
Lemma 6. Let C be a random graph on ¯n nodes with edge probability ¯p = (log n + ¯c)/¯n, where
n = 9¯n/µ2, 0 < µ < 1, and ¯c > 2(2 + log 2) are ﬁxed constants. Let ¯C be the event that C is not
connected. If n > (18e¯c/µ2)4, then P( ¯C) < µ2e−¯c/3.
Proof.
We use a common technique in random graph theory to upper-bound the probability
that a random graph on ¯n nodes with edge probability ¯p is not connected. Following (Bollobás
2001, Theorem 7.3), P( ¯C) is upper-bounded by the sum of the expected values of the number of the
connected components of sizes j = 1,2,..., ¯n/2:
P( ¯C) <
¯n/2
X
j=1
E(Xj),
(23)
where Xj is a random variable that counts the number of connected components of size j in a random
graph on ¯n nodes with edge probability ¯p. We next bound the diﬀerent terms in (23) individually.
Starting with j = 1, we have:
E(X1) = ¯n(1 −¯p)¯n−1 < ¯nexp(−¯p¯n) = µ2e−¯c
9
·
(24)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
43
For j = 2, we have:
E(X2) =
¯n
2

¯p(1 −¯p)2(¯n−2) < ¯p¯n2 exp(−2¯p¯n)
= e−2¯cµ2
9
log n + ¯c
n
¯c < log n
< e−2¯cµ2
9
2log n
n
2log n/n ≤2/e < 1
< e−2¯cµ2
9
·
(25)
For 3 ≤j ≤¯n/2, we can bound E(Xj) by the expected number of trees on j nodes as follows:
E(Xj) ≤
¯n
j

jj−2¯pj−1(1 −¯p)j(¯n−j) < (¯ne/j)
j jj−2¯pj−1(1 −¯p)j(¯n−j)
<
j−2 exp(j + j log ¯n + (j −1)log ¯p −¯pj(¯n −j))
j−2 < 1
<
exp(j(1 −¯c) −j(1 −µ2/9)log n + (j −1)log ¯p + j2¯p)
j2¯p < j(log n + ¯c)/2 for all j ≤¯n/2
<
exp(j(1 −¯c/2) −(j/2 −µ2/9)log n + (j −1)log((log n + ¯c)))
µ2/9 < 1 and ¯c < log n
<
exp(j(1 −¯c/2) −(j −1)log n/2 + (j −1)log(2log n)))
−log 2 < 0
<
ej(1+log 2−¯c/2)  log n/√n
j−1
2(2 + log 2) < c −1 < ¯c and 3 ≤j
<
e−j(log n)2/n.
(26)
Replacing (24), (25), and (26) in (23) and using the fact that P¯n/2
j=1 e−j <
e
e−1 < 2 we get:
P( ¯C) < 2µ2e−¯c
9
+ 2(log n)2
n
= 2µ2e−¯c
9
+ (log n)2
n3/4
2
n1/4
(log n)2
n3/4
< 1
< 2µ2e−¯c
9
+
2
n1/4
(18e¯c/µ2)4 < n
< µ2e−¯c
3
,
ﬁnishing the proof.
Fix any of the 9/µ2 cliques and let ¯P be the probability that it is not connected. Note that
this probability is decreasing in the probability of the edges being active and because we lower-
bounded the latter by ¯p, it suﬃces to upper-bound ¯P assuming that the probability of having an
active edge between each pair of nodes is ¯p. Equipped with Lemma 6, we know that ¯P < µ2e−¯c/3
if n > (18e¯c/µ2)4. Next, consider the event that the active edges induce a disconnected graph on at
least one of the 9/µ2 cliques and denote this event by E1. By a union bound over the 9/µ2 cliques,

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
44
we obtain that P(E1) ≤(9/µ2) ¯P < 3e−¯c, which upon choosing ¯c > −log(γ/6) can be upper-bounded
by γ/2:
P(E1) < γ
2, for n > (18e¯c/µ2)4 and ¯c > −log(γ/6)·
(27)
We next consider the event that for at least one connected pair of rewired cliques, none of the
−p−1 log(γµ/6) rewired edges between them are active. Let us denote this event by E2. we upper-
bound P(E2) by γ/2. Consider the −p−1 log(γµ/3) edges connecting the i-th rewired clique to the
(i + 1)-th rewired clique and let Ai be the random variable that is the number of active edges
among these −p−1 log(γµ/3) edges. Random variable Ai has a Bernoulli distribution with parameters
−p−1 log(γµ/3) and p. Subsequently, we can bound the probability that Ai = 0 as follows:
P(Ai = 0) = (1 −p)−p−1 log(γµ/6) < elog(γµ/6) = γµ
6 ·
By a union bound over the 3/µ rewired cliques, we obtain that, with probability at most γ/2, there
is a pair of rewired cliques that are connected together but none of the −p−1 log(γµ/6) edges that
connect them are active:
P(E2) < γ/2·
(28)
Having thus upper-bounded both P(E1) and P(E2) by γ/2 in (27) and (28), we conclude that P(E1 ∪
E2) < P(E1) + P(E2) < γ. Subsequently, we can give a 1 −γ lower bound on the probability of the
complement event, Ec
1 ∩Ec
2, that the active edges induce a connected graph on each of the cliques and
at least one of the −p−1 log(γµ/6) rewired edges between each pair of connected cliques is active.
Hence, with probability at least 1 −γ, after seeding one of the nµ/3 nodes on the rewired cliques,
the activation is going to spread from one rewired clique to the next. In other words, seeding one of
rewired clique nodes activates all of the nµ/3 nodes on the rewired cliques with probability at least
1 −γ, and the optimal expected spread size on G′ is at least (1 −γ)nµ/3.
So far we have shown that the optimum on G′ is at least (1 −γ)nµ/3. Next we show that the
expected spread size from seeding the output of Alg on G′ is less than (1 −γ)µ2n/3, which means
that Alg cannot be a µ-approximation algorithm. This implies that there is no µ-approximation
algorithm that queries less than pCϵ
µ,γn2 ∈Oµ(pn2) edges as claimed.
We use the run of Alg on G to analyze the run of Alg on G′. Note that due to symmetric
construction of G, Alg seeds one of the nodes of G at random. Observe that the expected spread
size of a random seed in G′ is upper-bounded as follows:

1 −3/µ
9/µ2
 nµ2
9
+
 3/µ
9/µ2
 nµ
3 =

2 −µ
3
 µ2n
9
< 2(1 −γ)µ2n
9
,
(29)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
45
where the last inequality follows since γ < µ/6. Moreover, note that the runs of Alg on G and G′
are the same unless Alg queries one of the positions (i.e., edges) that we rewire in G to construct
G′. Next we upper-bound the probability that Alg queries one of the rewired edges by µ/3 −3ϵ/µ.
Using the upper bound in (29), this implies that the expected spread size from seeding the output
of Alg on G′ is at most (1 −γ)µ2n/3 −ϵn, as claimed:

1 −µ
3 + 3ϵ
µ
 2(1 −γ)µ2n
9
+
µ
3 −3ϵ
µ
 nµ
3 =

3 −2γ −2µ
3 (1 −γ) + 6ϵ
µ (1 −γ)
 µ2n
9
−ϵn
< (3 −2γ −µ
3 (1 −γ))µ2n
9
−ϵn
< (1 −γ)µ2n
3
−ϵn,
where the penultimate is because 6ϵ/µ < µ/3 and the last inequality is because µ(1 −γ)/3 > γ.
To see why, recall the assumptions ϵ < µ2/18 and γ < µ/6. In particular, with the latter we have
γ < µ(1 −1/6)/3 < µ(1 −µ/6)/3 < µ(1 −γ)/3.
To ﬁnish the proof, it only remains to verify that µ/3−3ϵ/µ is an upper bound on the probability
of Alg querying one of the rewired edges of G′. To this end, let Ai be the (possibly random) set of
all edges belonging to the i-th clique in G that are queried by Alg. Conditioned on Ai, consider any
of the edges belong to Ai. The probability that this speciﬁc edge is rewired when constructing G′
from G is at most:
−p−1 log(γµ/6)
 µ2n/9
2

·
Note that this probability is conditioned on the realization of Ai and is with respect to the random
process by which G′ is constructed from G. Therefore, conditioned on Ai, the probability that a
rewired edge belonging to the i-th clique is queried by Alg is at most:
card(Ai)−p−1 log(γµ/6)
 µ2n/9
2

3/µ
9/µ2 ≤
−pn2(µ6 −9µ4ϵ)
14580log(γµ/6)
 
−log(γµ/6)
p
 µ2n/9
2

!
µ
3
< n(µ2 −9ϵ)
90(n −9)
µ
3 < µ3
27 −ϵµ
3 ·
where, in the ﬁst inequality, we have used the assumption that Alg queries less than pCϵ
µ,γn2 edges;
therefore, card(Ai) ≤pCϵ
µ,γn2 with probability one. In the last inequality, we use the fact that
n/(90(n−9)) < 1/9 for n > 10, and in particular, for n > (18e¯c/µ2)4 > 184 in (22). By averaging over
all realization of Ai and a union bound over all of the 9/µ2 cliques, we can bound the probability
that Alg queries any rewired edge by (9/µ2)(µ3/27 −ϵµ/3) = µ/3 −3ϵ/µ, completing the proof.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
46
B.12. Proof of Theorem 7: Approximation guarantees with bounded edge queries
Given ϵ′ > 0, ﬁx ϵ = ϵ′/7, δ = 2log n and set ρ = ρn,k
ϵ,δ , T = T n,k
ϵ,δ
and τ = τ n,k
ϵ
according to
Algorithm 4. First we consider the approximation guarantee of SEED(ϵ,k). Running Algorithm
PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p), provides access to the submodular function Γ(T )
ρ,ϵ which has the k-IM optimal
solution Λ(T )
ρ,ϵ with value OPT(T )
ρ,ϵ . Using SEED(ϵ,k), we obtain an approximate solution to k-IM on
Γ(T )
ρ,ϵ . Call this solution Λ⋆(T )
ρ,ϵ . The analysis of (Mirzasoleiman et al. 2015, Theorem 1) implies that
E

Γ(T )
ρ,ϵ (Λ⋆(T )
ρ,ϵ )

≥(1 −1/e −ϵ)Γ(T )
ρ,ϵ (Λ(T )
ρ,ϵ )
= (1 −1/e −ϵ)OPT(T )
ρ,ϵ ,
where the expectation is with respect to the randomness of the SEED algorithm. We can combine
the claims of Lemma 5 and Theorem 5 with the assumption n ≥(30/ϵ′)2 >
p
35/ϵ′ =
p
5/ϵ to
guarantee that with probability at least 1 −5e−δ = 1 −5/n2 ≥1 −ϵ we have
Γ(Λ(T )
ρ,ϵ ) = OPT(T )
ρ,ϵ ≥(1 −ϵ)OPT −2(2 −ϵ)ϵn.
Thus the expected number of nodes that are covered by the output of SEED algorithm, Λ⋆(T )
ρ,ϵ , can
be lower-bounded as follows:
E

Γ(Λ⋆(T )
ρ,ϵ )

≥(1 −1/e −ϵ)E
h
OPT(T )
ρ,ϵ
i
≥(1 −1/e −ϵ)(1 −ϵ)((1 −ϵ)OPT −2(2 −ϵ)ϵn)
≥(1 −1/e −ϵ)(1 −2ϵ)OPT −4ϵn
≥(1 −1/e)(1 −2ϵ)OPT −(ϵ)(1 −2ϵ)OPT −4ϵn
≥(1 −1/e)OPT −7ϵn = (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵ′n,
where the ﬁrst expectation is with respect to the randomness of both SEED and PROBE, and the
second one is with respect to the randomness of PROBE.
Next we analyze the running times of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) and SEED(ϵ,k) algorithms. Let us denote
the expected number of edge queries by q. Using Theorem 5, we can upper bound q as follows:
q ≤(1 −3e−δ)Qn,k
ϵ,δ + 3e−δ(2Tn2) ≤Qn,k
ϵ,δ + 6T
∈Oϵ′(pn2 log4 n +
p
kpn1.5 log5.5 n + knlog3.5 n),
(30)
where Qn,k
ϵ,δ is given by (7) with ϵ = ϵ′/7 and δ = 2log n; and the 2Tn2 upper bound is by probing
every node (so that each edge is queried twice). Note that the n ≥√δ + log T condition in Theorem
5 is always satisﬁed for n ≥(30/ϵ′)2 with our choice of δ and T. Because with δ = 2log n we have
log T = log(3(δ + log 2)(k + 1)log n/ϵ2) < log(18nlog2 n/ϵ2) < 4log n for all n ≥(30/ϵ′)2 > 18/ϵ2;
therefore, √δ + log T < √6log n < n, the later being true for all n ≥3.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
47
Every iteration of the “while loop” in step 8 of the PROBE algorithm leads to an edge query, and
therefore, the expected run time of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p) is O(q). Note that the expected number of
edges in the T subsampled graphs is upper bounded by q. Hence, using any typical graph traversal
algorithm (such as DFS or BFS), we can identify the connected components of all the T subsampled
graphs in a time that is O(q). To compute ∆(v|Λ⋆), we go over the connected components of ν in
each of the T subsampled graphs and add up their values. These values are pre-computed for each
connected component, and hence this operation takes O(T) time. Recall that the value of a connected
component is initially set equal to its number of initial nodes (belonging to Vρ). After adding a node
v to Λ⋆, we reset the value of the connected components containing v in each of the T subsampled
graphs to zero (see steps 10 and 11 of the SEED algorithm). This ensures that if we later pick another
node from these components we do not double count those initial nodes that are already covered by
v. This process can be done in O(T) = Oϵ′(k log2 n) time, where T = T n,k
ϵ,δ in (5) with ϵ = ϵ′/7 and δ =
2log n. Finally, note that as step 9 of Algorithm 3 is repeated k times, the submodular maximization
algorithm that we are using makes no more than k · card(R) = nlog(1/ϵ) = nlog(7/ϵ′) = Oϵ′(n)
queries to the function ∆(·|·). Combining the preceding bounds with (30) puts the total running
time of SEED and PROBE algorithms in Oϵ′(pn2 log4 n + √kpn1.5 log5.5 n + knlog3.5 n) as claimed.
B.13. Proof of Theorem 8: Hardness of approximation with query discrepancy
Consider the probe and seed cascade probabilities, and denote their minimum and maximum by
ˇp := min{p,p′} and ˆp := max{p,p′}; by assumption, we have ˆp/ˇp = 1 + δ. We show when the query
and seed cascade probability are diﬀerent (given by p and p′), then for ϵ satisfying
ϵ <
8µ(δ −δ2)cδ
41(2 −µ) + 16(δ −δ2)cδ
< µ
2
, where cδ = 1 + (δ −δ2)/2,
(31)
there can be no k-IM approximation algorithm that guarantees an expected spread size of at least
µOPT−ϵn on any input graph with optimum expected spread size OPT. Let Alg be any such k-IM
approximation algorithm. Deﬁne nϵ,µ := (1 −2ϵ/µ)n and note that under (31) we have 2ϵ/µ < 1.
The input graph for our hard example is comprised of two subgraphs: G1 and G2. The former is a
clique of size 2ϵn/µ and the latter is a random graph with edge probability (1−δ/2)/(nϵ,µˇp) on the
remaining nϵ,µ nodes. We prove our hardness results for k = 1 under the following speciﬁcations:
n >
256
(ϵ −3µe−c −δ2)2 , and
(32)
ˇp = min{p,p′} > log n + c
2ϵn/µ
, where
(33)
c = max

2(2 + log 2),log

3µ
3 −δ2

·
First note that the expected spread size when seeding one of the G1 clique nodes is at most 2ϵn/µ,
irrespective of whether the cascade probability is p or p′. We use Lemma 6, with ¯n = 2ϵn/µ and ¯p = ˇp

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
48
satisfying (33), to provide a companion lower bound on the expected spread size when seeding G1.
Accordingly, if n > (µec/ϵ)4, then the probability that active edges on G1 do not form a connected
graph is at most 3µe−c/(2ϵ). Having established this lower bound for ˇp = min{p,p′}, it holds true
for either of the two cascade probabilities (p and p′) because increasing the cascade probability can
only increase the expected spread size.
So far we have shown that the expected spread size from seeding one of the G1 nodes is at most
2ϵn/µ and at least

1 −3µe−c
2ϵ
 2ϵn
µ = 2ϵn
µ −3ne−c,
both bounds being true irrespective of whether the cascade probability is p or p′. We next show
that an opposite situation holds in case of G2. The expected spread size from seeding one of the
nodes in G2 depends critically on the cascade probability and can be much larger or much smaller
than the range that we have established for G1. We use techniques from the analysis of the giant
connected component in random graphs (Janson et al. 2011, Theorem 5.4) to lower-bound the
expected spread size from seeding G2 when the cascade probability is ˆp and to upper-bound it when
the cascade probability is ˇp. Comparing the two bounds with the range that we have established for
the expected spread size on G1 reveals that Alg should necessarily seed G2 when cascade probability
is ˆp and G1 when the cascade probability is ˇp. Therefore, there can be no approximation algorithm
that provides a µOPT −ϵn guarantee while the query and seed cascade probabilities are diﬀerent.
We show this for the small enough ϵ in (31), based on the discrepancy between the query and seed
cascade probabilities (ˆp/ˇp = 1 + δ).
We begin by lower-bounding the expected spread size from seeding a random node in G2 when
the cascade probability is ˆp. Note that if the cascade probability is ˆp, then the active edges after
the independent cascade on G2 constitute a random graph with edge probability:
ˆp1 −δ/2
nϵ,µˇp = (1 + δ)(1 −δ/2)
nϵ,µ
= cδ
nϵ,µ
>
1
nϵ,µ
·
In this case we show that the expected spread size from seeding a random node in G2 is at least
nϵ,δ/2, where
nϵ,δ := 16nϵ,µ(δ −δ2)cδ
41
·
We do so by upper-bounding the probability that a random node on G2 belongs to a component of
size less than nϵ,δ. Let us denote this event by E. To upper-bound P(E), we consider a random node
ν and search the component containing ν according to the following procedure:

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
49
Procedure 1. Starting from ν, initialize the set of discovered nodes to include only ν and set
X0 = 1. At step one (i = 1), declare all neighbors of ν to be discovered and set X1 equal to the number
of newly discovered nodes. Also declare ν to be explored. At any step i > 1, choose an unexplored
node at random from the set of discovered but unexplored nodes; declare it to be explored; add
all of its undiscovered neighbors to the discovered set; and set Xi equal to the number of newly
discovered nodes at step i.
Fact 1. Consider τ ≥1 iterations of Procedure 1. The total number of discovered but unexplored
nodes after τ iterations is given by: Pτ
i=0 Xi −τ. Therefore, at any step τ, the size of the connected
component containing ν is greater than τ if, and only if, Pτ
i=0 Xi > τ; the size of the connected
component containing ν is equal to τ if, and only if, Pτ
i=0 Xi = τ; and the size of the connected
component containing ν is less than τ if, and only if, Pτ
i=0 Xi < τ.
Fact 1 implies that P(E) = P
 Pnϵ,δ
i=0 Xi < nϵ,δ

. To upper-bound P(E), let X−
i
be i.i.d. random
variables with their common distribution set to:
Binomial

nϵ,µ −nϵ,δ, cδ
nϵ,µ

·
Note that for all i ≤nϵ,δ, Xi stochastically dominates X−
i ; hence,
P(E) = P
 Pnϵ,δ
i=0 Xi < nϵ,δ

≤P
 Pnϵ,δ
i=0 X−
i ≤nϵ,δ

·
(34)
To ease the notation, deﬁne X−= Pnϵ,δ
i=0 X−
i and note that X−also has a binomial distribution with
parameters given by:
Binomial

nϵ,δ(nϵ,µ −nϵ,δ), cδ
nϵ,µ

·
We next point out that,
E[X−] = nϵ,δ(nϵ,µ −nϵ,δ) cδ
nϵ,µ
= nϵ,δ

1 −16
41(δ −δ2)cδ

cδ
= nϵ,δ

1 + δ −δ2
2
(1 −32
41c2
δ)

> nϵ,δ,
(35)
where the last inequality follows because 0 < δ −δ2 ≤1/4 which implies cδ = 1 + (δ −δ2)/2 ≤9/8
and 32c2
δ/41 ≤81/82 < 1, for all 0 < δ < 1. Combining (34) and (35), we get:
P(E) ≤P
 X−≤nϵ,δ

≤P
 X−< E[X−]

< 1
2·

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
50
We have established that the probability of the event E that the size of the connected component of
a random node in G2 is less than nϵ,δ is at most 1/2. This implies that the expected spread size from
seeding a random node in G2 is at least nϵ,δ/2. Under (31), we have 2ϵn/µ < µnϵ,δ/2 −ϵn; hence,
whenever the cascade probability is ˆp, Alg should necessarily seed one of the nodes in G2.
Next, we upper-bound the expected spread size from seeding a node in G2 when the cascade
probability is ˇp. For a ﬁxed node ν in G2, let ¯E be the event that the size of the connected component
containing ν is greater than
¯nϵ,δ := 16log nϵ,µ
δ2
·
Let Xi be deﬁned in the same way as in Procedure 1, then Fact 1 continues to hold and we have:
P( ¯E) = P
P¯nϵ,δ
i=0 Xi > ¯nϵ,δ

·
To upper-bound P( ¯E), let X+
i be i.i.d. random variables with common Binomial(nϵ,µ,(1−δ/2)/nϵ,µ)
distribution and note that for all i, X+
i stochastically dominates Xi; hence,
P( ¯E) = P
P¯nϵ,δ
i=0 Xi > ¯nϵ,δ

≤P
P¯nϵ,δ
i=0 X+
i > ¯nϵ,δ

= P
P¯nϵ,δ
i=1 X+
i ≥¯nϵ,δ(1 −δ/2) + ¯nϵ,δδ/2

≤exp

−¯n2
ϵ,δδ2/4
2¯nϵ,δ(1 −δ/2) + ¯nϵ,δδ/3

≤exp
−¯nϵ,δδ2
8

=
1
n2
ϵ,µ
,
where the penultimate inequality follows by applying a Chernoﬀbound to P¯nϵ,δ
i=0 X+
i
which is a
binomial random variable with mean ¯nϵ,δ(1 −δ/2). By union bound, the probability of having at
least one node that belongs to a connected component of size greater than ¯nϵ,δ is at most nϵ,µP( ¯E) =
1/nϵ,µ; or equivalently, with probability at least 1−1/nϵ,µ, all of the nodes in G2 belong to connected
components of size less than or equal to ¯nϵ,δ. Hence, when the cascade probability is ˇp, the expected
spread size from seeding any of the nodes in G2 is at most

1 −
1
nϵ,µ

¯nϵ,δ +
1
nϵ,µ
nϵ,µ < ¯nϵ,δ + 1.
Therefore, whenever cascade probability is ˇp and
¯nϵ,δ + 1 < µ(2ϵn/µ)(1 −3µe−c/(2ϵ)) −ϵn = (ϵ −3µe−c)n,
Alg would necessarily seed one of the nodes in G1 and achieve (2ϵn/µ)(1 −3µe−c/(2ϵ)) expected
spread size. The conditions in (32) are suﬃcient to ensure ¯nϵ,δ + 1 < (ϵ −3µe−c)n. This completes

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
51
the proof showing that any approximation algorithm Alg seeds diﬀerent nodes for diﬀerent cascades
probabilities on our hard example. Therefore, the approximation guarantees cannot be achieved
when the query and seed probability diﬀer under the speciﬁed conditions.
B.14. A pruning algorithm to correct for query discrepancy
Algorithm 5: PRUNE(p,p′)
Input: G′(1)
ρ,τ,...,G′(T )
ρ,τ and Vρ generated by PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p′), and target cascade
probability p
Output: G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ simulating the output of PROBE(ρ,T,τ,p)
1 Require: p′ > p.
2 Set h = p/p′.
3 for i from 1 to T do
4
Initialize G(i)
ρ,τ ←G′(i)
ρ,τ·
5
for every edge e in G(i)
ρ,τ do
6
Let H be an independent Bernoulli draw with P[H = 1] = h.
7
if H = 0 then
8
Remove e from G(i)
ρ,τ.
9
end
10
end
11
for every node ν in G(i)
ρ,τ do
12
if none of the nodes in Vρ are reachable from ν then
13
Remove ν from G(i)
ρ,τ.
14
end
15
end
16 end
17 return G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ·
Appendix C: Extensions to other inﬂuence models
We presented our results for undirected graphs with a homogeneous cascade probability (p). In
subsection C.1, we present the extension of our results to directed inﬂuence graphs. In subsection
C.2, we explore other inﬂuence models beyond the independent cascade and provide a pathway to
perform edge queries in the general class of triggering inﬂuence models.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
52
C.1. Directed inﬂuence graphs
To perform edge queries on directed graphs, in steps 6 and 7 of the PROBE algorithm we let Nν
denote the set of incoming neighbors (i.e., nodes that inﬂuence ν) such that the edge query in step
10 reveals the ι-th incoming neighbor of ν. Two directed edges that are between the same pair
of nodes in opposite directions (u →ν and ν →u) are distinguished. Therefore, as long as we do
not probe a node more than once, each directed edge will get at most one chance of appearing in
G(i)
ρ,τ. Subsequently, the “if statement” in step 11 of the PROBE algorithm should be removed when
performing edge queries on directed graphs: any queried edge in step 10 is always added to G(i)
ρ,τ in the
following steps. As a further consequence, our edge query upper bound in the directed case consists
entirely of the edges that appear in the sketch (denoted by ET in Appendix B.10) and is given by (15):
with probability at least 1 −eδ no more than Cn,k
ϵ,δ ∈Oϵ,δ(pn2 log2 n + √kpn1.5 log2.5 n + k2 log2 n)
edges are queried — a slight improvement over our edge query upper bound in the undirected case.
In the “while loop” condition in step 8 of the PROBE algorithm, instead of considering the
size of the connected component of node ν, we count the number of nodes that are reachable via
directed paths from ν (i.e., the size of its realized cone of inﬂuence). For example, in Figure 8(A),
the reachable set for all of the initial nodes is empty, therefore we proceed to probe the incoming
neighbors until there are no new nodes to probe. In fact, of all the initial nodes in all three cascades
in Figure 8, only the leftmost initial node in Figure 8(B) has a non-empty reachable set that is a
singleton.
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 8
Three reverse cascades are depicted in (A) red, (B) orange, and (C) blue. All cascades start from the
same random initial nodes which are marked in the same color as the cascades. As the cascades diﬀuse
in reverse, each node reveals its incoming edges at random. To score the nodes, we count the number
of reachable initial nodes in each cascade and add them up. For example, the node that is marked in
black scores three in the red cascade, two in the orange cascade, and one in the blue cascade. In total, it
scores as high as or higher than other nodes across the three cascades. The unsampled nodes and edges
are dotted.
We need to make similar changes to the way candidates are scored in the SEED algorithm. First,
in step 3 of SEED we set the value of each initial node (belonging to Vρ) to be one. When evaluating

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
53
the marginal increments (∆(v|Λ⋆)) in step 7 of SEED, we add the values of the initial nodes that
are reachable via directed paths from v in each of the T subsampled graphs (G(1)
ρ,τ,...,G(T )
ρ,τ ), rather
than summing the value of its connected components (see Figure 8). Finally, in step 11 of SEED if
an initial node is reachable from the chosen seed, then we nullify its value for scoring the subsequent
candidates.
Figure 9
With o(n) inﬂuence samples, one is unlikely to discover the center of the directed star network. In such
a case it is impossible to guarantee a µOPT −ϵn expected spread size with fewer than Ω(n) queries.
In contrast, ﬁnding an approximately optimal seed set by inﬂuence sampling in a directed graph
is very hard. For example, consider a star graph with n leafs where all of the edges are directed
away from the center toward the leafs (see Figure 9). Assume that the cascade probability on each
edge is 1. In this case, if we seed a leaf we only observe an isolated node and hence we need Ω(n)
inﬂuence samples to ﬁnd the center of the star and seed it. In a situation where running reverse
spreads is a plausible way of acquiring network information (e.g., by reverse inﬂuence sampling as
Borgs et al. (2014) do), our algorithm and proofs continue to hold exactly the same. In particular,
we can estimate the marginal increase of a candidate node on the current seed set by counting the
number of times that it has appeared in the output of the reverse inﬂuence samples without any
of the currently chosen seeds (i.e., the number of times that the random initial nodes are reachable
from the candidate node but not from any of the currently chosen seeds). Following Algorithm 1
and Theorem 2, we can collect Oϵ(k2 log n) reverse inﬂuence samples and choose the best k seeds
by approximating the greedy steps.
C.2. Triggering models
In general, the inﬂuence graph may be directed and cascade probabilities may diﬀer in each direction
and across the edges. When performing edge queries, the probed nodes should reveal each of their
incoming neighbors (inﬂuencers), with the cascade probability associated with that edge. Here we
explain how a triggering set technique that is proposed by Kempe et al. (2015) helps us devise
edge queries in a large class of inﬂuence models, including the independent cascade and linear
threshold models. Recall that the inﬂuence function Γ maps a seed set to a positive real number
that is the (expected) number of adopters under a (randomized) model of diﬀusion. Kempe et al.
(2003, 2005, 2015) — through a conjecture that is positively resolved by Mossel and Roch (2010)

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
54
— identify a broad class of threshold models for which the inﬂuence function is non-negative,
monotone, and submodular. Inﬂuence maximization in such models can be solved to within a (1 −
1/e) approximation guarantee, following a natural greedy node selection algorithm.
In a general threshold model, each node v has an activation function fv and a threshold θv ∈[0,1].
The activation function maps subsets of neighbors of v to a real number between zero and one. Node
v becomes an adopter at time t if fv(Av,t−1) ≥θv, where Av,t−1 ⊂Nv is the set of all active (adopter)
neighbors of node v. Approximate inﬂuence maximization with deterministic thresholds is known
to be very hard — see, e.g., (Kempe et al. 2015, Section 3.2) and (Schoenebeck and Tao 2019).
To avoid the intractable settings, Kempe et al. (2003, 2005, 2015) consider a randomized model
where thresholds are i.i.d. uniform [0,1] variables. Mossel and Roch (2010) show that if the “local”
activation functions fv are submodular, then the “global” inﬂuence function Γ is also submodular
and inﬂuence maximization can be achieved with strong approximation guarantees (Mossel and
Roch 2010, Theorem 1.6 and Corollary 1.7). In the special case of the linear threshold model, each
node v is inﬂuenced by its incoming neighbours u ∈Nv according to their edge weights buv. Node v
becomes an adopter at time t if the total weight of her adopting neighbors exceeds her threshold,
i.e., if fv(Av,t−1) = P
u∈Av,t−1 buv ≥θv.
At the heart of the proofs of Kempe et al. (2003, 2015) lie a triggering set technique. Accordingly,
each node v chooses a random subset of its incoming neighbors, which we call its triggering set and
denote it by Tv ⊂Nv. Node v becomes an adopter at time t if any of the nodes in Tv is an adopter at
time t −1. The distribution according to which the triggering sets are drawn is determined by the
diﬀusion model. However, not all diﬀusion processes can be reduced to a triggering set model. For
those that do, their inﬂuence function is guaranteed to be submodular (Kempe et al. 2015, Lemma
4.4).
For example, in the independent cascade model, the triggering set Tv includes each of the neighbors
u ∈Nv with cascade probability associated with the u →v edge (puv), independently at random.
In the case of the linear threshold model, Kempe et al. (2015) devise the following construction,
assuming P
u∈Nv buv ≤1: The triggering set Tv is comprised of a single node or no nodes at all. For
u ∈Nv, the probability that Tv = {u} is equal to buv, and Tv = ∅with probability 1 −P
u∈Nv buv.
For diﬀusion processes that can be cast as a triggering set model, we can implement queries
by having the probed nodes reveal their triggering sets. Starting from random initial nodes, each
triggering set corresponds to a batch of directed edges that are incoming to the probed node. We
can use the number of reachable initial nodes to implement an approximate greedy heuristic as
described in Appendix C.1 — see Figure 10. One needs to analyze the speciﬁc diﬀusion process
and the triggering distributions to provide approximation guarantees using a bounded number of
queries.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
55
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 10
Some diﬀusion processes can be reduced to a triggering set model; whereby, after randomly drawing a
triggering set from among her neighbors, a node becomes active if any of the nodes in her triggering
set are active. In such models, we can devise edge queries by having a probed node reveal a random
realization of her triggering set, and then proceeding to probe the revealed nodes. In the case of the
linear threshold model, the triggering sets are either empty or a singleton chosen randomly according
to the edge weights. The reverse cascades in (A), (B) and (C) show three queries where the nodes
sequentially reveal their triggering sets, starting from a random initial node. The black node appears
in the output of all three “reversed cascades”, and therefore scores the highest as a seed candidate.
In the particular case of the linear threshold model, the proof of Theorem 2, and its adaptation
to directed graphs in Appendix C.1, continue to hold with little change. Using k batches of ρ
reversed cascades, we can provide an approximate k-IM solution for the linear threshold model over
directed graphs. At each stage we choose ρ initial nodes at random and implement ρ cascades in
reverse. In each reversed cascade, we start from the initial node, reveal her triggering set, and then
proceeding to probe the node that is revealed in the triggering set, etc. After each batch of ρ reversed
cascades, we choose the node that appears the most number of times, discarding those cascades that
include any of the already chosen seeds. Following Theorem 2, we can provide a (1 −1/e)OPT −ϵn
approximation guarantee, by running kρ = k⌈81k log( 6nk
ϵ )/ϵ3⌉reversed cascades.
To bound the number of edge queries, recall that each triggering set in the linear threshold
model consists of at most a single node. Hence, each reversed cascade corresponds to a path of
length at most n — see Figure 10. Therefore, we can bound the total number of queried edges by
nkρ = nk⌈81k log( 6nk
ϵ )/ϵ3⌉. In Theorem 9, we state our results formally for the case of k-IM with
the linear threshold model over directed graphs.
References
Akbarpour M, Malladi S, Saberi A (2020) Just a few seeds more: Value of network information for diﬀusion.
Technical report, Stanford University, available at SSRN 3062830.
Alon N, Fischer E, Krivelevich M, Szegedy M (2000) Eﬃcient testing of large graphs. Combinatorica
20(4):451–476.
Alon N, Fischer E, Newman I, Shapira A (2009) A combinatorial characterization of the testable graph
properties: It’s all about regularity. SIAM Journal on Computing 39(1):143–167.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
56
Badanidiyuru A, Vondrák J (2014) Fast algorithms for maximizing submodular functions. Proceedings of
the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, 1497–1514 (Portland, Oregon, USA:
SIAM).
Balkanski E, Immorlica N, Singer Y (2017a) The importance of communities for learning to inﬂuence.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, 5862–5871 (Long Beach, California, USA:
Curran Associates, Inc.).
Balkanski E, Rubinstein A, Singer Y (2016) The power of optimization from samples. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 4017–4025 (Barcelona, Spain: Curran Associates, Inc.).
Balkanski E, Rubinstein A, Singer Y (2017b) The limitations of optimization from samples. Proceedings of
the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1016–1027 (Montreal, Canada:
ACM).
Banerjee A, Chandrasekhar AG, Duﬂo E, Jackson MO (2013) The diﬀusion of microﬁnance. Science
341(6144):1236498.
Banerjee A, Chandrasekhar AG, Duﬂo E, Jackson MO (2019) Using gossips to spread information: Theory
and evidence from two randomized controlled trials. The Review of Economic Studies 86(6):2453–2490.
Bateni M, Esfandiari H, Mirrokni V (2018) Optimal distributed submodular optimization via sketching.
Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, 1138–1147, KDD ’18 (New York, NY, USA: ACM), ISBN 978-1-4503-5552-0.
Bateni MH, Esfandiari H, Mirrokni V (2017) Almost optimal streaming algorithms for coverage problems.
Proceedings of the 29th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, 13–23, SPAA
’17 (New York, NY, USA: ACM), ISBN 978-1-4503-4593-4.
Behrman JR, Kohler HP, Watkins SC (2002) Social networks and changes in contraceptive use over time:
Evidence from a longitudinal study in rural Kenya. Demography 39(4):713–738.
Bollobás B (2001) Random Graphs (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).
Borgs C, Brautbar M, Chayes J, Lucier B (2014) Maximizing social inﬂuence in nearly optimal time. Proceed-
ings of the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 946–957 (Portland,
Oregon, USA: SIAM).
Cai J, De Janvry A, Sadoulet E (2015) Social networks and the decision to insure. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 7(2):81–108.
Catanese SA, De Meo P, Ferrara E, Fiumara G, Provetti A (2011) Crawling Facebook for social network anal-
ysis purposes. Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics,
1–8.
Chami GF, Ahnert SE, Kabatereine NB, Tukahebwa EM (2017) Social network fragmentation and commu-
nity health. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(36):E7425–E7431.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
57
Chazelle B, Rubinfeld R, Trevisan L (2005) Approximating the minimum spanning tree weight in sublinear
time. SIAM Journal on computing 34(6):1370–1379.
Chen W, Lin T, Tan Z, Zhao M, Zhou X (2016) Robust inﬂuence maximization. Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 795–804, KDD
’16 (San Francisco, California, USA: ACM).
Chen W, Wang Y, Yang S (2009) Eﬃcient inﬂuence maximization in social networks. Proceedings of the 15th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 199–208, KDD
’09 (Paris, France: ACM).
Chin A, Eckles D, Ugander J (2021) Evaluating stochastic seeding strategies in networks. Management
Science .
Christakis NA, Fowler JH (2010) Social network sensors for early detection of contagious outbreaks. PloS
One 5(9):e12948.
Cohen E, Delling D, Pajor T, Werneck RF (2014) Sketch-based inﬂuence maximization and computation:
Scaling up with guarantees. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Conference on Infor-
mation and Knowledge Management, 629–638 (Shanghai, China: ACM).
Cohen R, Havlin S, Ben-Avraham D (2003) Eﬃcient immunization strategies for computer networks and
populations. Physical Review Letters 91(24):247901.
Domingos P, Richardson M (2001) Mining the network value of customers. Proceedings of the 7th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 57–66 (San Jose, Cali-
fornia, USA: ACM).
Eckles D, Esfandiari H, Mossel E, Rahimian MA (2019) Seeding with costly network information. Proceedings
of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 421–422, EC ’19 (New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery).
Esfandiari H, Mitzenmacher M (2018) Metric sublinear algorithms via linear sampling. 59th Annual Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 11–22 (Paris, France: IEEE).
Feld SL (1991) Why your friends have more friends than you do. American Journal of Sociology 96(6):1464–
1477.
Feng C, Fu L, Jiang B, Zhang H, Wang X, Tang F, Chen G (2020) Neighborhood matters: Inﬂuence maxi-
mization in social networks with limited access. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
.
Flodgren G, Parmelli E, Doumit G, Gattellari M, O’Brien MA, Grimshaw J, Eccles MP (2011) Local opinion
leaders: Eﬀects on professional practice and health care outcomes. The Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2011(8):CD000125.
Godes D, Mayzlin D (2009) Firm-created word-of-mouth communication: Evidence from a ﬁeld test. Mar-
keting Science 28(4):721–739.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
58
Goel S, Salganik MJ (2010) Assessing respondent-driven sampling. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107(15):6743–6747.
Golovin D, Krause A (2011) Adaptive submodularity: Theory and applications in active learning and stochas-
tic optimization. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 42:427–486.
Gomez-Rodriguez M, Leskovec J, Krause A (2012) Inferring networks of diﬀusion and inﬂuence. ACM Trans-
actions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 5(4):1–37.
Gonen M, Ron D, Shavitt Y (2011) Counting stars and other small subgraphs in sublinear-time. SIAM
Journal on Discrete Mathematics 25(3):1365–1411.
Goyal A, Bonchi F, Lakshmanan LVS (2010) Learning inﬂuence probabilities in social networks. Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 241–250 (New York, New
York, USA: ACM).
He X, Kempe D (2016) Robust inﬂuence maximization. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 885–894, KDD ’16 (New York, NY, USA: ACM).
He X, Kempe D (2018) Stability and robustness in inﬂuence maximization. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data 12(6):66:1–66:34.
Heckathorn DD, Cameron CJ (2017) Network sampling: From snowball and multiplicity to respondent-driven
sampling. Annual Review of Sociology 43:101–119.
Hinz O, Skiera B, Barrot C, Becker JU (2011) Seeding strategies for viral marketing: An empirical compar-
ison. Journal of Marketing 75(6):55–71.
Horel T, Singer Y (2015) Scalable methods for adaptively seeding a social network. Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, 441–451 (Florence, Italy: International World Wide Web
Conference).
Indyk P (1999) Sublinear time algorithms for metric space problems. Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, 428–434 (Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ACM).
Janson S, Luczak T, Rucinski A (2011) Random graphs, volume 45 (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons).
Karimi M, Lucic M, Hassani H, Krause A (2017) Stochastic submodular maximization: The case of coverage
functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 6853–6863 (Long Beach, CA, USA:
Curran Associates, Inc.).
Kempe D, Kleinberg J, Tardos É (2003) Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a social network.
Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, 137–146 (Washington, DC, USA: ACM).
Kempe D, Kleinberg J, Tardos É (2005) Inﬂuential nodes in a diﬀusion model for social networks. Proceedings
of the 32nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, 1127–1138 (Lisbon,
Portugal: Springer).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
59
Kempe D, Kleinberg J, Tardos É (2015) Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a social network. Theory
of Computing 11(4):105–147.
Kim DA, Hwong AR, Staﬀord D, Hughes DA, O’Malley AJ, Fowler JH, Christakis NA (2015) Social network
targeting to maximise population behaviour change: A cluster randomised controlled trial. The Lancet
386(9989):145–153.
Kumar R, Moseley B, Vassilvitskii S, Vattani A (2015) Fast greedy algorithms in mapreduce and streaming.
ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing (TOPC) 2(3):14.
Kumar V, Krackhardt D, Feld S (2018) Network interventions based on inversity: Leveraging the friendship
paradox in unknown network structures, working Paper, Yale University.
Kumar V, Sudhir K (2019) Can friends seed more buzz and adoption?, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper
No. 2178.
Lattanzi S, Singer Y (2015) The power of random neighbors in social networks. Proceedings of the 8th ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 77–86, WSDM ’15 (Shanghai, China: ACM).
Leskovec J, Faloutsos C (2006) Sampling from large graphs. Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 631–636 (Philadelphia, PA, USA: ACM).
Libai B, Muller E, Peres R (2013) Decomposing the value of word-of-mouth seeding programs: Acceleration
versus expansion. Journal of Marketing Research 50(2):161–176.
Lungeanu A, McKnight M, Negron R, Munar W, Christakis NA, Contractor NS (2021) Using Trellis software
to enhance high-quality large-scale network data collection in the ﬁeld. Social Networks 66:171–184.
Manshadi V, Misra S, Rodilitz S (2020) Diﬀusion in random networks: Impact of degree distribution. Oper-
ations Research 68(6):1722–1741.
Mihara S, Tsugawa S, Ohsaki H (2015) Inﬂuence maximization problem for unknown social networks. Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, 1539–1546
(Paris, France: IEE/ACM).
Mihara S, Tsugawa S, Ohsaki H (2017) On the eﬀectiveness of random jumps in an inﬂuence maximization
algorithm for unknown graphs. International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), 395–400
(Da Nang, Vietnam: IEEE).
Mirzasoleiman B, Badanidiyuru A, Karbasi A, Vondrák J, Krause A (2015) Lazier than lazy greedy. Proceed-
ings of the 29th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1812–1818 (Austin, Texas, USA: AAAI).
Mossel E, Roch S (2010) Submodularity of inﬂuence in social networks: From local to global. SIAM Journal
on Computing 39(6):2176–2188.
Nemhauser GL, Wolsey LA, Fisher ML (1978) An analysis of approximations for maximizing submodular
set functions–I. Mathematical programming 14(1):265–294.

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
60
Nguyen HT, Thai MT, Dinh TN (2016) Stop-and-stare: Optimal sampling algorithms for viral marketing
in billion-scale networks. Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data,
695–710.
Paluck EL, Shepherd H, Aronow PM (2016) Changing climates of conﬂict: A social network experiment in
56 schools. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113(3):566–571.
Sadeh G, Cohen E, Kaplan H (2020) Sample Complexity Bounds for Inﬂuence Maximization. Vidick T,
ed., 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2020), volume 151 of Leibniz
International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), 29:1–29:36 (Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl–
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik).
Salganik MJ, Heckathorn DD (2004) Sampling and estimation in hidden populations using respondent-driven
sampling. Sociological Methodology 34(1):193–240.
Schoenebeck G, Tao B (2019) Beyond worst-case (in)approximability of nonsubmodular inﬂuence maximiza-
tion. ACM Trans. Comput. Theory 11(3):12:1–12:56, ISSN 1942-3454.
Seeman L, Singer Y (2013) Adaptive seeding in social networks. Proceedings of the 54th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 459–468 (Berkeley, California, USA: IEEE).
Stein S, Eshghi S, Maghsudi S, Tassiulas L, Bellamy RKE, Jennings NR (2017) Heuristic algorithms for
inﬂuence maximization in partially observable social networks. Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on Social Inﬂuence Analysis, 20–32 (Melbourne, Australia: CEUR Workshop Proceedings).
Tang Y, Shi Y, Xiao X (2015) Inﬂuence maximization in near-linear time: A martingale approach. Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, 1539–1554.
Tang Y, Xiao X, Shi Y (2014) Inﬂuence maximization: Near-optimal time complexity meets practical eﬃ-
ciency. Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, 75–86.
Traud AL, Mucha PJ, Porter MA (2012) Social structure of Facebook networks. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 391(16):4165–4180.
van der Vaart AW, Wellner JA (1996) Weak Convergence and Empirical Processes: With Applications to
Statistics (New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag).
Wang C, Chen W, Wang Y (2012) Scalable inﬂuence maximization for independent cascade model in large-
scale social networks. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 25(3):545–576.
Wen Z, Kveton B, Valko M, Vaswani S (2017) Online inﬂuence maximization under independent cascade
model with semi-bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, 3022–3032
(Long Beach, California, USA: Curran Associates, Inc.).
Wilder B, Immorlica N, Rice E, Tambe M (2017a) Inﬂuence maximization with an unknown network by
exploiting community structure. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Social Inﬂuence
Analysis, 2–7 (Melbourne, Australia: CEUR Workshop Proceedings).

Eckles et al.: Seeding with Costly Network Information
61
Wilder B, Immorlica N, Rice E, Tambe M (2018) Maximizing inﬂuence in an unknown social network. Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4743–4750 (New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA: AAAI).
Wilder B, Yadav A, Immorlica N, Rice E, Tambe M (2017b) Uncharted but not uninﬂuenced: Inﬂuence max-
imization with an uncertain network. Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems, 1305–1313 (São Paulo, Brazil: International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems).
Wu Q, Li Z, Wang H, Chen W, Wang H (2019) Factorization bandits for online inﬂuence maximization.
Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, 636–646.
Yadav A, Wilder B, Rice E, Petering R, Craddock J, Yoshioka-Maxwell A, Hemler M, Onasch-Vera L,
Tambe M, Woo D (2017) Inﬂuence maximization in the ﬁeld: The arduous journey from emerging
to deployed application. Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, 150–158.
Dean Eckles
is an associate professor at the MIT Sloan School of Management. His research
interests include social inﬂuence, networks, and causal inference.
Hossein Esfandiari
is a senior research scientist at Google. His works are in theoretical com-
puter science, including approximation algorithms and sublinear-time algorithms.
Elchanan Mossel
works in probability, combinatorics, and inference. He is on the senior faculty
of the Mathematics Department, with a jointly core faculty appointment at the Statistics and Data
Science Center of Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Institute for Data, Systems, and Society.
M. Amin Rahimian
is an assistant professor of Industrial Engineering at University of Pitts-
burgh. He works at the intersection of networks, data, and decision sciences. He borrows tools from
applied probability, statistics, algorithms, as well as decision and game theory to address problems
of distributed inference and decentralized interventions in large-scale sociotechnical systems.