TITLE: Combined Custom Hedging: Optimal Design, Noninsurable Exposure, and Operational Risk Management
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2133
---

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Combined Custom Hedging:
Optimal Design, Noninsurable Exposure, and
Operational Risk Management
Paolo Guiotto
Department of Mathematics ”Tullio Levi-Civita”, University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy, paolo.guiotto@unipd.it
Andrea Roncoroni
Department of Finance, ESSEC Business School, 95021 Cergy-Pontoise, France, roncoroni@essec.edu
We develop a normative framework for the optimal design, value assessment, and risk management inte-
gration of combined custom contingent claims. A risk averse ﬁrm faces a mix of ﬁnancially insurable and
noninsurable risk. The ﬁrm seeks optimal positioning in a pair of custom claims, one written on the insurable
term, and another written on any listed index correlated to the noninsurable term. We prove that a unique
optimum always exists unless the index is redundant, and show that the optimal payoﬀschedules satisfy a
design integral equation. We assess the ﬁrm’s incremental beneﬁt in terms of both an indiﬀerence value and
an eﬃciency rating: this beneﬁt increases with the correlation of the index to the noninsurable term, and it
decreases with the correlation of the index to the insurable term. Our hedge proves empirically relevant for a
highly risk averse ﬁrm facing a market shock (COVID-19 pandemic). In the context of a newsvendor model
featuring random price and demand, we show that: (i) integrating our optimal combined custom hedge with
the corresponding optimal procurement policy allows the ﬁrm to obtain a signiﬁcant improvement in both
risk and return; (ii) this gain may be traded oﬀfor a substantial enhancement in operational ﬂexibility.
Key words : Integrated risk management; Noninsurable risk; Financial product design; COVID-19
pandemic.
History : This paper was ﬁrst submitted on April 12, 1922 and has been with the authors for 83 years for
65 revisions.
1. Introduction
A large body of asset pricing literature is devoted to the direct problem of ﬁnancial contingent
claim (or, derivative) pricing: given a payoﬀschedule, one looks for a rational theory to assign a
corresponding fair value (Bingham and Kiesel 2004). Little attention has been paid to the inverse
problem of derivative origination, whereby an economic agent seeks an aﬀordable claim to optimize
1

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
a standing business position. Yet, contingent claim design is of great relevance in the value chain
of ﬁnancial business operations, nested inside the functional area of product design (Xu et al.
2016). In addition, customization (i.e., tailoring a payoﬀwritten on a given underlying risk term)
and combination (i.e., assembling payoﬀs written on distinct underlying risk terms) are typically
performed independently of each other. This is odd given the increasing popularity of derivative
combination both in portfolio allocation (Haugh and Lo (2001), Faias and Santa-Clara (2017)) and
in corporate risk management (Ding et al. (2007), Chen et al. (2014)).
We hope to contribute to the existing literature by: (i) providing a comprehensive methodology
for the optimal design of combined custom ﬁnancial claims to hedge corporate exposure mixing
ﬁnancially insurable and noninsurable risk terms (Basak and Chabakauri 2012); (ii) quantitatively
assessing the ﬁrm’s gain over the best alternatives developed so far, and (iii) analyzing the value of
integrating the optimal combined custom hedge into optimal management of physical operations,
in keeping with a holistic approach to risk management (Birge 2015).
1.1. Motivation
The problem of ﬁnancial contingent claim design dates back to the pioneering work of Leland
(1980) and Brennan and Solanki (1981) on portfolio insurance. These authors search for a payoﬀ
function of portfolio value that maximizes expected utility. Although presented as a hedging issue,
the problem is in essence a speculative gain optimization, so long as the agent’s business position
does not enter the utility to maximize. On the contrary, real world trades show that derivative
buyers and sellers may not have a mere speculative attitude. Corporate hedgers, for instance, seek
protection against cashﬂow variability in their business revenues; hence, their standing position
must aﬀect the hedge they select (Fraser and Simkins 2010).
Our starting point is the business position of a manufacturing ﬁrm, a commodity merchant, or a
ﬁnancial trader, which we refer to hereafter as a “ﬁrm”. Future operating (or, business) revenues,
say π, typically depend on a ﬁnancially insurable risk term X (i.e., a quantity that is commonly
veriﬁable at the time of uncertainty resolution, Chod et al. (2010)) and an uninsurable risk term
Y . Each term may be anything ranging from a random variable (r.v., henceforth) to a stochastic
process. In addition, we allow π to depend on the ﬁrm’s decision about an operational control q
driving the way risk terms interact within the position in question. In general, q may range from a
scalar to a more complex control policy. Revenues π = π (X,Y ;q) are referred to as mixed exposure.
A ﬁnancial intermediary acts as a claim originator in that (i) it supplies any claim H written on
X with payoﬀfunction (or functional) H (·) in an assigned class H; (ii) it puts a price VH on H
through a (possibly individual) state-price density (Caldentey and Haugh 2006). We say that risk
term X is claimable in H provided that both of these two previous conditions are met. (Whenever

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
3
the class of claims is clearly understood, we simply say the term is claimable.) In addition, there
is a side index I that is claimable in a class G. The ﬁrm can thus buy claims H on X and G on
I, devise a static hedge H + G, and get to full exposure π (X,Y ;q) + H (X) + G(I) for a total
hedging cost VH +VG. In contrast, we assume that no claim on risk term Y is available for trading
whatsoever, and say that Y is nonclaimable. Claimability thus subsumes the attribute of being
ﬁnancially insurable de facto. Henceforth, we identify a claim, or hedge, H on X with its random
payoﬀH (X) or payoﬀfunction (or functional) H (x).
Academic literature extensively examines the problem of optimizing business revenues π (X,Y ;q)
through ﬁnancial hedges (here, H + G), operational tools (here, q), or a suitable integration of
the two. A ﬁrst strand of research focuses on optimal positioning in a class of ﬁnancial claims
exclusively written on the claimable term X. The risk engendered by the nonclaimable component
Y is indirectly handled through the statistical dependence on X, if any. McKinnon (1967) (resp.,
Rolfo (1980)) devise the minimum variance (resp., maximum mean-variance (MV)) forward hedge
for a farmer exposed to a claimable soft commodity price X and a nonclaimable crop yield Y .
Kerkvliet and Moﬀet (1991) derive futures hedge ratios in the context of an international trade
involving an FX rate X and foreign revenues Y . Moschini and Lapan (1995) extend the method to
expected utility preferences and enlarge the hedging opportunity space by including vanilla options
and straddles. Brown and Toft (2002) adopt a value maximizing target and derive an optimal
custom claim featuring a quadratic payoﬀfunction.
The aforementioned ﬁnancial hedges on X may be integrated with operational management
policies deﬁned by a control q. Ritchken and Tapiero (1986) approach price-demand risk through
a joint selection of physical stock procurement and ﬁnancial option holding. Chowdhry and Howe
(1999) put forward an integrated strategy, which addresses the price-quantity risk experienced by
an international corporation featuring mean-variance preferences, and derive a genuinely custom
hedge in a risk neutral setup. Ding et al. (2007) integrate real options and derivative packages to
maximize MV preferences under nonzero risk premia. Chen et al. (2014) complete this research
path, and derive a fully custom optimal claim in a general setup.
A second strand of research focuses on devising ﬁnancial claims written on a side index I
exhibiting statistical dependence on the nonclaimable term Y .Gaur and Seshadri (2005) consider
ﬁxed-price newsvendor (NV) revenues under risk averse preferences: their ﬁnancial hedge is sought
among alternative classes of derivative packages written on an index I that partially spans the risk
engendered by demand Y . Chod et al. (2010) consider a value maximizing ﬁrm acting in a risk
neutral world: they derive an optimal claim on index I and boil it down to a portfolio of vanilla
instruments available for trading. Gerner and Ronn (2013) consider an airline company exposed
to jet-fuel consumption Y1 and price Y2: as long as no futures trade on jet-fuel price, they face a

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Figure 1
Single-claim vs. combined custom hedging of mixed claimable-nonclaimable exposure.
π( X , Y ; q)
• Gaur-Seshadri (2005)
• Caldentey-Haugh (2006, 2009)
• Chod-Rudi-Van Mieghem (2010)
• Gerner-Ronn (2013)
• Wang-Yao (2017)
Optimal single-claim custom hedge H♭(X)
for mixed exposure π(X,Y;q)
NONCLAIMABLE
Optimal combined custom hedge H*(X) + G*(I)
CLAIMABLE
I
X
CLAIMABLE
Exogenous spanning of risk
Endogenous spanning of risk
Combined spanning of risk
MIXED EXPOSURE
• ﻿McKinnon (1967)
• Rolfo (1980)
• ﻿Ritchken-Tapiero (1986)
• ﻿Kerkvliet-Moffet (1991) 
• Moschini-Lapan (1995)
• ﻿Chowdhry-Howe (1999)
• ﻿Brown-Toft (2002)
• Ding-Dong-Kouvelis (2007)
• Chen-Li-Wang (2014)
• Kouvelis-Pang-Ding (2018)
Optimal single-claim custom hedge G♭(I)
for nonclaimable exposure π(Y;q) 
Precursors
Precursors
nonclaimable risk vector Y := (Y1,Y2), which they manage through a suitable forward hedge on a
side index I.
Extant literature thus develops two approaches to ﬁnancially hedge mixed exposure: one uses
ﬁnancial claims written on the claimable term entering the position in question; the other adopts
claims written on a claimable side index. Figure 1 illustrates this situation.
The two approaches share a common feature: ﬁnancial hedging takes the form of either a sin-
gle, possibly custom, contingent claim (or trading strategy), or a parametrized array of assigned
derivatives. A simultaneous consideration of claim customization and combination seems to be
overlooked. We contend that the eﬀectiveness of any (possibly integrated ) risk management policy
may signiﬁcantly be hindered by such a constraint. Our conjecture calls for a theoretical devel-
opment to unify the aforementioned hedging approaches, and devise a normative method for the
design, assessment, and integration of the optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) facing
mixed exposure π (X,Y ;q). Interestingly, our study owes a great deal to a research strand that
extends the aforementioned static approaches to a dynamic setup (Caldentey and Haugh (2006),
Caldentey and Haugh (2009), Wang and Yao (2017), and Kouvelis et al. (2018)). Appendix EC.1(D)
elaborates on this connection.
1.2. Contribution
Our contribution is threefold.
1. We design and analyze the mean-variance optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) of
business positions featuring mixed exposure π = π (X,Y ;q) to ﬁnancially insurable and noninsur-
able risk terms X and Y according to an operational control q. This allows us to unify the two
aforementioned strands of research in the area of corporate risk management.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
5
Optimal hedging may be cast as a budget-constrained functional optimization problem over a
set of regular payoﬀs written on tradable indices only, hence under the assumption of incomplete
information whereby no knowledge about nontradable risk terms may enter the hedging instrument
(Caldentey and Haugh 2006). Each claim entails pure hedging and speculative terms, plus a new
cross-hedge component. Both the existence and uniqueness of the optimal combined claims are
guaranteed, provided the two claimable terms X and I are unrelated to one another according to
a suitable measure of dependence which we identify. This measure explicitly excludes that they
are functionally dependent on one another, meaning that f (X) ̸= h(I) for all functions f and h.
By assuming absolutely continuous distributions for all risk variables, the optimal payoﬀfunctions
satisfy a Fredholm integral equation.
2. We provide a sharp analytical assessment of the incremental beneﬁt a risk averse ﬁrm ascribes
to our optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) compared to either optimal single-claim
custom hedge H♭(X) or G♭(I). This beneﬁt can be expressed in terms of indiﬀerence value (i.e.,
a monetary amount) or relative eﬃciency (i.e., a dimensionless rating); they allow us to quantify
the power of our combined hedging proposal over the best existing alternatives.
We deﬁne combination value as the precise monetary amount which, when added to an optimal
single-claim custom hedge, makes the resulting payoﬀas attractive as our optimal combined custom
hedge’s in terms of MV. We derive an explicit expression for this quantity in terms of optimal
claim G∗(I) and obtain two tight lower bounds for the combination value in terms of a suitable
correlation measure between X and I and other model primitives. These bounds are related to
a reﬁned notion of risk aversion which allows us to diﬀerentiate between strictly and weakly risk
averse ﬁrms. By assessing a combination value, we may rank any array of alternative claimable
side indices to in turn decide which one to adopt. We also extend the eﬃciency index proposed
by Brown and Toft (2002) to benchmark alternative hedges with respect to a scale ranging from
no hedge to our optimal combined custom hedge. We derive a formula for eﬃciency in terms of
optimal claim G∗(I) and a tight upper bound. These results allow us to decide whether to switch
from a single-claim to a combined custom hedge. A case-study shows the power of this method in
the context of a global economic crisis.
3. We assess the value enhancement from integrating our optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X)+
G∗(I) within the optimal management of business and physical operations. For a generalized
NV model, we experimentally measure the extent to which our integrated policy outperforms all
existing primary alternatives and the eﬀect it has on physical operations.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
We consider a stylized case featuring a gas retailer exposed to random price and demand, and
craft a new class of integrated risk management policies. In a realistic parametric setup, the inte-
grated ﬁnancial-operational policy consisting of our optimal combined custom hedge and the related
optimal procurement provides a risk averse ﬁrm with as much as a simultaneous 38.31% reduction
in risk (i.e., standard deviation) and 14.22% increase in return (i.e., expected value) of operating
revenues. This latter comprises a ﬁnancial speculative term represented by the expected payoﬀof
the hedge, which is negative, and an operational term given by the variation in expected revenues
obtained by switching from the optimally handled naked position to the naked position managed
through the optimal integrated policy (+45.3% in gas procurement order), which exceeds the afore-
mentioned ﬁgure. This underpins the hedging role of combining claims. It also shows the speculative
attitude of the hedge provider who correspondingly cashes in positive expected revenues from their
short hedge position. Finally, our hedge oﬀers a key leverage to widen the proﬁtable range of a
ﬁrm’s operations: gas procurement may increase anywhere from 2.2% to 54.0% while ensuring an
increase in return and a reduction of risk. Ultimately, our analysis highlights the importance of
combined custom hedging for integrated risk management whenever noninsurable risk is present.
Achieving the three aforementioned goals in the simplest possible (i.e., a one-period) time frame
and the most general (i.e., random-element based) state variable setup is a motive for our model.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the model framework. Section 3 presents our
optimal combined custom hedge. Section 4 quantiﬁes the value enhancement it yields. Section 5
analyzes a new class of integrated risk management policies. Section 6 concludes with a summary,
empirical predictions, managerial insights, and avenues for future research. Complements, technical
details, and all proofs are available in the Electronic Appendices.
2. Model
We develop a normative framework for the optimal design of combined custom contingent claims.
Let us consider a one-period time frame {0,T}: ﬁnancial hedging and an operational decision occur
at time 0; uncertainty is resolved for all risk terms, and cash ﬂows are paid out at time T. For
the sake of simplicity, we assume interest rates are zero. A ﬁrm expresses their beliefs through
a probability space (Ω,F,P). Measure P denotes a physical probability reﬂecting an estimation
based on a time series of observed samples, a purely subjective assessment, or any blend of the two.
The sources of corporate risk are represented by a term X that is claimable in a suitable set HX
and a nonclaimable term Y . An additional side (i.e., position external) index I is claimable in a set
HI. (Exact hedging spaces, or classes, are deﬁned in the next subsection.) Together, variables X,
Y , and I represent the random state of the system at time T as seen from time 0. We let them be
random elements deﬁned on (Ω,F,P). Hence, the model can handle both static and dynamic risk
systems. Table EC.1 in Appendix EC.1.1 reports all terms and symbols appearing in the model.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
7
Example 1 (Static and dynamic systems). Let 0 and T be the endpoints of a time interval
[0,T] and let (Xt)0⩽t⩽T and (Yt)0⩽t⩽T be assigned stochastic processes. A standard case in ﬁnance
entails ﬁgures observed exactly at time T, i.e., X := XT and Y := YT. Alternatively, we may consider
functionals of observed price paths. For instance, Fusai et al. (2008) consider discretely monitored
Asian-style deals where payoﬀs depend on the arithmetic average of a commodity price monitored
over a ﬁnite set t1,...,tN of dates prior to the payoﬀdate T. One may correspondingly set X :=
N −1 PN
j=1 X(tj) and Y := N −1 PN
j=1 Y (tj). More generally, risk variables can be the underlying
stochastic processes, say X := (Xt)0⩽t⩽T and Y := (Yt)0⩽t⩽T.
2.1. Corporate Positions featuring Mixed Exposure
At time 0, the ﬁrm holds a naked (i.e., hedge-free) position. This generates a time T cash ﬂow
π = π (X,Y ;q) combining claimable term X with nonclaimable term Y according to an operational
policy q. Function π (·,·;q) is assumed to be suﬃciently regular to ensure that π (X,Y ;q) is square-
integrable for any admissible control q. This quantity deﬁnes the time T state of a ﬁnancially
uncontrolled system, whereby no ﬁnancial hedge has been entered in and an operational control
policy q has been selected at time 0. In keeping with Caldentey and Haugh (2006), the operational
policy domain may range from a set of scalars to a class of stochastic control policies which do not
aﬀect any system variable. Cash ﬂow π thus accommodates a wide array of corporate exposure
instances. The following examples are detailed in Appendix EC.1.2.
Example 2 (Mixed exposure). 1) Primary commodity production model (Moschini and Lapan
1995): π (X,Y ;q) := XY q −c(q). 2) Stochastic clearance price model (Caldentey and Haugh 2009):
π(X,Y ;q) := (Y −ξq)q −Xq; 3) Generalized newsvendor model (Secomandi and Kekre 2014):
π (X,Y ;q) := s(X)v (Y,q) + bid(X)(q −Y )+ −ask (X)(Y −q)+ −pq; 4) Multinational produc-
tion capacity allocation model (Chowdhry and Howe 1999): π (X,Y;q) := X1Y1 −c1o1 (q,Y) +
X3 [X2Y2 −c2 (Y1 + Y2 −o1 (q,Y))].
2.2. The Space of Combined Custom Hedges
Hedging is determined by positioning in the custom derivative market at time 0. The ﬁrm may
enter a tailored contingent claim with payoﬀH (X) to settle at time T. However, the idiosyncratic
risk portion carried over by Y remains unhedged so long as the risk term Y is nonclaimable. The
ﬁrm may then identify a side index I correlated to Y and buy a custom claim with time T payoﬀ
G(I). A combined custom hedge H (X)+G(I) is deﬁned by a pair of combined claims H (X) ∈HX
and G(I) ∈HI, where H# denotes the space of σ (#)-measurable r.v.’s with ﬁnite variance. It also
requires meeting a budget constraint VH(X) +VG(I) ⩽w, where V# denotes the fair value of a claim

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
with payoﬀ#, and w is the ﬁrm’s cash available for hedging. This constraint is well-deﬁned as long
as X and I are claimable. Time T full exposure revenues can be expressed as:
π(X,Y ;q) + [H(X) + G(I)],
(1)
where (H (X),G(I)) deﬁnes a ﬁnancial control policy. They represent the time T state of a ﬁnan-
cially controlled system in our hedging problem. In general, a payoﬀH (X) is an HX-measurable
variable, that is a functional of random element X as a whole: later, we derive conditions whereby
H (X) is a genuine payoﬀfunction x →H (x) to compute on each sample value x = X (ω). Similar
considerations hold for G(I) and H (X) + G(I).
We assume that the ﬁrm can price the two claims using arbitrage pricing theory (Bingham and
Kiesel 2004). That is VH(X) = EQ [H (X)] and VG(I) = EQ [G(I)], where Q is an equivalent martingale
measure (EMM) compatible with the absence of arbitrage opportunities. Following Caldentey and
Haugh (2006) and (2009), we assume that Q is assigned through a pricing kernel dQ/dP the ﬁrm
is aware of. (Appendix EC.1.4 elaborates further on this point.) We need not assume completeness
in the underlying market model. However, this property ensures the uniqueness of both the EMM
Q and the consequent hedge. The budget constraint may be expressed as:
EQ [H (X) + G(I)] ⩽w.
(2)
Appendix EC.2.1 provides the additional regularity conditions allowing us to cast the hedge
design problem within a Hilbert space setting: this framework lets us visualize the underlying issue
through a neat geometrical representation (see Appendix EC.1.5) and develop a solution in full
generality.
2.3. Optimal Design: Problem Statement
The quality of a combined custom hedge is assessed through a MV utility criterion U (·) := ϱE[·]−
(a/2)Var[·], where ϱ and a are nonnegative scalars. If ϱ > 0, then ratio a/ϱ deﬁnes the ﬁrm’s risk
aversion. If a > 0, the reciprocal ratio ϱ/a denotes the ﬁrm’s risk propensity. The case whereby ϱ = 0
and a > 0 represents a variance minimizing ﬁrm. A MV target allows us to obtain optimal hedges
as the sum of pure hedging and speculative terms. This adheres to the empirical evidence about
traded contingent claims in ﬁnancial markets (Anderson and Danthine 1980). Correspondingly, we
use the term “hedging” in the broad sense of “contingent claim positioning”. Our adoption of MV
preferences is supported by further considerations detailed in Appendix EC.1.3.
The ﬁrm seeks to design a pair of combined custom claims maximizing a MV target, subject to
payoﬀregularity and a budget constraint, i.e.,
max
(H(X),G(I))∈HX×HI: EQ[H(X)+G(I)]⩽w U (π + [H(X) + G(I)]),
(3)

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
9
where π := π(X,Y ;q). Any solution (H∗,G∗) to this problem deﬁnes an optimal combined custom
hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) for the ﬁrm in question. We omit explicitly indicating the dependence of π
on q whenever this is immaterial to the analysis (Sections 3 and 4), but include it each time this
is essential (e.g., Section 5).
We can simplify the design problem (3) by showing that: 1) The maximum is attained in the
geometrical variety deﬁned by constraint EQ[H(X) + G(I)] = w; 2) In a MV setup there is no
loss of generality when assuming a zero cash endowment w = 0; 3) The maximum can be sought
among value-centered claims: EQ[H(X)] = 0 and EQ[G(I)] = 0. All details are reported in Appendix
EC.2.2. Note that property 2 also holds under the value maximizing criterion adopted in Caldentey
and Haugh (2009). In the following, we exclusively focus on the value-centered problem. Appendix
EC.1.4 provides a number of clarifying remarks about the extent, limitations, and possible exten-
sions of our model, while Appendix EC.1.5 illustrates our theory within a simpliﬁed Bernoulli
market model.
3. Optimal Design
3.1. Economic Characterization
We derive and analyze the economic structure of combined contingent claims that deﬁne any
optimal combined custom hedge. Let FX (resp., FI) denote the sub σ-algebra of the events space
F generated by X (resp., I), which represents the information gleaned by the observation of X
(resp., I), and E[·|F#] stand for the conditional expectation operator given F#, which is the
function of variable “#” that best approximates the argument “·” in the space of ﬁnite variance
r.v.’s.
Proposition 1 (Characterization of optimal combined custom hedge). Any
optimal
combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) for the value-centered problem:
U ∗
HXI :=
max
(H(X),G(I))∈HX×HI: EQ[H(X)]=EQ[G(I)]=0U (π (X,Y ) + [H (X) + G(I)])
(4)
involves combined claim payoﬀs H∗(X) = H∗
0(X) −EQ[H∗
0(X)] and G∗(I) = G∗
0(I) −EQ[G∗
0(I)],
where both H∗
0 (X) and G∗
0 (I) display a zero mean under P and satisfy the ﬁrst-order condition:



H∗
0(X) = −E[(π −E[π])|FX] + E
 ϱ
a
 1 −dQ
dP
FX

−E[G∗
0(I)|FX],
G∗
0(I)
= −E[(π −E[π])|FI] + E
 ϱ
a
 1 −dQ
dP
FI

−E[H∗
0(X)|FI].
(5)
Combined claims H∗(X) and G∗(I) are value-centered as per budget constraint. Their cash ﬂows
are driven by payoﬀs H∗
0 (X) and G∗
0 (I) solving system (5), each featuring as many as three
ﬁnancially distinct components. We analyze the structure of H∗
0 (X), with G∗
0 (I) following mutatis
mutandis.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
A ﬁrst term is the best estimate one can make of the deviation of business revenues π from their
average value E[π], based on the sole knowledge of the claimable term X appearing there. In a
context of purely claimable exposure (π = π (X)) and lack of market risk premium (P = Q) this
term boils down to the optimal single-claim hedge derived in Chowdhry and Howe (1999). If the
market quotes a nonzero risk premium (P ̸= Q), the same term arises as the variance minimizing
(ϱ = 0) single-claim hedge (see Proposition EC.1).
A second term builds on the market risk premium 1−dQ/dP. It deﬁnes the optimal single-claim
position for a pure speculator (π = 0) and represents the reward they receive for risk taking (Poitras
(2013)). This cash ﬂow acts as a rebate over the minimum variance hedging payoﬀ. Interestingly,
a speculative component enters the optimal derivative schedule proportionally to the ratio ϱ/a
representing ﬁrm’s propensity to risk. Notably, this term is independent of the ﬁrm’s position and
plays a ubiquitous role in optimal derivative positioning (Leland (1980), Brennan and Solanki
(1981), Carr and Madan (2001)).
A third term seems to be new in the existing literature on the subject. It deﬁnes a cross-claim
eﬀect representing a hedge enhancement aﬀorded by the linkage between X and I. Speciﬁcally,
the greater the dependence between side index I and position’s claimable X, the stronger the
contribution of one claim, say G∗(I), to the payoﬀof the other claim, say H∗(X). An oﬀsetting
cross-claim eﬀect may explain the underhedging puzzle arising in asset pricing, a phenomenon
usually ascribed to utility prudence (Adam-M¨uller 1997), basis risk (Briys et al. 1993), defaulting
OTC markets (Cummins and Mahul 2008), or liquidity needs (Mello and Parsons 2000).
Example 3 (Independent hedging index and the speculative theme). If a side index I
is statistically independent of the claimable term X, the third term in system (5) vanishes,
i.e., E[G∗(I)|FX] = E[G∗(I)] = 0, and the (value-centered) optimal claims reduce to H∗
0(X) =
−E[K0|FX] and G∗
0(I) = −E[K0|FI], where K0 := π +(ϱ/a)dQ/dP−E[π + (ϱ/a)dQ/dP]. If index
I is also statistically independent of term Y , hence G∗
0(I) = E[(ϱ/a)(1 −dQ/dP)|FI], then I is
useless for mitigating the ﬁrm’s exposure π although it may have a speculative role. Indeed, if risk
is the sole concern of the ﬁrm (i.e., ϱ = 0), then G∗
0(I) ≡0. However, if expected revenues are part
of the ﬁrm’s target (i.e., ϱ > 0), then G∗
0(I) ̸= 0, provided that I and the market premium dQ/dP
are not statistically independent of one another.
Essential to the present study is the optimal hedging kernel deﬁned as K := π + (ϱ/a)dQ/dP.
This quantity gathers both hedging and speculative components of the optimal combined hedge
in an ideal contingent claim that simultaneously spans business and market premium risks. This
can be seen by posing G ≡0 in the ﬁrst equation of system (5) and allowing for positioning in
claims written on a variable Z that spans both market premium risk (i.e., pricing kernel dQ/dP is
FZ-measurable) and business risk (i.e., π is FZ-measurable). Note that K0 deﬁned in the example
above is the optimal centered hedging kernel, i.e., K0 = K −E[K].

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
11
3.2. Existence and Uniqueness
In general, the optimal combined claim pair (H∗(X),G∗(I)) may not be unique (see, e.g., Appendix
EC.1(F)). It turns out that both the existence and uniqueness of the optimal combined claims
H∗(X) and G∗(I), and the hedge H∗(X)+G∗(I) they entail, depends on the relation between X
and I as measured through the maximal correlation index deﬁned by:
rXI :=
sup
φ(X)∈HX,ψ(I)∈HI: E[φ(X)]=E[ψ(I)]=0
ρ(φ(X),ψ(I)) ∈[0,1],
(6)
where ρ is the Pearson linear correlation (Balakrishnan and Lai 2009). Appendix EC.2.3 reports
the major properties of this index.
Theorem 1 (Existence and uniqueness of optimal combined hedge). Let
claimable
X
and index I display a maximal correlation rXI < 1. Then, the optimal combined claim pair
(H∗(X),G∗(I)), hence the resulting combined custom hedge H∗(X)+G∗(I), exists and is unique.
In addition, the value-centered optimal claim H∗
0 (X) solves the ﬁxed-point functional equation:
H∗
0(X) = ΠX
0 (X) + E[E[H∗
0(X)|FI]|FX],
(7)
where term ΠX
0 (X) := −E[K −E[K|FI]|FX] represents the best estimate a suitable function of X
can make of the portion of the optimal hedging kernel K that is unspanned by I.
Once we solve equation (7) for H∗
0(X), then G∗
0(I) stems from the second equation in the ﬁrst-order
system (5). This features a high level of generality, as X, Y , and I may be any kind of random
element, including ﬁnite vectors and stochastic processes. We oﬀer examples within a log-normal,
a Bernoulli and an Itˆo dynamic market model in Appendix EC.1.6.
Example 4 (Log-normal market model). Under a standard market model featuring lognor-
mal variables (Bingham and Kiesel 2004), things are dramatically simpler, since unitary maximal
correlation is equivalent to having one variable functionally dependent on the other. If (X,I) =
(eZ,eW) and (Z,W)
P∼N(m,C), condition rXI < 1 amounts to |ρZ,W| < 1. In addition, rXI = 1
entails |ρZ,W| = 1, i.e., W = aZ + b: hence, the two underlying terms X and I are functionally
dependent one another as long as I = eW = eb(eZ)a = ebXa and the problem degenerates.
3.3. The Design Integral Equation
Under absolutely continuous distributions (with P and Q densities f# and f Q
#, respectively), com-
bined claim payoﬀs H∗(X) and G∗(I) take the form of payoﬀfunctions H∗(x) and G∗(i) to
compute at the values assumed by X and I, respectively; in addition, these payoﬀfunctions solve
a Fredholm integral equation. Let LP (#) be the law of a r.v. # and L2
# := L2 (RN,BRN,LP (#)).

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Theorem 2 (Design integral equation). Let the N-dimensional r.v.’s X, Y , and I admit a
joint distribution density fXY I under P. If rXI < 1, then the optimal combined custom hedge
H∗(X) + G∗(I) exhibits payoﬀfunctions H∗(x) = H∗
0(x) −c∗
H and G∗(x) = G∗
0(x) −c∗
G, with con-
stants c∗
H := EQ [H∗
0(X)] and c∗
G := EQ [G∗
0(I)]; the value-centered claim payoﬀfunction H∗
0(x) in
L2
X solves a Fredholm equation of the second kind:
H∗
0(x) = ΠX
0 (x) +
Z
RN k(x,ξ)H∗
0(ξ)dξ,
 x ∈RN
(8)
with integral kernel k(x,ξ) :=
R
RN
fXI(x,i)
fX(x)fI(i)fXI(ξ,i)di, (x,ξ) ∈RN × RN, and term:
ΠX
0 (x) = −
Z
RN π(x,y)fXY (x,y)
fX(x)
dy +
Z
R3N π(ξ,y)fXI(ξ,i)fXY I(x,y,i)
fX(x)fI(i)
dξdydi
(9)
−ϱ
a
f Q
X(x)
fX(x) −
Z
RN f Q
I (i) fXI(x,i)
fX(x)fI(i) di

,
 x ∈RN
.
Expressions for the payoﬀfunction G∗
0(i) in L2
I are derived in Appendix EC.3.3 (formulae (EC.29)
and (EC.30)). Appendix EC.1.7 solves the design integral equation (8) for a large class of integral
kernels, proposes a new numerical scheme, and shows a convergence result.
4. Combination Value Assessment
Firms can optimally handle mixed exposure through the optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X)+
G∗(I). They may nevertheless decide to hedge through a single instrument on either claimable
term X or I. In this respect, two major issues present themselves:
Issue 1 How should we select an appropriate index I within a menu of claimable terms?
Issue 2 When is it worth switching from a single-claim to our combined custom hedge?
Answering these questions requires us to ﬁrst assign a monetary value to our combination theme.
4.1. Financial Hedging Flexibility, Combination Value, and Risk Spanning
Access to any class H ⊂L2 (Ω) of contingent claims deﬁnes the ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility of a
ﬁrm. Whenever it is well-posed, the corresponding hedge design problem is:
H∗
H ←
max
H∈H: EQ[H]=0U (π + H) =: U ∗
H.
(10)
Example 5. The optimal single-claim custom hedges written on either X or I are deﬁned as H♭:=
H∗
HX and G♭:= H∗
HI, respectively. The optimal combined custom hedge deﬁned in Proposition 1
satisfy H∗+G∗= H∗
HXI, where HXI := HX +HI. (Appendix EC.1.8 elaborates on the discrepancy
between optimal single-claim and combined custom hedges in terms of their payoﬀfunctions.)
We may monetize a shift in ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility, say from G to H, by resorting to a notion
of indiﬀerence value for the MV criterion U .

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
13
Definition 1 (Value of financial flexibility). The value VG→H of a ﬁnancial hedging ﬂex-
ibility shift from G to H is the monetary amount m rendering the ﬁrm indiﬀerent between adopting
the optimal hedge in G plus m and the optimal hedge in H, i.e., U
 π + H∗
G + m

= U (π + H∗
H).
The value VH of ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility granted by H is deﬁned by V{0}→H.
Clearly, VG→H may be negative. It surely is nonnegative provided that G ⊂H: this is the case of
VH for any class H ̸= {0}. Since EQ

H∗
G

= 0 (budget constraint), then VG→H may be interpreted
as the fair price of claim H∗
G + m ∈G achieving the same target MV as that of the optimal claim
H∗
H ∈H. Since U (# + m) = U (#) + ϱm, then U
 π + H∗
G + VG→H

= U ∗
G + ϱVG→H, and:
VG→H = ϱ−1  U ∗
H −U ∗
G

.
(11)
This formula allows us to interpret changes in optimal mean-variance in terms of monetary units.
We may apply these notions to assess a monetary value to claim combination.
Definition 2 (Combination value). The combination value CVX→X+I of X and I over X is
the value of a ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility shift from single-claim to combined custom hedging, i.e.,
CVX→X+I := VHX→HXI.
We may similarly deﬁne the combination value of X and I over I as CVI→X+I := VHI→HXI.
Combination values are always nonnegative because HXI ⊃HX. Note that these deﬁnitions focus
on combination values under custom hedging: this choice averts potential valuation bias stemming
from assuming any prescribed functional form for the hedge’s payoﬀ, say linear (forward hedge) or
piecewise linear (combinations of vanilla instruments).
Any claim on a side index I that is functionally dependent on X (as deﬁned in Subsection 1.2)
provides the ﬁrm with no combination value over using H♭(X). Hence, we assume that rIX < 1
so that risk variables I and X are not functionally dependent upon one another. The exact value
of optimal combination under customization depends upon the ability of the claimable terms to
span the risk engendered by business revenues and to leverage the market risk premium. Let I be
a candidate side index. We argue that:
• Conjecture I : All other terms being equal, the greater the statistical linkage rIX between side
index I and the position’s claimable X, the stronger the redundancy of I, and the smaller the
value from combining a claim on X with a claim on I. Hence, on equal terms, the relevance of
claim combination vs. single-claim positioning decreases with increasingly dependent I and X. The
nonunitary assumption rIX < 1 in Theorem 1 underpins our guess.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
• Conjecture II : All other terms being equal, the greater the statistical linkage rIY between
side index I and the position’s nonclaimable Y , the stronger the ability of I to mitigate the risk
engendered by Y , and the greater the value from combining a claim on X with a claim on I. This
is actually the rationale behind the studies by Gaur and Seshadri (2005), Caldentey and Haugh
(2006), Chod et al. (2010), Wang and Yao (2017) and (2019)).
These statements call for selecting a side index I which is as weakly linked to X (i.e., low
rIX) and as strongly linked to Y (i.e., high rIY ) as possible. However, a low value of rIX does
not necessarily entail a high value of rIY : they may both decrease or increase, thus producing a
counterbalancing eﬀect which ought to be assessed case by case. Example EC.7 shows this may
happens within the context of a Bernoulli market model. Moreover, an increase (decrease) in the
speculative nature of the selected combined custom hedge may partially oﬀset the loss (gain) in
terms of net reduction of risk that results from using an index I adhering to both prescriptions
above. The intricate relation between combination value and maximal correlation indices can be
clariﬁed through a number of estimates, which in turn oﬀer a tool for the rational selection of a
side index (Issue 1).
4.2. Value Estimates and Index Selection
We can compute the combination value CVX→X+I in terms of the additional centered claim G∗
0 (I)
and oﬀer a lower bound that may suﬃce for practical applications, e.g., index selection.
Theorem 3 (Combination value assessment). Let rIX < 1 and ϱ > 0. Then:
CVX→X+I = a
2ϱVar(G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]).
(12)
⩾a
2ϱ(1 −r2
IX)Var(E[K0 −E[K0|FX]|FI]),
(13)
where K0 is the optimal centered hedging kernel and pair (H∗
0 (X),G∗
0 (I)) solves system (5). The
lower bound is tight: equality holds true provided that X and I are statistically independent.
A similar expression can be derived for CVI→X+I. The right-hand side in these expressions is
invariant upon rescaling the risk aversion parameters a and ϱ. While exact estimate (12) requires
one to preliminarily compute G∗
0(I), the lower bound (13) directly stems from correlation rIX and
other model primitives. Speciﬁcally, this bound increases proportionally to three factors: (i) The
risk aversion coeﬃcient a/ϱ: the greater its value, the stronger the ﬁrm’s beneﬁt from combined
positioning on X and I; (ii) A degree of statistical independence between X and I, here measured
by 1−r2
IX: this quantity attains a maximum when X and I are mutually independent (Conjecture
I); (iii) The ability of a suitable payoﬀwritten on side index I to span the variance risk engendered
by the portion of the optimal centered hedging kernel K0 that remains unspanned by using the

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
15
best approximating claim written on X: this term is intimately connected to the relation between
index I and the nonclaimable term Y .
We can improve our estimate (13) and seek conditions whereby a bound for CVX→X+I is explic-
itly proportional to the degree of dependence between I and Y (Conjecture II). We restrict our
statement to separable mixed exposures featuring independent risk terms: a similar, yet more
convoluted expression can be derived in the general case.
Proposition 2 (Combination value lower bound: strictly risk averse ﬁrms). Let X and
Y be statistically independent risk terms entering a separable exposure π(X,Y ) := α(X)β(Y ). If:
Var[π] ≫
ϱ
a
2
Var
dQ
dP

,
(14)
then:
CVX→X+I ⪆a
2ϱ(1 −r2
IX)

1 −
p
1 −r2
IY
2 mα(X)
σβ(Y ),
(15)
where mα(X) = E[α(X)] and σ2
β(Y ) = Var[β(Y )]. The lower bound is tight: equality holds true pro-
vided that X and I are statistically independent.
Bound (15) is approximately proportional to risk aversion coeﬃcient a/ϱ, a degree 1 −r2
IX of
statistical independence between X and I, and a degree

1 −
p
1 −r2
IY
2
of statistical dependence
between I and Y : their joint eﬀect attains a maximum value when index I is simultaneously
independent of X (rIX = 0) and fully dependent on Y (rIY = 1) in terms of maximal correlation.
This conﬁrms Conjecture II. Bound (15) is also easier to compute than bound (13) and exact
estimate (12) as long as it directly stems from model parameters: it thus oﬀers the ﬁrm a practical
tool to select a side hedging index within a basket of alternative claimable terms.
Example 6 (Side index selection). Let I1, I2, and I3 be claimable indices. Assume maximal
correlations are rI1X = 0.1, rI2X = 0.2, rI3X = 0.4, and rI1Y = 0.6, rI2Y = 0.7, rI3Y = 0.75. Whereas
index I1 is the “closest” to independence of X, index I3 is the most dependent on Y among the three
indices in question. Let us consider for simplicity a variance minimizing agent (ϱ = 0). Asymptotic
estimate (15) is essentially a bound proportional to (1−r2
IX)

1 −
p
1 −r2
IY
2
. For a ﬁrm satisfying
condition (14), it solves this puzzle and shows that I3 is the best choice.
Condition (14) allows us to sharpen the traditional concept of risk aversion. Two ﬁrms sharing
a common risk aversion a/ϱ may actually diﬀer in terms of exposure π and beliefs P. Hence, the
pure hedging components appearing in their optimal combined claims diﬀer as well (formula (5)).
Inequality (14) states that (squared) risk aversion exceeds the market premium risk per unit of
business risk. We correspondingly say the ﬁrm is strictly risk averse. Otherwise, the ﬁrm is said to
be weakly risk averse. These deﬁnitions are well-posed since 1 = E[dQ/dP] ⩽E
h
(dQ/dP)
2i
. For a
weakly risk averse ﬁrm, we oﬀer a lower bound in Appendix EC.1.9.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
4.3. Eﬃciency Analysis
Estimate (12) and bounds (13), (15), and (EC.14) oﬀer absolute assessments of combination values.
Hence, they do not speak to the appropriateness of switching from optimal single-claim hedges to a
combined custom hedge (Issue 2). According to Brown and Toft (2002), this should depend on the
relative proximity or distance between competing hedges in terms of target performance. We can
adapt their eﬃciency index to MV preferences and deﬁne a new one based on values of ﬁnancial
hedging ﬂexibility. This index allows us to benchmark alternative hedges against a scale ranging
from no hedge to our optimal combined hedge. This ranking allows a ﬁrm to assess the relative
merits of alternative solutions oﬀered by a hedge provider.
Definition 3 (Single-claim hedge efficiency). The
single-claim
hedge
H♭(X)
(resp.,
G♭(I)) eﬃciency is the ratio of ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility values granted by HX (resp., HI) and
HXI:
EX := VHX
VHXI
,
(resp., EI := VHI
VHXI
).
(16)
Eﬃciency is dimensionless, it lies in [0,1], and is invariant under aﬃne rescaling in the MV. It can
also be expressed in terms of MV: E# =

U ∗
H# −U0

/
 U ∗
HXI −U0

, with U0 := U (π). Hereafter,
we focus on EX, the case of EI being similarly dealt with. Example EC.8 ranks an array of potential
hedges in a Bernoulli market model. Here follows an exact assessment for EX.
Proposition 3 (Single-claim hedge eﬃciency assessment).
EX =
Var(E[K0|FX])
Var(E[K0|FX]) + Var(G∗(I) −E[G∗(I)|FX]).
(17)
In particular, EX = 1 provided that I = f (X). EI can similarly be derived in terms of H∗(X).
Formula (17) shows that the greater the variance of the portion of G∗(I) that is unpredictable
by X, the lower the capacity of single-claim hedge H♭(X) to yield the MV attained by our optimal
combined custom hedge H∗(X)+G∗(I), and the lower the eﬃciency of single-claim hedge H♭(X).
4.3.1. Case-study: Risk aversion and hedge combination during COVID-19 pan-
demic.
Let X = NYMEX 1m WTI oil futures price (US$/bbl), Y = IEA US oil daily consumption
(MMbbl), and I = COMEX 1m gold futures price (US$/oz) 6-month forecasts. A representative
agent of the US oil industry is exposed to operating revenues π := (X −k)Y , where k = 22.5
USD/bbl is an average unit production cost. When should they hedge through H♭(X), G♭(I), or
H∗(X)+G∗(I)? We analyze this trilemma under normal and extreme market conditions, here rep-
resented by the ﬁrst semester of 2019 and 2020 (COVID-19 pandemic), respectively. At the outset

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
17
Table 1
Volatility, correlation, and eﬃciency across market contexts and risk aversion levels.
Year
WTI vol
Cons vol
Gold vol
Maximal correlations
Risk averse ←→Risk taker
Eﬀ
σX
σY
σI
rXY
rXI
rY I
100a∗
50a∗
10a∗
a∗
2019
(normal)
0.064
0.001
0.006
0.090
0.207
0.179
0.994
0.048
0.972
0.036
0.989
0.037
0.538
0.400
EX
EI
2020
(crisis)
0.962
0.026
0.003
0.849
-0.399
-0.623
0.857
0.306
0.492
0.627
0.039
0.983
0.001
0.999
EX
EI
of each period, we estimate a simpliﬁed version of the trivariate lognormal model (EC.18) reported
in Appendix EC.2(E). 6-month estimates for volatilities, maximal correlations, and eﬃciencies in
each time period and across four levels of risk aversion (standard: a∗:= 2E[π]/Var[π] ≃7.7×10−4,
med.: 10a∗, high: 50a∗, huge: 100a∗) are reported in Table 1.
2019 shows a normal scenario: WTI and gold are mildly volatile, and consumption is steady.
All correlations are small, with WTI-consumption smallest. Thus, revenues π almost exclusively
depend on WTI and a single claim on X should hedge most of their risk, while any combination
value should prove modest. Eﬃciency ﬁgures show this is the case (EX ∼1), unless the agent is a
risk taker (a = a∗) and claims on X and I may combine to enhance proﬁtability regardless of risk.
In contrast, 2020 exhibits an extreme scenario: WTI is highly volatile, consumption uncertainty
dramatically increases, and gold prices reﬂect the diversiﬁcation role they usually play during crises
(Baur and Lucey 2010). All correlations increase in absolute value and a tradeoﬀemerges: on one
hand, an increased rXY makes consumption Y approach a function of X, hence revenues π depend
on X only: hence, the best practice to hedge through a single claim on X; on the other hand, a
tripled ﬁgure for |rY I| suggests a value in combining claims. Since EX increases with risk aversion,
while EI increases with risk propensity, the problem can be solved as follows: for an appropriately
high level of risk aversion a (resp., propensity a−1), the agent should use H♭(X) (resp., G♭(I));
on intermediate values, where both eﬃciency EX and EI are well below one, they should adopt
the optimal combined hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I). This applies to both the risk takers in 2019 and the
highly risk averse agents in 2020. Combination strategy is thus valuable in managing mixed risk
during the aforementioned economic crisis.
5. Risk Management Integration
The joint adoption of ﬁnancial and operational instruments deﬁnes integrated risk management
policies (Babich and Kouvelis 2018). Our theoretical development allows us to craft a new class of
integrated policies to optimize business exposure.
5.1. A New Integrated Policy for the Newsvendor Position
We take the case of a commodity producer, say a gas company serving a mid-sized area in the US.
They produce a stock q (operational control) to meet future random demand Y (position’s non-
claimable). Each unit sold yields the market price X prevailing upon delivery (position’s claimable).

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Gross revenues are thus: X min{Y,q}. Residual stock, if any, entails a ﬁxed unit cost net salvage
price, say c. This leads to an overall cost equal to cmax{q −Y,0}. For the sake of simplicity, we
assume that unmet demand, if any, entails no additional cost. We also disregard production costs:
their consideration would increase computational eﬀort while leaving our argument unaltered. The
resulting position displays newsvendor-type operating net revenues as in Wang and Yao (2017):
πNV (X,Y ;q) := X min{Y,q} −cmax{q −Y,0}.
(18)
The side index I (the position external claimable term) is a temperature record in the delivery
area.
An integrated policy (H,q) is deﬁned by a hedging payoﬀfunction H (ﬁnancial control) in a set
H and a procurement order q (operational control) in a set Q. We consider seven sets H × Q of
admissible integrated policies. They diﬀer in terms of ﬁnancial hedging space H, while they all
share a common set Q of feasible procurement orders. Given a set H × Q of admissible integrated
policies, we select the one optimizing full exposure utility, namely:
 H∗
H×Q,q∗
H×Q

←
max
(H,q)∈H×Q: EQ[H]=0U
 πNV (X,Y ;q) + H

=: U ∗
H×Q.
This optimization problem can be disentangled into two nesting problems:
H∗
H (q) ←maxH∈H: EQ[H]=0 U (πNV (X,Y ;q) + H) =: U ∗
H (q),
(19)
q∗(H) ←
maxq∈Q U (πNV (X,Y ;q) + H∗
H (q)),
(20)
so that the optimal integrated policy in H × Q, the corresponding operating revenues, and
the related utility may be expressed as
 H∗
H×Q,q∗
H×Q

:= (H∗
H (q∗(H)),q∗(H)), π∗
H×Q + H∗
H×Q :=
πNV (X,Y ;q∗(H)) + H∗
H (q∗(H)), and U ∗
H×Q = U ∗
H (q∗(H)), respectively. We refer to maps q →
H∗
H (q) ∈H and q →U ∗
H (q) ∈R as the optimal hedge proﬁle in H and the ﬁnancially optimal utility
proﬁle over H, respectively. Then, the optimal hedge H∗
H×Q in H and utility U ∗
H×Q over H are
given by the optimal hedge proﬁle and the ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁle over H, each computed
with the optimal procurement order q∗(H).
The ﬁrst hedging policy leaves the business position ﬁnancially naked. The second to the sixth
hedging policies assume positioning in a linear claim on X (Rolfo 1980), a linear claim on I
(Gaur and Seshadri 2005), a custom claim on X (Chen et al. 2014), a custom claim on I (new),
and a combined linear hedge on X and I (Roncoroni and Id Brik 2017), respectively. Appendix
EC.2.4 oﬀers a precise description of these six hedging classes, as well as the corresponding
ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁles. The seventh hedging policy involves our optimal combined
custom hedge, i.e., H = HXI := HX + HI. The ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁle is U ∗
HXI (q) =

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
19
U (πNV (X,Y ;q) + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) and H∗
HXI×Q := H∗(X)+G∗(I) is our optimal combined cus-
tom hedge. We are now ready to present our proposal.
The joint adoption of the optimal combined custom hedge with the related optimal procurement:
 H∗
HXI×Q,q∗
HXI×Q

:=
 H∗
HXI (q∗(HXI)),q∗(HXI)

(21)
deﬁnes a new integrated risk management policy in HXI × Q referred to as the optimal combined
custom integrated policy. We compare this policy to the six alternatives resulting from integrating
each of the aforementioned optimal hedges with the related optimal procurement order. We simplify
notation and let subscripts exclusively indicate a hedging space H.
5.2. Empirical Comparative Analysis
We assume a lognormal model for the state vector (log X,log Y,log I) distribution under P and a
constant market price of risk (Cartea and Williams 2008). Appendix EC.2.5 details the model and
reports a parametric setup compatible to gas prices and consumption levels recorded in the US.
Hereafter, risk and return stand for standard deviation and expected value of future revenues.
5.2.1. Eﬃcient Frontiers
We ﬁrst consider integrating each of the seven optimal ﬁnancial
hedges with a varying level of gas procurement. We assess their performance through the Wang-Yao
eﬃcient frontiers (Wang and Yao (2017) and (2019)) as depicted in Figure 2 (Left panel). Each
frontier exhibits a locus of mean and standard deviation pairs (mH (q),σH (q)) of full exposure rev-
enues πNV (X,Y ;q)+H∗
H (q) across a range of operational levels q in Q. Each pair thus characterizes
the optimally hedged full exposure corresponding to an operational level q. It turns out that σH (q)
always increases in q, while mH (q) does so until a threshold ¯qH and then decreases. Return-risk
conﬁgurations (mH (q),σH (q)) for q > ¯qH are ineﬃcient in that they entail a simultaneous increase
in risk and reduction in return. Therefore, we let q range between 0 and the smallest procurement
order ¯q for which at least one of the seven eﬃcient frontiers reverts back to ineﬃcient return-risk
conﬁgurations, namely ¯q := minH ¯qH. In the case in question, we have ¯q ≃10.92 MMBtu.
Descriptive statistics on both axes are reported on a $10 MM scale. The uppermost frontier refers to
a naked position, while the lowermost frontier corresponds to our optimal combined custom hedge.
In between are eﬃcient frontiers corresponding to optimal hedges in the other ﬁve classes. On each
curve we indicate point PH := (mH (q∗
H),σH (q∗
H)) by a bold dot: it corresponds to the optimal
integrated policy (H∗
H,q∗
H). In Appendix EC.2(F), Table EC.4 reports optimal procurement q∗
H,
expected value (i.e., return) and standard deviation (i.e., risk) of the optimal operating revenues
π∗
H + H∗
H across the seven admissible integrated policy spaces, and variations of both descriptive
statistics occurring upon switching between integrated policies, say from
 H∗
G,q∗
G

, featuring a

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Figure 2
Wang-Yao return-risk eﬃcient frontiers (left panel) and eﬃciency proﬁles (right panel) of alternative
integrated ﬁnancial-operational policies.
q0
*
q*(ℋI
f)
q*(ℋI)
q*(ℋX)
q*(ℋX
f )
q*(ℋXI
f )
q*(ℋXI)
Position
Position + Single Forward Hedge on X
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on X
Position + Single Forward Hedge on I
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on I
Position + Combined Forward Hedge on X and I
Position + Combined Custom Hedge on X and I
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Financially Optimal Expected Return (USD × 107)
Financially Optimal Standard Deviation (USD × 107)
Position
Position + Single Forward Hedge on X
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on X
Position + Single Forward Hedge on I
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on I
Position + Combined Forward Hedge on X and I
Position + Combined Custom Hedge on X and I
6
7
8
9
10
11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Gas Procurement q (MMBtu × 106)
Efficiency Index
Note. Each frontier (left panel) is the locus of full exposure (i.e., ΠH,q := πNV (X,Y ;q) + H∗
H (q)) return (mean) and
risk (standard deviation) pairs (mH (q),σH (q)) := (E[ΠH,q],StdDev[ΠH,q]) across procurement orders q varying in
the eﬃciency range [0,10.98] and evaluated at the corresponding optimal hedge H∗
H (q) selected in a class H =H0 (no
hedge), Hf
I (forward on I), HI (single-claim custom on I), Hf
X (forward on X), HX (single-claim custom on X), Hf
XI
(combined forward on X and I), and HXI (combined custom on X and I). Figures are expressed in tens of millions
of dollars. A bold dot indicates the optimal procurement order q∗(H) ∈Q related to the hedging class H identifying
the curve it lies on.
hedging class G, to (H∗
H,q∗
H), featuring another hedging class H. In a slight abuse of language, we
refer to this modiﬁcation as a change from a hedging class G to a hedging class H.
We analyze these results along three dimensions: a) Nature of the underlying: X vs. I; b) Hedging
payoﬀcomplexity: linear vs. custom; c) Number of underlying terms: single vs. combined position-
ing. In the background is the interplay of these terms with the naked operating revenues πNV .
These latter are linear in the position’s claimable X, a property certainly binding for low values
of q, in which case they become somewhat independent of Y . Conversely, they are nonlinear in Y
for relatively low values of q, and become increasingly linear as q increases. These facts lead to a
few interesting properties of the proposed hedges, which we highlight in Figure 2.
a) Nature of underlying terms: X vs I. Be they linear or bespoke, claims on X and claims
on I show contrasting patterns. Compared to the naked position alone, while the former entail
signiﬁcant reductions in risk (−17.99% and −19.50% upon entering a forward on X or a custom
claim on X, respectively) and mild increases in return (+4.84% and +5.01% in the aforementioned
cases), the latter go the other direction (+7.27% and −8.59% in risk variation and +9.21% and
+14.05% in return variation upon entering a forward on I and a custom claim on I, respectively).
Hedged exposure leads to a simultaneous reduction of risk and an increase of return in all cases

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
21
except one: that is upon entering the optimal forward on I, which entails a rise in both return
and risk. This is because πNV is linear in Y as long as Y < q and then turns into a constant for
Y > q, so that a linear hedge on index I correlated to Y is eﬀective in the former case while it
brings additional risk for low values of q. This tradeoﬀis resolved by the adopted MV criterion,
which entails that the forward hedge on I is still preferable to a naked position. Figure 2 shows
that for low procurement orders q, hedges on X push the eﬃcient frontier downward while hedges
on I display a limited eﬀect in that sense; this feature weakens as long as q increases, until a
reversion occurs: for a suﬃciently high level of q, hedges on I dominate hedges on X in terms of
risk reduction given a common return ﬁgure. These considerations show that, in general, mixed
exposure leads to a tension in hedging eﬀectiveness between derivatives written on the claimable
term entering position’s revenues and those contingent on a side index exhibiting strong correlation
to the position’s nonclaimable term.
b) Hedging payoﬀcomplexity: linear vs custom. For low values of q, hedging through claims
on X leads to a remarkable improvement in the eﬃcient frontier compared to using claims on I.
This eﬀect slows as q increases due to the increasing relevance assumed by term Y within the
NV exposure. However, switching from a forward to a custom claim on X entails a steady and
relatively small gain across q due to the steadily linear behavior of πNV with respect to X: graphs
show that the eﬃcient frontiers related to forward and custom hedges on X are nearly matching.
Conversely, hedges on I seem to be less eﬀective than hedges on X for relatively low q, whereby
πNV shows a mild dependence on Y . However, switching from a forward to a custom hedge on
I improves the hedge performance. This eﬀect is exacerbated so long as the procurement order q
increases, due to the ability of custom claims on I to eﬀectively manage the increasingly relevant
and nonlinear dependence of revenues πNV on Y . Indeed, the eﬃcient frontiers related to forward
and custom hedges on I diverge as q increases. Also, for large levels of q, both linear and custom
hedges on I perform better than any hedges on X. These facts show that optimal customization
is relevant to hedging in the presence of nonlinear behavior in the underlying exposure.
c) Number of underlyings: single-claim vs combined. Combined hedging allows ﬁrms to resolve
the aforementioned tradeoﬀbetween risk and return gain over the ﬁgure shown by naked operating
revenues. In the forward hedging cases, full exposure risk (resp., return) gains resulting from
combined claim positioning is comparable to risk (resp., return) gains resulting from single-claim
positioning on X (resp., I), namely −19.60% vs. −17.99% (resp., +12.07% vs. 9.21%). In the custom
hedging cases, optimal combination nearly doubles risk reduction when compared to the eﬀect of
a single-claim on X (−38.31% vs. −19.50%), and multiplies risk reduction of a single-claim on I
by four (−38.31% vs. −8.59%). Our optimal combination approach ensures a return comparable
to that of a single-claim on I (+14.22% vs. +14.05%), which already accounts for as much as three

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
times the return from a single-claim on X (+14.05% vs. +4.84%). These observations underpin
our contention that optimal combination may entail a crucial improvement in hedge design.
Similar observations can be made when switching from any hedging set to another. For instance,
entering the combined forward hedge yields an appreciable gain in return upon switching from
either a forward (+6.89%) or a custom claim on X (+6.72%). It also entails risk savings upon
switching from either a forward (−25.05%) or a custom claim on I (−12.05%). Interestingly, adopt-
ing our combined hedging strategy leads to a more eﬃcient outcome regardless of starting position.
Appendix EC.2.6 analyzes the special case of variance preferences, i.e., ϱ = 0.
5.2.2. Hedge Eﬃciency across Operational Levels and Hedging Spaces
We may com-
pare optimal integrated policies across hedging classes H and procurement orders q by using the
eﬃciency index deﬁned in Section 4.3. Recall that H∗
H and U ∗
H (q) denote the ﬁnancially opti-
mal hedge and utility proﬁle when hedging in H (formula (19)). Functions U ∗
HXI (q) and U0 (q)
indicate the highest and the lowest ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁles. Let the value VH (q) of
ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility granted by H be the monetary amount m satisfying U (π (q) + m) =
U (π (q) + H∗
H). The eﬃciency of H at an operational level q can be deﬁned as the proportion of the
maximal value VHcu
XI (q) obtained by switching from no hedging to the optimal hedging in H, i.e.,
EH(q) := VH (q)/VHXI (q). Figure 2 (Right panel) shows eﬃciency proﬁles for the hedging spaces
Hf
X,Hf
I ,HX,HI, and Hf
XI. For relatively low values of procurement order q, the largest contribu-
tion to the best hedge is carried over by claims written on price X. As q increases, this eﬀect cedes
to the increasing importance exhibited by claims written on side index I. Combining forwards is
an easy way to resolve this tradeoﬀ. In addition, custom claims perform better than linear claims,
and the discrepancy between these two classes is greater for claims on I than for claims on X,
a phenomenon due to the strong nonlinear dependence of NV revenues on size term Y . These
observations show that, in the NV case in question, hedge nonlinearities can signiﬁcantly improve
hedging performance provided they enter an optimal combined positioning in the derivative mar-
ket. Hence the empirical relevance of joining combination and customization themes. Appendix
EC.2.6 disentangles the operational and speculative eﬀects of hedging class switching on expected
revenues, and shows the former dominates the latter upon entering any hedging class at stake.
5.2.3. The Eﬀect of Financial Flexibility on Operational Flexibility
The ﬁrm may
leverage a batch of ﬁnancial hedging classes in various ways. First, it can strengthen its optimal
operational policy. Table EC.4 reports that optimal procurement starts at q∗({0}) = 7.087 with
no hedge and reaches q∗(HXI) = 10.300 with our optimal combined custom hedge, i.e., a 45.3%
increase. Second, they may use increasingly complex hedges to gain operational ﬂexibility: by

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
23
Table 2
Operational ﬂexibility gains generated by a change in the underlying hedging class.
Initial
hedge
Initial
procur.
Operational ﬂexibility range
q∗
Q

· →Hf
X

Q (· →HX)
Q

· →Hf
I

Q (· →HI)
Q

· →Hf
XI

Q (· →HXI)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
(MMBtu)
H0
7.087
[7.214, 8.651]
[7.214, 8.773]
[7.129, 7.961]
[7.177, 11.034]
[7.172, 11.034]
[7.241, 10.920]
Hf
X
7.861
-
[7.887, 7.982]
*
[7.781, 8.574]
[7.822, 9.309]
[7.898, 10.920]
HX
7.917
*
-
*
[7.809, 8.400]
[7.854, 9.188]
[7.928, 10.920]
Hf
I
8.470
[8.612, 8.958]
[8.604, 9.081]
-
[8.531, 11.034]
[8.529, 11.034]
[8.689, 10.920]
HI
9.934
*
*
*
-
[9.935, 10.173]
[10.168, 10.920]
Hf
XI
9.177
*
*
*
*
-
[9.380, 10.920]
switching to a larger hedging space, a ﬁrm may gain access to an array of operational procurement
orders, ensuring an eﬃcient improvement in the return-risk space.
Let us consider a starting hedging class G. By switching to a larger class of hedges H ⊃G, the
ﬁrm may tune their procurement order over a range deﬁned by a whole interval Q(G →H) :=
[q−,q+] ⊂Q. Each level q ∈[q−,q+] leads to a more eﬃcient outcome compared to PG :=
(mG (q∗(G)),σG (q∗(G))) in the return-risk space, that is Q(q) := (m(q),σ (q)) satisﬁes m(q) ⩾
mG (q∗(G)) and σ (q) ⩽σG (q∗(G)). The locus of points Q(q) is clearly visible on the curves dis-
played in Figure 2: we consider the two-point intersection (Q1,Q2) between the eﬃcient frontier
corresponding to the hedging class H and the two semi-axes deﬁning the lower-right orthant cen-
tered at P; they single out a portion of the eﬃcient frontier of H gathering all points Q in question.
The inverse images of Q1 and Q2 through m(♯) are exactly q−and q+. Note that an operational
ﬂexibility range Q(G →H) might not exist, unless G ⊆H, in which case it always does. Table 2
reports values for all operational ﬂexibility sets. An asterisk indicates that no operational ﬂexibil-
ity gain occurs. For instance, moving from Hf
X to Hf
I never leads to an optimal integrated policy
(θI (i −fI),q) that is more eﬃcient than the initial policy
 θX (x −fX),q∗ Hf
X

. In all other cases,
a ﬁrm may switch between hedging classes to expand the operating range while improving its posi-
tioning in the return-risk space. How (and indeed, whether) a ﬁrm decides to increase operational
ﬂexibility is a matter of preference reﬁnement beyond the assumed MV criterion.
6. Conclusion
6.1. Summary
We develop a new model for combined contingent claim origination, and analyze its eﬀectiveness
in a typical ﬁnance-operations context (Babich and Kouvelis 2018). From the perspective of ﬁnan-
cial economics, we solve an inverse problem of fund allocation to bespoke ﬁnancial claims. More
precisely, we establish a general methodology for the design of combined custom claims to opti-
mally manage the risk engendered by any mix of insurable and noninsurable exposure faced by
a ﬁrm featuring MV preferences. Under mild technical conditions, optimal custom claims exist,

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
are unique, and their payoﬀschedules satisfy a design integral equation. We also provide analyti-
cal solutions and create a numerical scheme for this equation. From the standpoint of operations
management, we outline a rational decision process for handling corporate risk. Speciﬁcally, we
assess the monetary beneﬁt a representative ﬁrm earns by switching from a single-claim custom
hedge to our optimal combined custom hedge. A related eﬃciency index allows the ﬁrm to rank
alternative potential hedges and make an informed choice. We also devise a new array of integrated
ﬁnancial-operational risk management policies which allow the ﬁrm to widen operational ﬂexibility
and improve the eﬃcient frontier of their operating revenues. Exactly how the ﬁrm leverages these
opportunities is an entirely idiosyncratic decision, outside of the scope of a claim design framework.
6.2. Empirical Predictions and Managerial Insights
Our model naturally leads to a number of testable empirical implications and managerial insights.
Some proved to sharpen existing knowledge, while others have yet to be assessed.
1. Static management of long-term risk. Chowdhry and Howe (1999) state that ﬁrms engage
either in operational hedging when facing an important demand risk or in ﬁnancial hedging when
demand is predictable. Hence, the former is adopted to manage long-terms exposure, while the
latter is used to tackle short-term risk. We show that this need not be the case provided the hedging
space allows for claim combination. Indeed, our empirical analyses demonstrate that a ﬁrm facing
mixed exposure can suitably combine custom claims into an eﬀective hedge even when demand
is highly unpredictable. Static hedging may thus mitigate long-term exposure, and operational
hedging can address the residual risk. This insight sharpens the Kouvelis et al. (2018) prescription
whereby “inventory decisions focus on demand risk which cannot be hedged by ﬁnancial instru-
ments”.
2. Financial vs. operational hedging proﬁtability. Conventional theories state that hedging
increases ﬁrm’s value by alleviating market (i.e., ﬁrm-exogenous) imperfections (Smith and Stulz
1985). Adam and Fernando (2006) empirically show cases where shareholder value increases through
systematic gains from derivative holdings. We demonstrate that by switching between hedging
classes, expected revenues vary according to a ﬁnancial term leveraging market risk premia and a
real component leveraging operational ﬂexibility gains granted by the ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility
change. Our NV exercise empirically reveals that the former may be negligible, while the latter
still remains important. Hence, even in a model featuring no market imperfections, the beneﬁcial
eﬀect of ﬁnancial hedging ﬂexibility on shareholder value may exclusively manifest through the
nonﬁnancial (i.e., ﬁrm-endogenous) channel of operational ﬂexibility.
3. Customization vs. combination. The decision of exclusively relying on either a customiza-
tion or a combination theme leads us to a new dilemma. The eﬃciency proﬁles of alternative

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
25
integrated policies in the NV case underpin the superiority of combination over customization.
The ultimate choice ought to be grounded in the market context in question. We predict that
the high transaction costs and price markups usually exhibited by custom claims act in favor of
adopting combined forwards. To test this prediction, empirical analysts might assess the actual
customization-combination mix prevailing in a batch of corporate hedging portfolios.
4. Speculative derivative portfolios. Poitras (2013) argues that a few ﬁnancial debacles (e.g., Met-
allgesellschaft AG) originated from a misunderstanding of the speculative side in large derivative
positions. Our design system (5) exhibits two terms contributing to the overall speculative portion
in a portfolio: one is idiosyncratic to the claim at stake (Chen et al. 2014); the other is a cross-claim
component arising upon combination, which we ﬁrst unveil. This leads to examine the relative
importance of each term in ﬁnancial derivative failures: we predict that the cross-claim term is
relevant whenever the underlying asset correlations proved important.
5. Decentralized risk management. Unless maximal correlation rXI = 0, the optimal combined
hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) dominates the combination H♭(X) + G♭(I) of optimal single-claim hedges.
In a decentralized risk management system, should the risk engendered by a claimable X and a
nonclaimable Y be handled by distinct entities, index selection might be run irrespectively of rXI.
This practice could increase the distance between the two combined hedges above and possibly
generate an important underperformance of a hedge. When designing a decentralized framework,
managers should established a centralized monitoring system to detect this kind of failure.
6. Combination-customization complementarity. Custom hedging on I proves increasingly eﬀec-
tive with decreasing rXY and increasing rIY . Whenever customization (say, upon switching Hf
X →
HX) is largely ineﬀective (say, because revenues are almost linear in X as in our NV experiment,
or X and Y are poorly correlated as in Brown and Toft (2002)), optimal combination may replace
(HX →Hf
XI) or add up (HX →HXI) to it, while enhancing the ﬁrm’s position. A manager can thus
use combination to eﬀectively cope with mixed revenues featuring, e.g., uncorrelated risk terms X
and Y . This insight settles an unresolved hedging issue in Brown and Toft (2002).
7. Ranking alternative hedges. A ﬁrm might wish to benchmark a hedge against an ideal reference.
No hedge and our optimal combined hedge may represent the lowest and the highest points of
reference, respectively. One-dimensional scales can be obtained by considering operating revenues
MV, mean, or variance ﬁgures, each computed at the current level of operations. By locating
and comparing hedges within a selected scale, ﬁrms may assess the relative quality of alternative
hedging opportunities, rank them accordingly, and select a preferred solution.
8. Resolving single-claim tradeoﬀ. Single-claim hedges may dramatically change their eﬃciency
in response to changes of varying nature. The extreme market case-study in Subsection 4.3 shows
that eﬃciency estimates for the optimal single-claim hedges on X and on I exhibit a tradeoﬀupon

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
varying the ﬁrm’s aversion to risk. The NV case-study shows the same property upon varying the
level of operations. Whatever the nature of an eﬃciency tradeoﬀis, a manager can combine claims
to develop a hedge that outperforms single-claim hedges across the selected dimension.
6.3. Future Developments
Forthcoming research may target a number of theoretical enhancements and applications. A ﬁrst
direction is to develop concrete model instances. On the ﬁnancial side, the dependence structure
among state variables could be modeled using copula functions and the design integral equation
could be recast in terms of the estimated copulas. This would lead to computable combined cus-
tom hedges compatible with real-world ﬁnancial market contexts. On the operational side, custom
claims may merge into static or dynamic operational hedging policies, such as inventory manage-
ment strategies (Berling and Mart´ınez-de-Alb´eniz 2011), capacity allocation options (Ding et al.
2007), or market procurement options (Secomandi and Kekre 2014), as well as combined assortment
and stocking decisions (Dong et al. 2018), among others.
A second direction is to modify one or more model ingredients and examine their eﬀect on
the results we obtained. These may include: a) The class of admissible hedges: they may range
from American-style to path-dependent payoﬀschedule; b) Naked position revenues π: they may
comprise newsvendor networks (Van Mieghem 2007), decentralized supply chains(Turcic et al.
2015), and trading networks (Nadarajah and Secomandi 2018), among others; c) The target utility:
risk aversion may be modeled by using risk-adjusted performance measures other than a MV
criterion: they include exponential utility (Chen et al. 2007), mean-CVaR (Conditional Value-at-
Risk) criterion (Zhao and Huchzermeier 2017), expected shortfall (Wang and Yao 2019), and an
upper bound constraining an assigned risk measure (Park et al. 2017), among others.
A third direction involves the theoretical investigation of the integrated ﬁnancial-operational risk
management problem. It may prove interesting to devise a setup where the joint optimization over a
functional class of custom claims and a class of operational actions could be analyzed. Operational
policies might be static, dynamic, or of some intermediate kind (e.g., a sequentially reoptimized
rule, as in Secomandi (2015)). Analyzing the existence, uniqueness, and any characterization of a
general integrated risk management problem is perhaps the most challenging issue we foresee.
A fourth direction is to use combined custom claims for purposes other than revenue hedging.
Our combined custom hedge may oﬀer a viable alternative in alleviating agency costs (Iancu et al.
2017), in increasing the cash endowment entering a budget constraint (Caldentey and Haugh 2009),
or in complementing insurance contracts on side events (Dong and Tomlin 2012).
A ﬁfth direction is to allow for the dynamic resettling of our combined custom hedge in the
spirit of Chen et al. (2007), Kouvelis and Ding (2013), and Goel and Tanrisever (2017). A new

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
27
setup would include a family of stochastic processes for each risk term, one process for a starting
time n and state x; a dynamic balance condition whereby the fair value of a new custom hedge
matches the fair value of the standing hedge; and an array of static hedge design problems, one for
each time and state. Appendix EC.1.10 proposes a model setup for the optimal design of dynamic
strategies based on single-claim custom hedges.
A sixth direction is to extend the role of the time T of uncertainty resolution to that of a decision
variable, and examine the eﬀect of our combined custom hedge on T. Appendix EC.1(K) gives
a snapshot of conjectures put forward in Guiotto et al. (2020). An alternative path might be to
explore the role of T as an entry time as in Leung and Ludkovski (2011).
Note that both issues of dynamic extension and the embedding the time T as a decision variable
are still open problems even under the assumption of single-claim custom hedging. Any advance in
one of the aforementioned issues would deﬁnitively constitute a step forward in the construction
of a general theory of corporate risk management.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to ´Alvaro Cartea, Andras Fulop, Olaf Korn (discussant), R¨udiger Kiesel, Panos Kouvelis,
Jonathan Lipsmeyer, Patrice Poncet, Marcel Prokopczuk (discussant), Nicola Secomandi (discussant), Rom´eo
T´edongap, Danko Turcic, and Liao Wang for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier version of
the paper. We thank John Birge, Jiri Chod, Lingxiu Dong, Hamed Ghoddusi, Dan Iancu, Burak Kazaz,
Selvaprabu Nadarajah, Michel Robe, Duan Seppi, Sridhar Seshadri, David Yao, and the participants of the
OM Seminar at Carnegie Mellon University (Pittsburgh), the 5th International Symposium on Environment
& Energy Finance Issues 2017 (Paris), the INFORMS Annual Meeting 2017 (Houston), the CEMA annual
meetings 2017 (Oxford), 2018 (Rome), and 2019 (Pittsburgh), the Supply Chain Finance & Risk Management
Workshops 2018 and 2019 (St. Louis), the Mostly OM 2019 Workshop at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong (Shenzhen), and the Faculty of Business and Economics Seminar at the University of Hong Kong
(Hong Kong) for constructive comments. We also thank John Birge (Editor-in-Chief), Steven Kou (Area
Editor), and the anonymous Associate Editor and Referees, whose feedback led to a substantially improved
version of this paper. The usual disclaimers apply. We acknowledge ﬁnancial support by CERESSEC. This
research has been conducted as part of the project Labex MMEDII (ANR11LBX002301).
References
Adam T.R., Fernando, C.S. (2006). Hedging, Speculation, and Shareholder Value.J. Financial Econom.
81(2), 283-309.
Adam-M¨uller, A.F.A. (1997). Export and Hedging Decisions under Revenue and Exchange Rate Risk: A
Note. European Economic Review, 41, 1421-1426.
Anderson, R. W., Danthine, J.P. (1980). Hedging and Joint Production: Theory and Illustrations.Journal of
Finance 35, 487-498.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
Babich, V., Kouvelis, P. (2018). Introduction to the Special Issue on Research at the Interface of Finance,
Operations, and Risk Management (iFORM): Recent Contributions and Future Directions. Manufac-
turing & Service Operations Management 20(1), 1-18.
Balakrishnan, N., Lai, C-D. (2009). Continuous Bivariate Distributions. Springer.
Basak, S., Chabakauri, G. (2012). Dynamic Hedging in Incomplete Markets: A Simple Solution. The Review
of Financial Studies 25(6), 1845-1896.
Baur, D.G., Lucey, B.M. (2010). Is Gold a Hedge or a Safe Haven? An Analysis of Stocks, Bonds and Gold.
Financial Rev. 45, 217-229.
Berling, P., Mart´ınez-de-Alb´eniz, V. (2011). Optimal Inventory Policies When Purchase Price and Demand
are Stochastic.Oper. Res. 59(1), 109-124.
Bingham, N.H., Kiesel, R. (2004). Risk-Neutral Valuation - Pricing and Hedging of Financial Derivatives.
Springer Finance, Springer-Verlag London.
Birge, J.R. (2015). OM Forum-Operations and Finance Interactions. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management 17(1), 4-15.
Brennan, M.J., Solanki, R. (1981). Optimal Portfolio Insurance. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 16(3), 279-300.
Brown, G.W., Toft, K.B. (2002). How Firms Should Hedge. Review of Financial Studies 14, 1283-1324.
Briys, E., Crouhy, M., Schlesinger, H. (1993). Optimal Hedging in a Futures Market with Background Noise
and Basis Risk. European Economic Review 37, 949-960.
Caldentey, R., Haugh, M.B. (2006). Optimal Control and Hedging of Operations in the Presence of Financial
Markets. Mathematics of Operational Research 31(2), 285-304.
Caldentey, R., Haugh, M.B. (2009). Supply Contracts with Financial Hedging. Oper. Res. 57(1), 47-65.
Carr, P., Madan, D. (2001). Optimal Positioning in Derivative Securities. Quant. Finance 1(1), 19-37.
Cartea, ´A., Williams, T. (2008). UK Gas Markets: the Market Price of Risk and Applications to Multiple
Interruptible Supply Contracts. Energy Economics 30(3), 829-846.
Chen, L., Li, S., Wang, L. (2014). Capacity Planning with Financial and Operational Hedging in Low-Cost
Countries. Production and Operations Management 23, 1495-1510.
Chen, X., Sim, M., Simchi-Levi, D., Sun, P. (2007). Risk Aversion in Inventory Management. Operations
Research 55(5), 828-842.
Chod, J., Rudi, N., van Mieghem, J.A.V. (2010). Operational Flexibility and Financial Hedging: Comple-
ments or Substitutes? Management Science 56, 1030-1045.
Chowdhry, B., Howe, J. T. B. (1999). Corporate Risk Management for Multinational Corporations: Financial
and Operational Hedging Policies. European Finance Review 2, 229-246.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
29
Cummins, J.D., Mahul, O. (2008). Hedging under Counterparty Credit Uncertainty. Journal of Futures
Markets 28, 248-263.
Ding, Q., Dong, L., Kouvelis, P. (2007). On the Integration of Production and Financial Hedging Decisions
in Global Markets. Operations Research 55, 470-489.
Dong, L., Guo, X., Turcic, D. (2018). Selling a Product Line Through a Retailer When Demand Is Stochastic:
Analysis of Price-Only Contracts. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 21(4), 713-948.
Dong, L., Tomlin, B. (2012). Managing Disruption Risk: The Interplay Between Operations and Insurance.
Management Science 58, 1898-1915.
Faias, J.A., Santa-Clara, P. (2017). Optimal Option Portfolio Strategies: Deepening the Puzzle of Index
Option Mispricing.J. Financial Quant. Anal. 52(1), 277-303.
Fraser, J., Simkins, B.J., Eds. (2010). Enterprise Risk Management. Kolb Series in Finance, John Wiley &
Sons.
Fusai, G., Marena, M., Roncoroni, A. (2008). Analytical Pricing of Discretely Monitored Asian-Style Options:
Theory and Application to Commodity Markets. J. Banking Fin. 32 (10), 2033–2045.
Gaur, V., Seshadri, S. (2005). Hedging Inventory Risk Through Market Instruments. Manufacturing & Ser-
vice Operations Management 7(2), 103-120.
Gerner, M., Ronn, E.I. (2013). Fine-Tuning a Corporate Hedging Portfolio: The Case of an Airline. Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 25(4), 74-86.
Goel, A., Tanrisever, F. (2017). Financial Hedging and Optimal Procurement Policies under Correlated Price
and Demand. Production and Operations Management 26(10), 1924-1945.
Guiotto, P., Roncoroni, A., Turcic, D. (2020), The Term Structure of Optimal Operations. Foundations and
Trends in Technology, Information and Operations Management, 14(1-2), 155-177.
Haugh, M.B., Lo, A.W. (2001). Asset Allocation and Derivatives. Quantitative Finance 1, 45-72.
Iancu, D.A., Trichakis, N., Tsoukalas, G. (2017). Is Operating Flexibility Harmful Under Debt? Management
Science 63(6), 1730-1761.
Kerkvliet, J., Moﬀet, M. H. (1991). The Hedging of an Uncertain Future Foreign Currency Cash Flow.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26, 565-579.
Kouvelis, P., Li, R., Ding, Q. (2013). Managing Storable Commodity Risks: The Role of Inventory and
Financial Hedge.Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 15(3), 507-521.
Kouvelis, P., Pang, Z., Ding, Q. (2018). Integrated Commodity Inventory Management and Financial Hedg-
ing: A Dynamic Mean-Variance Analysis. Production Oper. Management 27(6), 1052-1073.
Leland, H. (1980). Who Should Buy Portfolio Insurance. The Journal of Finance 35, 581-594.
Leung, T., Ludkovski, M. (2011). Optimal Timing to Purchase Options. SIAM Journal on Financial Math-
ematics 2, 768-793.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
McKinnon, R.I., (1967). Futures Markets, Buﬀer Stocks, and Income Stability for Primary Producers. Journal
of Political Economy 75, 844-861.
Mello, A.S., Parsons, J.E. (2000). Hedging and Liquidity. The Review of Financial Studies 13, 127-153.
Moschini, G., Lapan, H., (1995). The Hedging Role of Options and Futures Under Joint Price, Basis, and
Production Risk. Internat. Econom. Rev. 36(4), 1025-1049.
Nadarajah, S., Secomandi, N. (2018). Merchant Energy Trading in a Network. Operations Research 66(5),
1189-1456.
Park, J.H., Kazaz, B., Webster, S. (2017). Risk Mitigation of Production Hedging. Production and Operations
Management 26(7), 1299-1314.
Poitras, J. (2013).Commodity Risk Management: Theory and Application Routledge, New York and London.
Ritchken, P.H., Tapiero, C.S. (1986). Contingent Claims Contracting for Purchasing Decisions in Inventory
Management. Operations Research 34(6), 864-870.
Rolfo, J. (1980). Optimal Hedging under Price and Quantity Uncertainty: The Case of a Cocoa Producer.
Journal of Political Economy 88, 100-116.
Roncoroni, A., Id Brik, R. (2017). Hedging Size Risk: Theory and Application to the US Gas Market. Energy
Economics 64, 415-437.
Secomandi, N. (2015). Merchant Commodity Storage Practice Revisited. Oper. Res. 63(5), 1131-1143.
Secomandi, N., Kekre, S. (2014). Optimal Energy Procurement in Spot and Forward Markets. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 16(2), 270-282.
Smith, C., Stulz, R. (1985). The Determinants of Firms’ Hedging Policies. J. Financial Quant. Anal. 20,
391–405.
Turcic, D., Kouvelis, P., Bolandifar, E. (2015). Hedging Commodity Procurement in a Bilateral Supply
Chain. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 17(2), 221-235.
Van Mieghem, J.A. (2007). Risk Mitigation in Newsvendor Networks: Resource Diversiﬁcation, Flexibility,
Sharing, and Hedging. Management Science 53(8), 1269-1288.
Wang, L., Yao, D.D. (2017). Production with Risk Hedging - Optimal Policy and Eﬃcient Frontier. Opera-
tions Research 65(4), 1095-1113.
Wang, L., Yao, D.D. (2019). Risk Hedging for Production Planning. Production Oper. Management (forth-
coming).
Xu, Y., Pinedo, M., Xue, M. (2016). Operational Risk in Financial Services. A Review and New Research
Opportunities. Production and Operations Management 26(3), 426-445.
Zhao, L., Huchzermeier, A. (2017). Integrated Operational and Financial Hedging with Capacity Reshoring.
European Journal of Operational Research 260, 557-570.

Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. OPRE-2019-01-058.R3
31
Paolo Guiotto is Senior Researcher and Faculty Member in Mathematical Analysis at the
University of Padua, Research Fellow at Scuola Galileiana of Studi Superiori, and former Research
Scholar at Scuola Normale Superiore in Pisa, the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
and the University of Southern California in Los Angeles. His research interests lie in the area of
stochastic analysis, including the interplay with quantum physics and ﬁnancial engineering.
Andrea Roncoroni is Professor of Finance at ESSEC Business School and Visiting Fellow
at Bocconi University. He is Director of the Energy and Commodity Finance Research Center
(ECOMFIN) and President of the Commodity and Energy Markets Association (CEMA). His
research interests include risk analysis and management, ﬁnancial derivatives, interface between
ﬁnance and operations, and stochastic modelling of commodity prices.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec1
Electronic Companion Appendices
EC.1. Complements
EC.1.1. List of Symbols
Table EC.1
A framework for the optimal design of combined custom ﬁnancial contingent claims.
Symbol
Mathematical term
Financial term
Operational term
{0,T}
▶Time set
▶Time period
▶Time frame
0
Initial time
Hedging setup time
Decision time
T
Final time > 0
Payoﬀtime
Realization time
(Ω,F,P)
▶Probability space
▶Firm’s beliefs
▶Stochastic setting
X
▶Random element
▶Claimable (risk) term
▶State variable 1
Y
idem
Nonclaimable (risk) term
▶State variable 2
I
idem
Claimable (side) index
▶State variable 3
F# (# = X or I)
▶σ-algebra of events of #
▶Events gleaned by #
▶#-information
L2 (Ω)
▶Finite variance r.v.
▶Regular payoﬀs
▶Regular variables
HX
▶L2 (Ω,FX,P)
▶Payoﬀs H (X)
▶Financial controls 1
HI
▶L2 (Ω,FI,P)
▶Payoﬀs G(I)
▶Financial controls 2
HXI
▶HX + HI
▶Combined p.’s H (X) + G(I)
▶Financial controls 3
L2
X
▶L2 (RN,BRN ,LP (X))
▶Payoﬀfunctions x →H (x)
▶Financial controls 1(bis)
L2
I
▶L2 (RN,BRN ,LP (I))
▶Payoﬀfunctions i →G(i)
▶Financial controls 2(bis)
L2
XI
▶L2
X + L2
I
▶Combined p. functions H (x) + G(i)
▶Financial controls 3(bis)
Q
▶Set of scalars
▶Operational variables q
▶Operational controls q
π = π(X,Y ;q)
▶Random variable in L2 (Ω)
▶Naked exposure
▶Fin. uncontrolled system
w
▶Nonnegative constant
▶Financial endowment
▶Control constraint
Q
▶Martingale measure
▶Pricing probability
▶Control constraint
U (·)
▶ϱEP [·] −(a/2)VarP [·]
▶Mean-variance utility
▶Target reward
(no symbol)
▶π (X,Y ;q) + [H (X) + G(I)]
▶Full exposure
▶Fin. controlled system
EC.1.2. Examples of Mixed Exposure
Example EC.1 (Primary commodity production model). Moschini and Lapan (1995) con-
sider a ﬂexible producer of a primary commodity, say a farmer harvesting crops. They face risk
from output price X quoted in dollars per tonne (US$/t) and crop yield Y expressed in tonnes per

ec2
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
hectare (t/ha). If q denotes the scale of production expressed in hectares (ha) and c(q) stands for
the corresponding cost, then operating net revenues may be written as:
π (X,Y ;q) := XY q −c(q).
(EC.1)
This is an example of multiplicatively mixed exposure.
Example EC.2 (Stochastic clearance price model). Caldentey and Haugh (2009) develop
and analyze a Stackelberg game between a producer and a retailer. They consider a background
quoted price process (Xt)0⩽t⩽T. At time 0, the producer oﬀers the retailer a wholesale price menu
X deﬁned by a functional W evaluated at each quoted price path X0T := (Xt (ω))0⩽t⩽T, namely:
X := W [X0T]. Then, the retailer reacts by optimizing net revenues:
π(X,Y ;q) := (Y −ξq)q −Xq
(EC.2)
over the class of order quantity actions q that depend on the same price path, i.e., q := Q[X0T]
for a suitable deterministic functional Q. Costs result from ordering each unit for a wholesale
purchase price X. Gross revenues are the order quantity q times a retail market price, which in
turn is calculated as a random market size term Y net a linear discount component ξq featuring
elasticity ξ. In the original Stackelberg game model, W is a control variable determined when the
producer selects a production level. Here, we focus on the retailer’s viewpoint, and assume that W
is assigned upfront. This is an example of additively mixed exposure.
Example EC.3 (Generalized newsvendor model). Secomandi and Kekre (2014) consider a
newsvendor-like commodity merchant meeting demand Y by optimally adjusting an initially pro-
cured quantity q through suitable ex post open market trades. Let X be the quoted commodity
price, s(X) stand for the retailer’s selling price, bid(X) be the bid quote, ask (X) be the ask
quote, and v (Y,q) denote the sales ﬁgure. In general, the merchant’s net revenues can be writ-
ten as sales revenues s(X)v (Y,q), plus liquidation revenues resulting from any stock excess over
demand (q −Y )+, minus purchase costs of any demand excess over stock (Y −q)+, net the initial
procurement cost pq, i.e.:
π (X,Y ;q) := s(X)v (Y,q) + bid(X)(q −Y )+ −ask (X)(Y −q)+ −pq.
Secomandi and Kekre (2014) take s(x) = x, v (y,q) = y, and p equal to the forward ask price
prevailing at time 0. By setting retail price s(x) equal to a constant amount, the bid price equal to a
constant salvage value, the ask price equal to a constant per unit penalty cost of unsatisﬁed demand,
and v (Y,q) = min{Y,q}, we obtain the newsvendor position revenues considered in Caldentey and
Haugh (2006).

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec3
Example EC.4 (Multinational production capacity allocation model). Chowdhry
and Howe (1999) consider a multinational corporation allocating production capacity and selling
their single product in two economies. Given domestic and foreign production capacities q1 and
q2, demand ﬁgures Y1 and Y2, sales prices X1 and X2, and an exchange rate X3, the authors
show how to determine the domestic production level o1 (q,Y) depending on the demand vector
Y := (Y1,Y2) and the capacity allocation vector q := (q1,q2). Foreign production level o2 (q,Y)
results from a clearing condition whereby overall production o1 + o2 is required to meet global
demand Y1 + Y2. Corporate net revenues may be expressed as the sum of domestic and currency
converted foreign proﬁt and losses:
π (X,Y;q) := X1Y1 −c1o1 (q,Y) + X3 [X2Y2 −c2 (Y1 + Y2 −o1 (q,Y))],
where c1 and c2 denote domestic and foreign unit production costs, respectively.
EC.1.3. On the Adoption of Mean-Variance Preferences
There are at least three arguments in favor of adopting MV preferences in our framework. First,
the MV criterion, possibly in the restricted form of a variance to minimize, is a benchmark for
representing risk-aversion within risk management models in a variety of contexts. These include
international trading (Ding et al. (2007), Chen et al. (2014)), operations management (Kouvelis and
Gutierrez (1997), Mart´ınez-de-Alb´eniz and Simchi-Levi (2006), Chen et al. (2007), Van Mieghem
(2007), Kouvelis and Ding (2013)), and agricultural business optimization (Rolfo (1980), Lence
(1995)), among others. Second, although the appropriateness of MV preferences has been debated
for decades, there is general consensus on the dominance of this criterion over the existing alter-
natives in practical contexts (Markowitz 2014). Third, optimizing a MV target ensures analytical
tractability of the problem. Incidentally, by replacing the variance term with a quadratic cost
function, MV leads to the value maximizing criterion adopted in Stulz (1984), Mello et al. (1995),
Froot and Stein (1998), Brown and Toft (2002), Chod et al. (2010), Goel and Tanrisever (2017),
and Park et al. (2017), among others.
EC.1.4. Discussion on Extent, Limitations, and Extensions of our Model
We herein clarify the extent, limitations, and possible extensions of our model.
1. Time frame and static positioning. It is natural to cast the optimal design of a combined custom
hedge as a static decision problem. This setup allows us to develop a self-contained design theory
adhering to the empirical observation that most nonﬁnancial ﬁrms are simply insurance buyers
who are either unwilling or unable to trade in ﬁnancial markets (Brown and Toft 2002), hence
seeking buy-and-hold hedges. This is also in line with the growing popularity of static positioning

ec4
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
in the hedging practice of ﬁnancial intermediaries (Carr et al. 1998). A one-period setup does not
require risk terms X and I to be tradable: from a buyer’s perspective, they need only be claimable.
Temperature records and most economic indices are examples of nontradable claimable terms.
2. Relation to the dynamic trading approach. In the dynamic setup of Example 1, equipped with a
tradable side asset price process (It)0⩽t⩽T and risk averse preferences, Caldentey and Haugh (2006)
devise a hedging payoﬀV (T) resulting from a self-ﬁnancing trading strategy (SFTS) θ = (θt)0⩽t⩽T
that acts on the side asset price process in a complete ﬁnancial market. If admissible strategies
θ only depend on side asset price paths (i.e., incomplete information, as opposed to complete
information whereby they may also depend on the nonclaimable process (Yt)0⩽t⩽T), then V (T)
is a path-dependent payoﬀG(I0T), where I0T denotes a sample path of process (It)0⩽t⩽T over a
time period [0,T]. Conversely, any path-dependent G(I0T) can be replicated by a SFTS acting on
(It)0⩽t⩽T only, i.e., θ (t) = F [t,I0t]. Setting aside minor diﬀerences (e.g., our MV target functional
vs. their quadratic expected utility), the incomplete information solution developed by these authors
corresponds to the restricted case of our combined custom hedge stemming from H (X) ≡0. Our
theoretical development thus takes a step forward within the incomplete information hypothesis
by jointly designing and combining a custom claim on X with a custom claim on I. In this
respect, a direct design approach seems relevant to us: were we to adopt a dynamic framework,
it would be hard to characterize the SFTS as achieving additively combining payoﬀs of form
V (T) = H (X0T) + G(I0T) and then deﬁne conditions ensuring their optimal coupling. In the case
of path-independent claims H (XT) and G(IT), our approach also allows us to explicitly describe
the corresponding payoﬀfunctions H (x) and G(i) through a design integral equation.
3. Complementarity of dynamic trading and claim design approaches. We contend that the two
hedging approaches based on dynamic trading (Caldentey and Haugh (2006), Wang and Yao (2017)
and (2019)) and on direct claim design (Chowdhry and Howe (1999), Chen et al. (2014), and the
present work) may play a complementary role. A trading approach delivers replicating strategies,
which are of a key importance for the hedge issuer. In addition, it handles trading under complete
information (i.e., θ depending on nontradable Y as well) whenever it makes sense, say a ﬁrm
exposed to a term Y that only the ﬁrm can observe. However, claim design delivers explicit,
possibly path-dependent, payoﬀfunctions or functionals incorporating desired hedging themes (e.g.,
linearity, customization, and combination), in line with banking practice (Myint and Famery (2012),
Ramirez (2011)). For instance, a ﬁrm looks for exposure to speciﬁc path dependence F : X0T →X,
say an Asian-style average (Fusai et al. 2008) or a barrier condition (Leppard 2005). Then, the
optimal claim ˆF (X0T) := H∗(F (X0T)) = H∗(X) is the required optimal path-dependent claim.
4. Further linkages to dynamic ﬁnancial-operational risk management. Caldentey and Haugh
(2009) use portfolio value Vθ (T) to alleviate a budget constraint in a two-stage game representing

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec5
a supply chain model with ﬂexible contracts. Our setup covers their operating position (Example
EC.2) and borrows a number of features, including the nature of the pricing kernel and the equiv-
alence to a zero-balance constrained problem. Wang and Yao (2017) explore integrated dynamic
hedging in a NV model under minimum variance preferences: by assuming demand dynamics are
linked to a tradable side index, they derive MV eﬃcient frontiers of full exposure across varying
operational levels. Our model includes minimum variance as a special case (Appendix EC.2.6).
We similarly leverage eﬃcient frontiers to assess the performance of a new integrated policy we
propose (Subsection 5.2.1).
5. Market completeness. In order to feed a budget constraint (2), the ﬁrm must be able to price
any candidate contingent claim H (X) and G(I). This requirement is compatible with a variety
of market contexts. In all cases, Y is nonclaimable, hence no contract involving Y ever needs to
be priced; in particular, the distribution of Y under Q is not required at any step in the design
process. First, the joint market for (X,I) can be complete: this is the partially complete market
referred to in Smith and Nau (1995). Second, if this market is incomplete, then a pricing kernel
can be identiﬁed through any criterion for resolving incompleteness (Staum 2008). Third, the ﬁrm
might simply have access to the originator’s pricing kernel as suggested in Caldentey and Haugh
(2006). Fourth, markets for a claimable X and a claimable I can be segmented, i.e., pair (X,I) is
nonclaimable, whereas each market is complete on its own: the ﬁrm would then price claims using
pricing kernels dQX/dP or dQI/dP depending on the underlying variable in question. Finally, the
ﬁrm may simply specify a range of pricing kernels to in turn yield an array of optimal combined
custom hedges.
EC.1.5. Combined Custom Hedging in a Bernoulli Market Model
We build a simple model drawing upon our intuition about the nature of combined custom hedging
and its relevance to integrated ﬁnancial-operational risk management. Within the setup proposed
in Section 2, let us consider a variance minimizing ﬁrm (ϱ = 0) devoting no budget (w = 0) to
hedging in a risk neutral market (P = Q). The best ﬁnancial claim available so far is either the
optimal custom claim written on the ﬁnancially insurable price X (Chowdhry and Howe 1999):
H♭(X) ←
min
H(X)∈HX: E[H(X)]=0Var[π + H (X)] =: V ∗
X,
(EC.3)
or the optimal custom claim written on any claimable side index I exhibiting correlation to the
noninsurable term Y (Gaur and Seshadri 2005):
G♭(I) ←
min
G(I)∈HI: E[G(I)]=0Var[π + G(I)] =: V ∗
I .
(EC.4)

ec6
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
They are referred to as optimal single-claim hedges. It is tempting to consider the naively combined
custom hedge H♭(X) + G♭(I), suppose it outperforms both optimal single-claim custom hedges
H♭(X) and G♭(I), and assume it represents the optimal combined custom hedge deﬁned as:
H∗(X) + G∗(I) ←
min
(H(X),G(I))∈HX×HI: E[H(X)+G(I)]=0Var[π + H (X) + G(I)] =: V ∗
XI.
(EC.5)
This argument would be fallacious, and it is precisely this observation which represents the spring-
board for our theoretical development. Speciﬁcally, it turns out that:
Claim 1. The optimal single-claim custom hedges H♭(X) and G♭(I), and the optimal combined
custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) exist.
Claim 2. The optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) outperforms the naively combined
custom hedge H♭(X) + G♭(I) unless X is independent of I; optimal single-claim custom hedges
H♭(X) and G♭(I) can even outperform the naively combined custom hedge.
Claim 3. The optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) may considerably improve the
eﬀectiveness of integrated ﬁnancial-operational risk management policies encompassing any of the
alternative hedges H♭(X), G♭(I), and H♭(X) + G♭(I).
We prove the three claims in the simplest possible nontrivial setup. Let us begin with an intuitive
geometric argument supporting our main idea. Under zero market premia, i.e., Q = P, Chowdhry
and Howe (1999) show that H♭(X) = −[E[π|X] −E[π]]. In general, we have the following:
Proposition EC.1 (Minimum variance custom hedge). Consider a variance minimizing
agent. Let P be a closed subspace of L2(Ω,F,P) such that 1 ∈P and Q ∼P. Then, the zero-valued
optimal claim in P is given by:
P ∗:= arg
min
P ∈P: EQ[P ]=0Var[π + P] = −[ProjPπ + c∗],
(EC.6)
where constant c∗= −

π,ProjP
dQ
dP

. (Here, ProjP indicates the orthogonal projection on P.)
In our context, Q = P, hence c∗= −E[π] and E[H (X)] = EQ [H (X)] = 0. The same holds for
G(I). Then, the optimal single-claim hedge H♭(resp., G♭) is given by the orthogonal projection
of opposite naked revenues −π over the subspace U (resp., V) of ﬁnite-variance P-mean centered
r.v.’s which can be expressed as a function of X (resp., I). Both naively combined custom hedge
H♭(X) + G♭(I) and optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) clearly belong to the sum
space U ⊕V. However, the former is the sum of projections on individual spaces U and V, while
the latter is the orthogonal projection over U⊕V: clearly, the two always diﬀer unless U and V are
orthogonal (see Figure EC.1, its geometrical observation underpins the intuition behind Claim 1,
provided that space orthogonality is intended as statistical independence.).

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec7
Figure EC.1
Geometry of optimal vs. naively combined custom hedges H∗(X) + G∗(I) and H♭(X) + G♭(I).
Our argument may yield closed-form expressions for these hedges if we specify a probabilistic
model for all risk variables in question. The simplest nontrivial example is a Bernoulli market
model. Speciﬁcally, let X assume values x+ and x−with probability pX and 1 −pX, respectively,
and I assume values i+ and i−with probability pI and 1 −pI, respectively. We deﬁne pXI :=
P(X = x+,I = i+) and make no assumptions regarding the distribution of the nonclaimable risk
term Y .
Theme 1: Hedge design. Optimal single-claim and combined custom hedges can be computed in
closed-form.
Proposition EC.2 (Minimum variance hedges in a risk neutral Bernoulli market model).
Consider a Bernoulli market model with P = Q. The optimal single-claim hedges solving problems
(EC.3) and (EC.4) may be expressed as:
H♭(X) = αU, G♭(I) = βV,
(EC.7)
where U := (1X=x+ −pX)/
p
pX(1 −pX) and V := (1I=i+ −pI)/
p
pI(1 −pI) are zero mean r.v.’s
with unit variance, i.e., versors in L2 (Ω), and coeﬃcients α = −⟨π,U⟩and β = −⟨π,V ⟩are con-
stant. In addition, the optimal combined custom hedge solving problem (EC.5) exists and is unique
provided X and I are not functionally dependent on one another; it is given by:
H∗(X) + G∗(I) = α −ρβ
√1 −ρ2 U + β −ρα
√1 −ρ2 V,
(EC.8)
where |ρ| := |⟨U,V ⟩| =
(pXI −pXpI)/
p
pXpI(1 −pX)(1 −pI)
 < 1.

ec8
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
If either X or I is a function of the other, any combined hedge is a claim on a single underlying.
Otherwise, naively and optimal combined hedges H♭(X)+G♭(I) and H∗(X)+G∗(I) diﬀer unless
either ρ = 0 or α = β = 0: in the ﬁrst case, X and I are statistically independent variables; in
the second case, any claim written on either variable is useless for hedging purposes, hence the
corresponding optimal position vanishes. This proves Claim 1 stated earlier in this section.
Theme 2: Relative performance assessment. We compare our optimal combined custom hedge
H∗(X) + G∗(I) to the alternative hedges H♭(X), G♭(I), and H♭(X) + G♭(I) in terms of risk
mitigation performance. All the hedges in Proposition EC.2 may be written as ξU +ηV for suitable
constants ξ and η. In addition, full exposure variance is Var[π + (ξU + ηV )] = Var[π] + ξ2 + η2 −
2ξα−2ηβ +2ξηρ. Variance ﬁgures attained by using each of the four proposed optimal hedges are:
V ∗
HX = Var[π] −α2, VXI = Var[π] −(α2 + β2 −2ραβ),
V ∗
HI = Var[π] −β2,
V ∗
HXI = Var[π] −(α2 + β2 −2ραβ)/(1 −ρ2),
(EC.9)
where VXI := Var

π + H♭(X) + G♭(I)

. The naively combined custom hedge H♭(X) + G♭(I)
increases the ﬁrm’s exposure compared to adopting the sole optimal single-claim custom hedge
H♭(X), i.e., VXI > V ∗
HX, provided that β2 < 2αβρ. (If β ≷0, this inequality amounts to β ≶2αρ.)
Similarly, H♭(X)+G♭(I) may perform worse than G♭(I) alone. However, barring degenerate cases
(e.g., β = ρα, whereby V ∗
HXI = V ∗
HX), the optimal combined custom hedge H∗(X) + G∗(I) always
outperforms both single-claim custom hedges H♭(X) and G♭(I) as well as their naive combination
H♭(X) + G♭(I) provided that ρ2 < 1. These observations prove Claim 2, and show how merging
the two strands of research depicted in Figure 1 is indeed a worthy pursuit.
Theme 3: Operational ﬂexibility gain. Integrating our optimal combined custom hedge with the
optimal handling of business operations may yield considerable gains in operational ﬂexibility (Zhao
and Huchzermeier 2015). Let business revenues π (q) = π (X,Y ;q) depend on a scalar operational
control q ∈Q, say a procurement order, a production level, or a sale price. Each ﬁnancially optimal
variance reported in expressions (EC.9) entails a function q →V ∗
# (q), which we refer to as an
optional variance proﬁle.
We consider three alternative optimal ﬁnancial-operational hedging policies:
1. Optimal operational policy (0,q∗
0), with operational level q∗
0 minimizing the variance proﬁle
V0(q) := Var[π (q)] of naked position revenues;
2. Optimal single-claim integrated policy
 H♭(X),q∗
HX

minimizing Var[π (q) + H] over single-
claim custom hedges H (X) ∈HX and operational levels q ∈Q;
3. Optimal combined integrated policy
 H∗(X) + G∗(I),q∗
HXI

minimizing Var[π (q) + H + G]
over combined custom hedges H (X) + G(I) ∈HXI and operational levels q ∈Q.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec9
Figure EC.2
Operational ﬂexibility ranges and gains.
ℐqℋX
*
ℐqℋXI
*
0(q)
ℋX
*
(q)
ℋXI
*
(q)
0
*
0
*
Retail Price q (US$/unit)
(Financially Optimal) Variance
Note. Operational ﬂexibility ranges entailed by: (i) single-claim custom hedging (Iq∗
HX : red segment); (ii) combined
custom hedging (Iq∗
HXI : blue half-line). The corresponding operational ﬂexibility gain Iq∗
HXI \ Iq∗
HX is unbounded.
Under mild regularity conditions, the variance proﬁles of optimally hedged positions lie below the
naked position’s minimum variance V ∗
0 := V0 (q∗
0) in suitable operational control ranges of values.
That is, there are intervals Iq∗
HX and Iq∗
HXI such that V ∗
HX(q) ⩽V ∗
0 for all q ∈Iq∗
HX and V ∗
HXI(q) ⩽
V ∗
0 for all q ∈Iq∗
HXI . In addition, these ranges nest inside one another along with increasing hedge
complexity, i.e., Iq∗
HX ⊆Iq∗
HXI . We identify Iq∗
HX (resp., Iq∗
HXI ) with the operational ﬂexibility
range yielded by optimal single-claim (resp., combined) custom hedging. Thus, the range increment
Iq∗
HXI \ Iq∗
HX represents the operational ﬂexibility gain aﬀorded by our optimal combined hedge.
We now show that this gain can be as large as an unbounded interval of values.
Example EC.5 (Electricity retailer). Let an electricity retailer act as a price taker in a
competitive wholesale market (Joskow and Kahn (2001)). They buy at a competitive market price
X, sell on for a selected retail price q (control variable) a load demand Y/q requested by end
consumers, and earn operating revenues π(q) := (q −X)Y/q. Note that demand size is inversely
proportional to retail price q. We make the natural assumption that procurement costs and demand
level are positively correlated, i.e., ρ(XY,Y ) > 0. For the sake of simplicity, we consider the selected
side index I to be statistically independent of the purchase price X. (An extension to dependent
variables X and I would merely increase the computational burden while leaving our argument
unaﬀected.) Below, we derive analytical formulae for optimal variance proﬁles V ∗
0 (q), V ∗
HX(q),
V ∗
HXI(q), their points of minimum q∗
0, q∗
HX, q∗
HXI, and the two operational ﬂexibility ranges Iq∗
HX and
Iq∗
HXI . We show that each optimal variance proﬁle assumes the form V ∗
#(q) = a#
 q−1 −q∗−1
#
2 +b#,

ec10
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
where both a# > 0 and b# > 0 are decreasing with increasingly complex hedges. We also prove
that for any parametric conﬁguration entailing the two inequalities q∗−1
HX −
p
a−1
X (V ∗
0 −bX) > 0
and q∗−1
HXI −
p
a−1
XI (V ∗
0 −bXI) < 0, the operational range Iq∗
HX is bounded while the operational
range Iq∗
HXI is unbounded. In these cases, the operational ﬂexibility gain Iq∗
HXI \ Iq∗
HX from our
combination theme is unbounded as well. Figure EC.2 illustrates this interesting phenomenon.
These considerations underpin our experimental investigation in Section 5 of the extent of Claim
3 within the more general setup of Section 2.
EC.1.6. Further Examples
The following three examples compute maximal correlations, analyze their mutual dependence,
and oﬀer a case of hedge ranking in the context of a Bernoulli market model.
Example EC.6 (Maximal correlation in a Bernoulli market model). Since
φ(X) =
αU and ψ(I) = βV (Proposition EC.2), then: ρ(φ(X),ψ(I)) = |⟨U,V ⟩| = |ρXI|, and maximal
correlation is rX,I = |ρXI|. Clearly, ρXI = corr(1X=x+ −p+,1I=i+ −q+). By the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality, |ρXI| = 1 whenever V ∝U, i.e., V = ±U: X and I are a function of one another.
Example EC.7 (Maximal correlation linkages in a Bernoulli market model). In
the previous example, rIX = |⟨V,U⟩| = cos(ϑV U), where ϑV U denotes the angle between V and
U. If Y is a Bernoulli r.v., then rIY = cos(ϑV W) for some vector W. If W lies within the angle
between V and U, then it satisﬁes ϑV U = ϑV W + ϑW U. Since Y and X are ﬁxed, then the angle
ϑW U created between the two of them is ﬁxed as well. By varying I, we see that rIX = cos(ϑV U)
decreases (or increases) if and only if rIY = cos(ϑV W) decreases (or increases) as well.
Example EC.8 (Hedge ranking in a Bernoulli market model). With reference to the
eﬃciency analysis reported in Subsection 4.3, the variance attained by using no hedge, H♭(X), and
H∗(X) + G∗(I) are given by formulae (EC.9). The eﬃciency of single-claim hedge H♭(X) is thus:
EX = (1 −ρ2)α2/(α2 + β2 −2ραβ), where α = −⟨π,U⟩, β = −⟨π,V ⟩, and |ρ| = |⟨U,V ⟩|. Clearly,
H♭(X) and H∗(X) + G∗(I) deliver the same performance and EX = 1 provided that ρα = β. By
using the explicit expression for H∗(X) + G∗(I) in formula (EC.8), this condition amounts to
having G∗(I) = 0.
We now show that rXI = 1 is compatible with non-uniqueness of the optimal combined claims
H∗(X) and G∗(I).
Example EC.9 (Non-uniqueness). Let FI ⊆FX. Then, I = f(X) for a measurable function f
(i.e., index I is redundant), system (5) entails inﬁnitely many solution pairs. The design problem
(4) reduces to U ∗
HXI = U ∗
HX := max ˜
H∈HX: EQ[ e
H(X)]=0 U

π (X,Y ) + ˜H (X)

, whose (unique) solution
eH∗(X) equals H∗(X) + G∗(f (X)) = H∗(X) + G∗(I) for inﬁnitely many pairs (H∗(X),G∗(I))
solving the original problem (4).

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec11
We conclude this appendix by exhibiting a state variable setup based on Itˆo diﬀusion processes
and by computing the related maximal correlations in terms of their coeﬃcients.
Example EC.10 (Dynamic market model). Assume Itˆo diﬀusion dynamics:



dXt/Xt = α dt + σX
1 dW1 + σX
2 dW2,
dIt/It = β dt + σI
1dW1 + σI
2dW2,
dYt/Yt = γ dt + σY
1 dW1 + σY
2 dW2 + σY
3 dW3,
are assigned for given independent Brownian motions W1, W2, and W3. A variety of alternative state
vectors (X,Y,I) enter our setup, including 1) European-style vectors with components X := XT,
Y := YT, and I := IT, and 2) Asian-style vectors with terms X := (Xt1,...,XtN), Y := (Yt1,...,YtN),
and I := (It1,...,ItN) (see Example 1). Appendix EC.3.9 shows that rXI < 1 for both models
provided that coeﬃcients σX := (σX
1 ,σX
2 ,0) and σI := (σI
1,σI
2,0) are linearly independent, and
σY
3 ̸= 0.
EC.1.7. Explicit and Numerical Solution of the Design Equation
The design integral equation (8) can explicitly be solved provided that the integral kernel k(x,ξ)
is separable. This is the case of statistically independent variables X and I, that is fXI(x,i) =
fX(x)fI(i). Then, the integral kernel is k(x,ξ) =
R
RN fXI(ξ,i)di = fX(ξ) and the optimal hedges are
easily derived (see Example 3). We may also analytically solve the design integral equation related
to a class of kernels derived from a perturbation of the independence case. (A proof is reported in
Appendix EC.3.11.)
Proposition EC.3 (Separable Perturbation of the Independence Case). Let variables X
and I feature a joint distributions density:
fXI(x,i) = (1 + α(x)β(i))fX(x)fI(i),
(EC.10)
where α(x)β (i) ⩾−1 for all (x,i) ∈RN × RN and
R
RN α(x)fX (x)dx =
R
RN β (i)fI (i)di = 0. If
∥α∥L2
X∥β∥L2
II < 1, then the integral kernel is separable, it can be expressed as:
k(x,ξ) = fX (ξ)

1 + ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(x)α(ξ)

,
and the unique solution of design equation (8) is:
H∗
0(x) = ΠX(x) + γ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(x), x ∈RN,
(EC.11)
where γ = c−1 R
RN α(ξ)Π0(ξ)fX(ξ) dξ and c = 1 −∥α∥2
L2
X∥β∥2
L2
I.

ec12
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Example EC.11. Let N = 1. Assume that:
α(x) := θ(1 −2FX(x)),
β(i) := 1 −2FI(i),
where θ > 0 and F# denotes the distribution function of # under P. Both α and β satisfy the
aforementioned regularity conditions and ∥α∥L2
fX ∥β∥L2
fI < 1. Since ∂xα(x) = −2θfX(x), then:
E[α(X)] = −1
4θ
Z
R
∂x(α(x))2 dx = −θ
4

(1 −2FX(x))2x=+∞
x=−∞= 0,
and:
E[α(X)2] = −1
6θ
Z
R
∂x
 α(x)3
dx = −θ2
6

(1 −2FX(x))3x=+∞
x=−∞= θ2
3 < +∞.
Similarly, E[β(I)] = 0 and E[β(I)2] < +∞.
The design integral equation is diﬃcult to solve analytically. One may thus resort to a suitable
numerical scheme and derive an approximated solution. It turns out that most numerical methods
for integral equations rely on the compactness of the integral operator:
I [w](x) :=
Z
RN k(x,ξ)w(ξ) dξ,
x ∈RN,
(EC.12)
as deﬁned in L2
X (Hackbush 1995). In our context, I [w](X) = E[E[w(X)|FI]|FX] is a projection,
hence it is compact only provided it exhibits ﬁnite dimensional rank. Unfortunately, this is not
the case if (X,I) is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure. However, we may
adapt a Galerkin ﬁnite elements method, which normally requires a compactness assumption, as a
convenient means of developing our setup. Let L2
X,0 := {H ∈L2
X :
R
RN H(x)fX(x)dx = 0}.
Theorem EC.1 (Numerical solution of the design equation). Consider a basis (wj)j⩾0 for
L2
X,0, an orthonormal basis (ej)j=1,...,n for Span⟨w1,...,wn⟩(n ⩾1), a matrix Tn := (Tjk) deﬁned
by wj = Pn
k=1 Tkjek, operator I in (EC.12), and Mn := (⟨I [ek],ej⟩)k,j=1,...,n. If rXI < 1, then the
unique solution H∗
0 ∈L2
X of the design equation (9) is the L2
X-limit of payoﬀsequence:
 H∗
0,n(x)

n⩾1 :=
 n
X
j=1
hn
j wj(x)
!
n⩾1
,
where hn ∈Rn is the unique solution of the n-dimensional linear system: T −1
n
(In −Mn)Tnhn = γn,
matrix In is the n × n identity, and vector γn := (⟨ΠX
0 ,ej)j=1,...,n, with ΠX
0 given by (9).
In the case of Gaussian distributions, wj may be centered Hermite polynomials; if distributions are
lognormal, we may change variables according to x = eu and then center the outcome around the
P-mean. To the best of our knowledge, this result is new. We have used it for solving the design
equation arising in Section 5.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec13
EC.1.8. Combined vs. Single-Claim Hedge PayoﬀAnalysis
Let us consider the mean-centered claims H∗
0 (X) and G∗
0 (I) solving system (5). The optimal single-
claim hedge H♭(X) results from setting G(I) ≡0 in expression (5). We see that the two claims
H∗
0 (X) and H♭
0 (X) diﬀer by exactly the cross-claim eﬀect:
H∗
0 (X) −H♭
0 (X) = −E[G∗
0(I)|FX].
By adding G∗
0(I) to both terms in the previous expression, we have:
[H∗
0 (X) + G∗
0 (I)]
|
{z
}
combined positioning
−H♭
0 (X)
| {z }
single claim
= G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0(I)|FX]
|
{z
}
I-idiosyncratic risk
.
(EC.13)
The value-centered optimal combined custom hedge H∗
0 (X) + G∗
0 (I) exceeds the value-centered
optimal single-claim hedge H♭
0 (X) by the incremental contribution of claim G∗
0(I) over its X-
predictable component E[G∗
0(I)|FX]. In other words, this contribution is represented by the por-
tion of payoﬀG∗
0 (I) that depends on whatever risk source is unspanned by X. This quantity is the
I-idiosyncratic risk component of the hedge G∗
0 (I).
EC.1.9. Combination Value Lower Bound for Weakly Risk Averse Firms
For a weakly risk averse ﬁrm, we obtain an approximate explicit lower bound which does not
depend on naked revenues π. Hence, we needn’t assume anything regarding π, X, and Y .
Proposition EC.4 (Combination value lower bound: weakly risk averse ﬁrms).
Assume that Var[π] ≪(ϱ/a)
2 Var[dQ/dP]. Then:
CVX→X+I ⪆1
2(1 −r2
XI)

1 −
q
1 −r2
X⊥I
2 ϱ
aVar
dQ
dP

,
(EC.14)
where rX⊥I := sup

ρ(Z,W) : Z ∈L2
I,W ∈(L2
X)⊥ 
.
If index selection is based on this bound, then it would not depend upon the ﬁrm’s position
revenues π or nonclaimable risk term Y . This concludes our analysis of Issue 1 stated above.
EC.1.10. A Dynamic Custom Hedging Model Setup
Let us consider our standard model setup (Section 2) and the following variations. The time frame
is a ﬁnite set of points 0,...,N. There is a single source of risk X, which we assume to be claimable.
This is deﬁned through a family of stochastic processes X := (Xn,x
k
)0⩽n⩽k⩽N over a probability
space (Ω,F,P), starting at Xn,x
n
= x for all times n and states x, and grouped according to the rule
X
k,Xn,x
k
h
= Xn,x
h
for all times n ⩽k ⩽h and states x. We focus on one-claim hedges written on X
only. For the sake of simplicity, we consider operating revenues and hedges depending on the ﬁnal

ec14
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
state Xn,x
N
only. Given a starting point in time n, a state x, and a cash endowment w, the optimal
self-ﬁnancing hedging strategy (SFHS) originating at (n,x,w) is a family (H∗
k,y|n,x)n⩽k⩽N,y=Xn,x
k
deﬁned by the following recursion:
• At time t = n, optimal hedge H∗
n,x|n,x is the payoﬀH determined by solving:
max
H∈L2
X: EQ[H(Xn,x
N
)]=w U [π(Xn,x
N ) + H(Xn,x
N )].
(EC.15)
This is the one-period single-claim custom hedge design problem stated in Section 4.
• At time k + 1 : n ⩽k < N, given a standing hedge H∗
k,y|n,x for every state y = Xn,x
k
, let z =
Xn,x
k+1 denote an admissible state. The ﬁrm seeks an optimal hedge H := H∗
k+1,z|n,x paying out
H∗
k+1,z|n,x(Xk+1,z
N
) at maturity N and currently worth the time k + 1 fair value of the standing
hedge H∗
k,Xn,x
k |n,x in their portfolio (self-ﬁnancing condition). That is:
EQ[H(Xk+1,z
N
)] = EQ
h
H∗
k,Xn,x
k |n,x(Xn,x
N )
Xn,x
k+1 = z
i
.
(EC.16)
The time k + 1 hedge H∗
k+1,z|n,x corresponding to state z is the payoﬀH solving the one-period
design problem:
max
H∈L2
X: EQ[H(Xk+1,z
N
)]=EQ
"
H∗
k,Xn,x
k |n,x
(Xn,x
N
)
Xn,x
k+1=z
#U

π(Xk+1,z
N
) + H(Xk+1,z
N
))

.
(EC.17)
This procedure leads to the optimal SFHS:
H∗:=
 H∗
n,x|n,x,...,H∗
k+1,·|n,x,...,H∗
N−1,·|n,x

.
If x = xn,...,xN is a sample path for the underlying risk variable, then strategy H∗entails the
following sequence of payoﬀfunctions:

H∗
n,xn|n,x,...,H∗
k+1,xk+1|n,x,...,H∗
N−1,xN−1|n,x

.
One might also include transaction costs and examine the tradeoﬀbetween incremental beneﬁt and
cost related to switching from a static hedge to a periodically rebalanced hedge. An issue arising
upon extending any MV model to multiple periods is time inconsistency. This is of particular
relevance when trying to solve the course of dimensionality entailed by the formulation above and
coming up to an equivalent dynamic programming recursion. The problem may be tackled either by
replacing the MV target with an expected exponential utility, as in Caldentey and Haugh (2006),
or by using any of the methods developed in Basak and Chabakauri (2010) and Bj¨ork and Murgoci
(2014). An extension to a dynamic setup may be found in Kouvelis et al. (2018). Further theoretical
investigation is left for future research.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec15
EC.1.11. The Term Structure of Optimal Operations
Guiotto et al. (2020) consider time T operating revenues πT (X,Y ;q) in a dynamic setting (see, e.g.,
Example EC.10), derive a term structure of optimal operational levels T →q∗(T), and compute the
optimal lead-time deﬁned as T ∗
0 := arg maxT >0 U (πT (X,Y ;q∗(T))). One may include our combined
custom hedge and derive the optimal operational time deﬁned as:
T ∗
H⊕G := arg max
T >0 U
 πT (X,Y ;q∗(T)) + H∗
T,q∗(T ) (X) + G∗
T,q∗(T ) (I)

.
Our conjecture is twofold: ﬁrst, T ∗
H⊕G > T ∗
0 ; second, by reducing exposure to uncertainty, our
optimal combined hedge allows the ﬁrm to delay any optimal operational policy change resulting
from model exogenous factors (e.g., a sudden increase in risk aversion due to unexpected market
turmoil).
EC.2. Technical Details
EC.2.1. Regularity Conditions
Throughout the paper, functional dependence between variables is assumed to go through a Borel
measurable map. We require that all r.v.’s exhibit ﬁnite variance under the physical probability P.
This assumption does not substantially impact the economics of the underlying problem. However,
it ensures that any future cash ﬂow C with ﬁnite variance has a well-deﬁned fair price because:
EQ [|C|]
2 ⩽EP
h
|C|
2i
EP
h
(dQ/dP)
2i
. In particular, any admissible combined hedge has a ﬁnite fair
price EQ[H(X) + G(I)], hence the budget constraint in problem (3) is well-deﬁned. Let L2 (Ω) :=
L2(Ω,F,P) be the space of square integrable r.v.’s equipped with the usual inner product. We
denote BRN the Borel σ-algebra over RN. The assumption of variance ﬁniteness amounts to stating
that all risk variables (including the business position, pricing kernel, and hedge’s payoﬀs) are in
L2 (Ω). Should X and I be ﬁnite dimensional, then this statement is equivalent to taking payoﬀ
functions H = H (x) and G = G(i) in L2
X and L2
I, respectively. Similarly, the business position
π = π (X,Y ;q) is assumed to be in L2 (Ω) for all q ∈Q. Clearly, the optimized business position
revenues Π deﬁned in formula (1) are in L2 (Ω) and the target MV criterion U is well-deﬁned.
EC.2.2. Budget Constraint Reduction
We ﬁrst show that budget constraint EQ[H(X) + G(I)] ⩽w is binding at the optimum: any hedge
(H∗(X),G∗(I)) that solves the optimization problem (3) meets a condition with strict equality,
i.e., EQ[H∗(X) + G∗(I)] = w. Otherwise, the ﬁrm may use the residual cash endowment δ :=
w −EQ[H∗(X) + G∗(I)] > 0 to enhance their investment and take a derivative position (H∗(X) +
δ,G∗(I)). This latter clearly satisﬁes the budget constraint, while entailing a MV utility that

ec16
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
strictly exceeds the one related to (H∗(X),G∗(I)), i.e., U (π + (H∗(X) + δ) + G∗(I)) > U (π +
H∗(X) + G∗(I)). This contradicts the optimality of (H∗(X),G∗(I)). Next, we prove that the
optimization problem (3) with an equality constraint EQ[H(X) + G(I)] = w boils down to one
with equality constraints at the level of individual claims, i.e., EQ[H(X)] = 0,EQ[G(I)] = 0. Let
(H∗(X),G∗(I)) denote an optimal combined positioning that corresponds with a zero portfolio
endowment. Then, any derivative positioning (H∗(X) + w1,G∗(I) + w2), with w1 + w2 = w > 0, is
optimal for the problem featuring a budget w. Indeed, they are all worth w and deliver a common
MV performance. Given a worthless derivative portfolio, i.e., w = 0, centering each payoﬀfunction
by the related fair value does not alter the resulting MV target, namely U (π + (H (X) −VH) +
(G(I) −VG)) = U (π + H (X) + G(I)) −ϱ(VH + VG) = U (π + H (X) + G(I)), as long as VH + VG =
EQ[H(X) + G(I)] = w = 0, where VH := EQ[H(X)] and VG := EQ[G(I)]. These considerations show
that the ﬁrm may split their endowment w into a portion w1 allocated to purchasing a claim H (X)
written on the position’s claimable X and a portion w2 devoted to buying a claim G(I) written
on the side index I. The optimal hedge then reads as follows:
(H∗(X),G∗(I)) = ( eH∗(X) + w1, eG∗(I) + w2),
where claims eH∗(X) and eG∗(I) solve the reduced optimization problem (3) with individual con-
straints EQ[H(X)] = 0,EQ[G(I)] = 0.
EC.2.3. Properties of Maximal Correlation
Maximal correlation exhibits the following properties:
1. 0 ⩽rXI ⩽1 (unitary range);
2. rXI = rIX (symmetry);
3. rXI = 0 ⇔X and I are statistically independent (orthogonality);
4. rΦ(X)Ψ(I) = rXI for all bijections Φ and Ψ (invariance under one-to-one transformation);
5. rXI = |ρ(X,I)| if X and I are Gaussian. (Here ρ denotes the Pearson linear correlation.)
6. For any multivariate Gaussian pair (Z1,Z2), rZ1,Z2 = 1 ⇐⇒∃a,b ̸= 0 : a · Z1 = b · Z2.
Statements 1 to 5 are proved in Schweizer and Wolﬀ(1981). Statement 6 is proved in Guiotto
(2019). Note that functional dependence between variables X and I (see Section 1.2) entails a
unitary maximal correlation (rXI = 1), while the inverse may not be true. Hence, rXI < 1 implies
that X and I are not functionally dependent on one another.
EC.2.4. Hedging Policies and Utility Proﬁles in the Newsvendor Model
The ﬁrst hedging policy leaves the business position ﬁnancially naked, i.e., H = {0}. We thus
have a trivial hedge H∗
H×Q ≡0, a utility proﬁle U ∗
0 (q) := U (πNV (X,Y ;q)), and an optimal pro-
curement q∗
0 := q∗({0}). The second and third hedging policies assume a positioning in linear

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec17
derivatives written on either X or I. That is H = Hf
X := {x 7→θ (x −fX), θ scalar} and H =
Hf
I := {i 7→θ (i −fI), θ scalar}, where the two arbitrary constant values fX and fI represent
the T-delivery prices agreed on at time 0 by buyer and seller. Clearly, the zero-price condition
EQ[H] = 0 appearing in optimization (19) entails that fX and fI are forward prices and the opti-
mum is sought amongst forward contracts. The ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁles are U ∗
Hf
X (q) =
U
 πNV (X,Y ;q) + θ♭
X (X −fX)

and U ∗
Hf
I (q) = U
 πNV (X,Y ;q) + θ♭
I (I −fI)

. Here, the optimal
forward sizes θ♭
X and θ♭
I deﬁne the optimal single-claim forward hedges H∗
Hf
X×Q : x →θ♭
X (x −fX)
and H∗
Hf
I ×Q : i →θ♭
I (i −fI). Size θ♭
X has been found by Rolfo (1980), while θ♭
I is computed in
Gaur and Seshadri (2005). The fourth and ﬁfth hedging policies enlarge forward hedging spaces
to encompass all regular custom claims written on X and I, i.e., H = HX and H = HI, respec-
tively. They yield ﬁnancially optimal utility proﬁles U ∗
HX (q) = U
 πNV (X,Y ;q) + H♭(X)

and
U ∗
HI (q) = U
 πNV (X,Y ;q) + G♭(I)

, respectively. Here, claims H∗
HX×Q := H♭(X) and H∗
HI×Q :=
G♭(I) deﬁne the optimal single-claim custom hedges solving problem (10) for H = HX and H = HI,
respectively. Claim H♭(X) has been derived in Chen et al. (2014), while G♭(I) is, to the best
of our knowledge, new. The sixth hedging policy involves an optimal combined portfolio of two
forwards: one contract is written on the position’s claimable X, the other on the side index I. The
hedging space is H = Hf
XI := {(x,i) 7→θX (x −fX) + θI (i −fI), θX and θI scalar}. The ﬁnancially
optimal utility proﬁle is U ∗
Hf
XI (q) = U (πNV (X,Y ;q) + θ∗
X (X −fX) + θ∗
I (I −fI)). Here, sizes θ∗
X
and θ∗
I are the optimal forward gas and index units deﬁning the optimal combined forward hedge
H∗
Hf
XI×Q : (x,i) →θ∗
X (x −fX) + θ∗
I (i −fI) derived in Roncoroni and Id Brik (2017).
EC.2.5. Model Implementation Algorithm
Let the state vector distribution be jointly lognormal under the physical measure P, i.e.,


log X
log Y
log I

P∼N




mX
mY
mI

,


σ2
X
ρXY σXσY ρXIσXσI
ρXY σXσY
σ2
Y
ρY IσY σI
ρXIσXσI
ρY IσY σI
σ2
I



.
(EC.18)
Risk neutral parameters mQ
X and mQ
I result from shifting their physical counterparts mX and mI
by a proportion λ of the corresponding volatility terms σX and σI, where λ stands for the gas
market price of risk (Kolos and Ronn 2008). A risk neutral mean mQ
Y is not required so long as
demand Y is nonclaimable and thus it does not enter arbitrage-free valuation used in the budget
constraint. We assume that correlations and standard deviations are the same under P and Q. In
a NV model featuring operating revenues (18), we consider r.v.’s X, Y , and I representing a gas
price, a consumption level, and a temperature record to be observed at time T, respectively. We
assume T = 1 calendar year since current time 0. Estimating a trivariate lognormal model (EC.18)
requires samples for X, Y , and I. In the absence of one-year market estimates for gas prices,

ec18
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
consumption levels, and temperatures, we rely on simulated sample data. Speciﬁcally, we follow a
three-step simulation procedure:
1. Identify (log X,log Y,log I) with the marginal (log X (1),log Y (1),log I (1)) of a trivariate
stochastic process Z := (log X (t),log Y (t),log I (t))t⩾0;
2. Estimate process Z on a time series of gas prices, consumption levels, and temperature records;
3. Generate samples of (X,Y,I) by simulating paths of Z via Monte Carlo methods.
Given an array of simulated samples, we easily arrive at estimated means mX, mY , mI, stan-
dard deviations σX, σY , σI, and correlations ρXY , ρXI, and ρY I. If the process has normal ﬁnite
dimensional marginals, then a model instance (EC.18) is fully identiﬁed. This algorithm is fed by
a time series for the three state variables in question. Whereas gas prices are open market quotes,
consumption ﬁgures are usually proprietary information. In addition, temperature records should
refer to the exact region where gas is actually consumed. As our goal is to assess the relevance
of our integrated policy compared to major existing alternatives, we are content with deriving
and adopting a realistic parametric setup. This may be obtained by crafting an estimate of the
trivariate model (EC.18) based on a suitable instance of the aforementioned algorithm, which we
now describe.
Gas prices are daily quoted frontline futures prices for delivery at Henry Hub in Louisiana. These
quotes are posted on the Bloomberg platform (www.bloomberg.com). They are expressed in US
dollars per million British thermal unit (USD/MMBtu). Our time series spans December 1, 2007
to February 28, 2009. We assume prices obey a lognormal market model featuring mean-reverting
paths, i.e.,
dlog X (t) = θx [αx −log (X (t))]dt + σxdWx(t),
(EC.19)
under P. Here coeﬃcient θx represents a mean reversion speed per unit of log-price discrepancy
from the corresponding long-term level αx, term σx denotes the instantaneous variance rate, and
process Wx is a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion. This is a market model for commodity
price modeling, it ensures analytical tractability, and it ﬁts our distributional assumption (Benth
et al. 2008). Next, we estimate model (EC.19) through maximum likelihood on the recorded price
path. Finally, we run a Monte Carlo simulation and get to a sample mean mX and a standard
deviation σX for the normal variable logX = log X (1). Throughout the implementation, we assume
that time is measured in “years” according to the Actual/Actual day-count convention.
We repeat the same procedure for consumption level Y and obtain a sample mean mY and a
standard deviation σY for the normal variable logY = log Y (1). Here, Y is identiﬁed with the one-
year estimate of the monthly average consumption in a representative region featuring 10 million
inhabitants. Consumption levels for the whole US area are posted in a monthly report issued by

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec19
the US Energy Information Administration (www.eia.gov). We divide each record by thirty to get
an approximate ﬁgure for the region in question. Gas volumes are expressed in MMBtu. By using
standard formulae linking ﬁrst and second order moments to corresponding lognormal distribution
parameters, i.e., mz = 2log E[Z] −1
2 log

E[Z]
2 + Var[Z]

and σz =
p
log (Var[Z]/E[Z]) + 1, with
log (Z) ∼N (mz,σ2
z), we obtain round values for the mean and standard deviation of the one-year
forecast of gas price and volume.
Table EC.2
A realistic model setup.
Average value
Standard deviation
Gas price X (USD/MMBtu)
4
1
Gas volume Y (MMBtu)
10,000,000
5,000,000
Temperature index I (◦F)
60
30
Descriptive statistics of one-year estimate of state variables X, Y , and
I. Gas price X is expressed in US dollars per million British thermal units
(USD/MMBtu); Gas consumption is given in millions of British thermal units
(MMBtu); temperature records are measured in degrees Fahrenheit (◦F).
These ﬁgures are reported in Table EC.2, where temperature means and standard deviation reﬂect
a typical continental region featuring mild climate conditions. To complete our picture of a realistic
parametric setup, we assume correlations generate a mild positive dependence of gas price X on
both consumption level Y and temperature record I and a strong positive dependence between I
and Y . These two assumptions characterize regions where energy consumption goes in pair with
warm seasons, while showing a stiﬀdemand curve: the former exacerbates the portion of corporate
exposure due to nonclaimable risk, while the latter underpins the use of temperature derivatives
to cope with that type of risk. Last, initial conditions are given by recorded values X (0) = 5.57
USD/MMBtu, Y (0) = 2,547,629 MMBtu, I (0) = 19◦F, which correspond to log X (0) = 1.7178,
log Y (0) = 14.7507, and log I (0) = 2.9444 in the natural logarithmic scale. Estimated ﬁgures are
reported in Table EC.3.
Table EC.3
Parametric setup in a NV model for gas retail.
mY
mX
mI
mQ
X
mQ
I
σY
σX
σI
ρXY
ρXI
ρY I
λ
ϱ
a
c
16.01
1.36
3.98
1.35
3.97
0.47
0.25
0.47
0.20
0.30
0.95
0.2
1.00
10−7
2.00
This calibration procedure deﬁnes the model instance we consider in Section 5. Note that numerical
computations of the hedges are run up to an approximation error lower than 10−5.

ec20
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Figure EC.3
Optimal variance of alternative integrated policies for a variance minimizing ﬁrm.
Position
Position + Single Forward Hedge on X
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on X
Position + Single Forward Hedge on I
Position + Single-Claim Custom Hedge on I
Position + Combined Forward Hedge on X and I
Position + Combined Custom Hedge on X and I
4
6
8
10
12
0
5
10
15
20
Gas Procurement q (MMBtu × 106)
Financially Optimizal Variance (USD2 × 106)
EC.2.6. Empirical Comparative Analysis: Further Details
Table EC.4 reports optimal procurement q∗
H as well as expected value (i.e., return) and standard
deviation (i.e., risk) of the optimal operating revenues π∗
H + H∗
H across the seven admissible inte-
grated policy spaces. It also exhibits the variations of both mean and standard deviation that
occur upon switching from an integrated policy, say,
 H∗
G,q∗
G

featuring a hedging class G, to an
integrated policy (H∗
H,q∗
H) featuring another hedging class H.
It is interesting to study the special case of variance minimizing ﬁrms. This corresponds to setting
parameter ϱ = 0 in a MV target. Put diﬀerently, a ﬁrm is a pure risk minimizer provided that
no speculative theme aﬀects its preferences. Figure EC.3 shows realized optimal variance against
operational level q for the seven hedging strategies examined so far.
The naked position and the position hedged through our optimal combined custom claim deﬁne
upper and lower bounds for the variance proﬁle, respectively. For relatively low operational ﬁgures,
hedges involving X outperform all others. However, things change as the procurement order q
increases. For relatively large values of q, revenues hedged through single claims on I exhibit a
lower variance than those hedged by single claims on X. Interestingly, the optimal forward on I
outperforms the optimal custom claim on X for q greater than 106 MMBtu. As noted earlier, these
facts are intimately related to the kind of functional dependence of NV revenues on price X (resp.,
demand Y ) for relatively low (resp., high) values of procurement q. In general, by increasing hedge
complexity, a ﬁrm may attain an assigned level of operations and a progressively lower variance
or, equivalently, a progressively higher level of operations and a steady variance.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec21
Table EC.4
Optimal procurement orders, full exposure return/risk ﬁgures, and related variations from switching integrated policies.
Target class H
Starting
class G
q∗
G
mG

q∗
G

σG

q∗
G

Forward
on X
Custom
on X
Forward
on I
Custom
on I
Combined
Forward
Combined
Custom
MMBtu
US$
US$
%
%
%
%
%
%
Proc.∗
Return∗
Risk∗
Return
Risk
Return
Risk
Return
Risk
Return
Risk
Return
Risk
Return
Risk
No
Hedge
7.087
2.540
0.959
4.84
-17.99
5.01
-19.50
9.21
7,27
14.05
-8.59
12.07
-19.60
14.22
-38.31
Forward
on X
7.861
2.663
0.786
-
0.16
-1.84
4.17
30.80
8.78
11.47
6.89
-1.97
8.95
-24.77
Custom
on X
7.917
2.668
0.772
-0.16
1.88
-
4.00
33.26
8.60
13.56
6.72
-0.12
8.77
-23.36
Forward
on I
8.472
2.774
1.028
-4.00
-23.55
-3.85
24.96
-
4.42
-14.78
2.61
-25.05
4.58
-42.49
Custom
on I
9.934
2.897
0.876
-8.07
-10.29
-7.92
-11.94
-4.24
17.35
-
-1.73
-12.05
0.15
-32.51
Combined
Forward
9.177
2.847
0.771
-6.45
2.01
-6.29
0.12
-2.55
33.43
1.76
13.70
-
1.92
-23.27
Combined
Custom
10.300
2.901
0.591
-8.21
32.93
-8.06
30.48
-4.38
-73.88
-0.15
48.18
-1.88
30.32
-
For each hedging class H = H0 (no hedge), Hf
X (forward on X), HX (custom on X), Hf
I (forward on I), HI (custom on I), Hf
XI (combined forward on X and I),
and HXI (combined custom on X and I), we report: 1) Optimal procurement order q∗(H), 2) Full exposure return mH (q∗(H)) and risk σH (q∗(H)), and 3) Percentage
variation in revenues return and risk obtained by switching between pairs of optimal integrated policies related distinct hedging classes, say from G (row) to H (column),i.e.,
by replacing optimal operating revenues π
 X,Y ;q∗
G

+ H∗
G with π (X,Y ;q∗
H) + H∗
H.

ec22
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Regardless of the hedging class in question, minimum variance is attained at q = 0, a result in
keeping with the pure variance minimizing ﬁrm considered in Wang and Yao (2017). By comparing
this result with those reported earlier in Figure 2 for a risk averse ﬁrm, we see that the best strategy
is “not to play the game” (i.e., q = 0) whenever risk is the sole concern for the ﬁrm. Should they be
interested in expected revenues as well, then an array of optimal operational levels arises depending
on the hedging class in question. Indeed, in the NV case under scrutiny, the greater the class of
hedging opportunities, the larger the optimal procurement order (Table 2, column 2).
We conclude by disentangling the operational and speculative eﬀects on expected revenues pro-
duced by a change in hedging classes. Suppose a ﬁrm switches from a hedging class G to another
class H. Then, revenues π∗
G + H∗
G turn into π∗
H + H∗
H. Hence, expected revenue variations reported
in Table EC.4 stem from two distinct channels. One is ﬁnancial speculative and is represented by
the variation in the expected payoﬀof the hedge: E[H∗
H] −E

H∗
G

. It stems from the ability of
ﬁnancial derivatives to leverage the risk premium oﬀered by the market. The other is operational
and is given by the variation in expected revenues under optimal integrated policies
 H∗
G,q∗
G

and
(H∗
H,q∗
H): E[π∗
H]−E

π∗
G

. This term originates from the eﬀect that a change in ﬁnancial hedge has
on the optimal procurement order q∗, which in turn aﬀects revenues π. For instance, let us consider
entering an optimal integrated policy, starting from an optimally handled naked position π∗
0 :=
π (q∗
0). This corresponds to switching from G := H0 (no hedge) to any other hedging class H. For
notational neatness, we omit indicating H0 as a starting hedging class. The expected relative gain
∆mH := (E[π∗
H + H∗
H] −E[π∗
0])/E[π∗
0] can be split into a ﬁnancial term ∆mfin
H := E[H∗
H]/E[π∗
0] and
an operational term ∆mop
H := (E[π∗
H] −E[π∗
0])/E[π∗
0]. Table EC.5 reports these quantities expressed
as percentages over the no-hedge ﬁgures and for all the six non trivial hedging classes at stake.
Table EC.5
Expected gain breakdown into speculative and operational terms.
Hedging class
Procurement order
Expected gain
Speculative
Operational
H
q∗
H
∆mH
=
∆mfin
H
+
∆mop
H
(MMBtu)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Hf
X
7.861
4.84
-1.33
6.17
HX
7.917
5.01
-1.54
6.55
Hf
I
8.470
9.21
-0.49
9.70
HI
9.934
14.05
-1.15
15.20
Hf
XI
9.177
12.07
-0.84
12.91
HXI
10.300
14.22
-1.67
15.89
For each target hedging class H = Hf
X (forward on X), HX (custom on X), Hf
I (forward
on I), HI (custom on I), Hf
XI (combined forward on X and I), and HXI (combined custom
on X and I), we report optimal procurement order q∗
H, full exposure expected gain ∆mH0→H,
speculative term ∆mfin
H0→H, operational term ∆mop
H0→H. All variations are expressed as a
percentage over the no-hedge ﬁgure.
Two interesting features are worth mentioning. First, expected revenues primarily increase due
to an increasing optimal procurement order allowed by the adoption of a ﬁnancial hedge. Put

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec23
diﬀerently, operational ﬂexibility is a major source of proﬁtability (Zhao and Huchzermeier 2017).
Second, the market risk premium conveyed by the hedge plays a relatively modest and negative
role in the variation of expected revenues. The negative sign may reﬂect a risk averse attitude of
the ﬁrm, which adheres to a “hedging pressure” (Keynes (1923), Hicks (1939)) whereby hedgers
pay a premium to transfer their risk to speculators acting as hedge providers.
EC.3. Proofs
EC.3.1. Proof of Proposition 1
The statement is a direct consequence of the Lagrange multipliers theorem applied to optimal
pair (H∗(X),G∗(I)). Let us consider the map (H,G) →U (π + H + G). A point of maximum
(H∗(X),G∗(I)) under constraints EQ[H(X)] = 0 and EQ[G(I)] = 0 satisﬁes the ﬁrst order station-
arity condition:
∇U (π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) = λ∇(EQ[H∗(X)]) + µ(EQ[G∗(I)]),
(EC.20)
for suitable real scalars λ and µ. Here, ∇:= (∂H,∂G) is the gradient operator and ∂denotes the
Fr´echet diﬀerential operator. If L2 := L2 (Ω,F,P), straightforward calculations lead to:
⟨∂HU (π + H + G),δH⟩= E[(ϱ −a((π + H + G) −E[π + H + G]))δH], ∀δH(X) ∈L2,
(EC.21)
⟨∂GU (π + H + G),δG⟩= E [(ϱ −a((π + H + G) −E[π + H + G]))δG], ∀δG(I) ∈L2.
(EC.22)
Clearly:
⟨∂HEQ[H(X)],δH(X)⟩= EQ[δH(X)],
∂GEQ[H(X)] = 0,
⟨∂GEQ[G(I)],δG(I)⟩= EQ[δG(I)],
∂HEQ[G(I)] = 0.
Hence, condition (EC.20) leads to a 2×2 system of equations for the optimal pair (H∗(X),G∗(I)):



E[(ϱ −a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)]))δH(X)] = λEQ[δH(X)],
E[(ϱ −a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)]))δG(I)] = µEQ[δG(I)],
(EC.23)
for any δH(X),δG(I) ∈L2. By taking δH ≡1 ≡δG, we obtain Lagrange multipliers:
λ = E[(ϱ −a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)]))] = ϱ,
and µ = ϱ. By inserting these values into system (EC.23) and switching from risk neutral to physical
expectation, we have:



E
 ϱ
 1 −dQ
dP

−a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)])

δH(X)

= 0,
E
 ϱ
 1 −dQ
dP

−a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)])

δG(I)

= 0,

ec24
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
namely:



E
 ϱ
 1 −dQ
dP

−a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)])
FX

= 0,
E
 ϱ
 1 −dQ
dP

−a((π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)) −E[π + H∗(X) + G∗(I)])
FI

= 0.
As long as H∗(X) is FX measurable and G∗(I) is FI measurable, we may simplify the system as
follows:



H∗(X) = −E

π + ϱ
a
dQ
dP
FX

−E[G∗(I)|FX] + m,
G∗(I) = −E

π + ϱ
a
dQ
dP
FI

−E[H∗(X)|FI] + em,
(EC.24)
for suitable constants m, em. These latter may be computed by taking the expectation of both terms
in the two equations under P, that is:
em = m = E[H∗(X)] + E[G∗(I) ] + E[π] + ϱ
a.
If we consider the P-mean centered claims H∗
0(X) := H∗(X) −E[H∗(X)] and G∗
0(I) := G∗(I) −
E[G∗(I)], the resulting pair (H∗
0(X),G∗
0(I)) satisﬁes the system (5).
Q.E.D.
EC.3.2. Proof of Theorem 1
Our proof strategy is as follows. First, we highlight that H∗
0 (X) solves a ﬁxed-point equation.
Second, we prove that this equation involves a contraction in a suitable subspace of L2 (Ω). Third,
we derive both existence and uniqueness of H∗
0 (X) by using the Banach ﬁxed-point theorem.
To begin, we insert the second equation of system (5) into the ﬁrst one and get to:
H∗
0(X) = Π0(X) + EP [EP [H∗
0(X)|FI]|FX],
(EC.25)
where:
Π0(X) := −EP [K −EP [K|FI]|FX],
(EC.26)
and K := π + ϱ
a
dQ
dP is the optimal hedging kernel. This is a ﬁxed-point equation. The Banach ﬁxed-
point theorem requires the right-hand side in equation (EC.25) to be a contraction in a suitable
space. To show this, let us deﬁne the operator:
T[Z] := E[E[Z|FI]|FX].
By using standard properties of conditional expectation, we easily see that T is linear and bounded
on HX. Moreover,
E[T[Z]] = E[E[E[Z|FI]|FX]] = E[Z],
hence E[T[Z]] = 0 provided that E[Z] = 0. In other terms, T maps the Hilbert subspace HX of P-
centered, FX-measurable, L2 (Ω) r.v.’s into itself. Also, Π0(X) ∈HX. Therefore, (EC.25) assumes
the following abstract form:
H∗
0(X) = Π0(X) + T [H∗
0(X)]
(EC.27)

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec25
in the space HX. Map T is a contraction over HX provided that the operator norm ∥T∥is strictly
less than 1. The following estimate proves this claim. Let φ(X) ∈HX and ψ(I) ∈HI. By using the
deﬁnition of inner product in L2 (Ω) and two elementary properties of conditional expectation, we
have:
⟨E[φ(X) | FI],ψ(I)⟩= E[ψ(I)E[φ(X) | FI]] = E[E[φ(X)ψ(I) | FI]]
= E[φ(X)ψ(I)] = ∥φ(X)∥2∥ψ(I)∥2ρ(φ(X),ψ(I)),
hence:
⟨E[φ(X) | FI],ψ(I)⟩⩽rXI∥φ(X)∥2∥ψ(I)∥2
by the very deﬁnition of maximal correlation rXI. If we set ψ(I) := E[φ(X) | FI], the following
upper bound holds true:
∥E[φ(X) | FI]∥2 ⩽rXI∥φ(X)∥2.
(EC.28)
Consequently,
∥E[E[φ(X) | FI] | FX]∥2 ⩽∥E[φ(X) | FI]∥2
(EC.28)
⩽
rXI∥φ(X)∥2
for all φ(X) ∈HX. Hence, ∥T∥⩽rXI, which we assumed to be strictly smaller than 1. Therefore, T
is a contraction in HX and the Banach ﬁxed-point theorem ensures that equation (EC.27) admits
a unique solution H∗
0 (X) in HX.
Q.E.D.
EC.3.3. Proof of Theorem 2
Since vector (X,Y,I) is absolutely continuous on RN, we may compute all the conditional expec-
tations appearing in equation (7) in terms of probability densities. Indeed, conditional expectation
E[φ(X)|FI] = ψ(I), where:
ψ(i) = E[φ(X)|I = i] =
Z
RN φ(ξ)fX|I(ξ|i)dξ =
Z
RN φ(ξ)fXI(ξ,i)
fI(i)
dξ.
A similar formula holds for E[ψ(I)|FX]. According to Fubini-Tonelli theorem,
E[E[H∗
0(X)|FI]|X = x] =
Z
RN H∗
0(ξ)
Z
RN
fXI(x,i)
fX(x)
fXI(ξ,i)
fI(i)
di

dξ.
As for the conditional expected market premium, note that:
E
dQ
dP ψ(X)

= EQ[ψ(X)] =
Z
RN ψ(x)f Q
X(x)dx =
Z
RN ψ(x)f Q
X(x)
fX(x) fX(x)dx = E[φ(X)ψ(X)],
where φ(x) := f Q
X(x)/fX(x) and ψ(X) ∈L2
X. Hence, E
 dQ
dP | X = x

= f Q
X(x)/fX(x). Following a
similar argument, E
 dQ
dP | I = i

= f Q
I (i)/fI(i). By inserting these formulae into equation (7) and
the related term ΠX
0 (X), the design equation (8) follows after straightforward calculations.

ec26
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
A design equation for the value-centered claim payoﬀfunction G∗
0 (i) results from the second
equation in the ﬁrst-order system (5). The corresponding expression is given by:
G∗
0(i) = ΠI
0(i) +
Z
RN H∗
0(x)fXI(x,i)
fI(i)
dx,
 i ∈RN
(EC.29)
with term:
ΠI
0(i) = −
Z
R2N π(x,y;q)fXY I(x,y,i)
fI(i)
dxdy +
Z
R2N π(x,y;q)fXY (x,y)fXI(x,i)
fX(x)fI(i)
dxdy
−ϱ
a
f Q
I (i)
fI(i) −
Z
RN f Q
X(x) fXI(x,i)
fX(x)fI(i) di

.
 x ∈RN
(EC.30)
Q.E.D.
EC.3.4. Proof of Theorem 3
We premise to the proof the following
Lemma EC.1. Let P ∈L2 (Ω) be such that EQ[P] = 0. Then
U (π + P) −U (π) = a
2

E[K2
0] −E
h
(P0 + K0)
2i
,
(EC.31)
where P0 := P −E[P].
Proof. Let P0 := P −E[P] be deﬁned such that P = P0 −EQ[P0]. Since U (Z + k) = U (Z) + ϱk,
then:
U (π + P) = U (π + P0) −ϱEQ[P0] = U (π + P0) −ϱE

P0
dQ
dP

.
(EC.32)
Because U (Z + W) = U (Z) + U (W) −a cov(Z,W), we see that:
U (π + P0) = U (π) + U (P0) −a cov(π,P0)
= U (π) −a
2E[P 2
0 ] −aE[πP0].
By inserting this expression into (EC.32), we obtain:
U (π + P) = U (π) −a
2
 E[P 2
0 ] + 2E

P0
 π + ϱ
a
dQ
dP

= U (π) −a
2 (E[P 2
0 ] + 2E[P0K0])
= U (π) −a
2

E
h
(P0 + K0)
2i
−E[K2
0]

.
The Lemma is proved.
Q.E.D.
We are now ready to prove Theorem 3. Since CVX→X+I = ϱ−1  U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX

, we may focus on the
utility gap U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX. By using (EC.31) and adopting L2 notations, we see that:
U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX=−a
2

∥H∗
0 (X) + G∗
0(I) + K0∥
2
2 −
H♭
0(X) + K0
2
2

.
(EC.33)

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec27
We recall that H♭
0 (X) = −E[K0|FX] and:
H∗
0 + G∗
0 (I) = H♭
0 (X) + (G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]) = −E[K0|FX] + (G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]).
(EC.34)
The utility gap (EC.33) thus reads as follows:
U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX = a
2

∥K0 −E[K0|FX]∥
2
2 −∥(K0 −E[K0|FX]) + (G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]∥
2
2

= a
2

−2⟨K0 −E[K0|FX],G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]⟩−∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]∥
2
2

.
Note that K0 −E[K0|FX] and E[G∗
0 (I)|FX] are orthogonal under the standard scalar product in
L2(Ω,P). By using standard properties of conditional expectation, we may develop:
⟨K0 −E[K0|FX],G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]⟩= ⟨K0 −E[K0|FX],G∗
0 (I)⟩
= ⟨E[K0 −E[K0|FX]|FI],G∗
0 (I)⟩
= −⟨ΠI
0,G∗
0 (I)⟩,
where ΠI
0 := −E[K0 −E[K0|FX]|FI]. A ﬁxed-point equation for G∗
0 (I) can easily be derived as:
G∗
0 (I) = ΠI
0 + E[E[G∗
0 (I)|FX]|FI].
(EC.35)
By using standard properties of conditional expectation once more, we compute:
⟨ΠI
0,G∗
0 (I)⟩= ⟨G∗
0 (I) −E[E[G∗
0 (I) |FX] | FI],G∗
0 (I)⟩
(by (EC.35))
= ⟨E[(G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]) | FI],G∗
0 (I)⟩
= ⟨G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX],G∗
0 (I)⟩
(G∗
0 (I) ∈FI)
= ⟨G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX],G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) |FX]⟩
= ∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2
2,
where the equality before the last one stems from the fact that E[G∗
0 (I) | FX] ⊥G∗
0 (I) −
E[G∗
0 (I) | FX].
The utility gain ﬁnally reads as follows:
U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX = a
2 ∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥
2
2 .
(EC.36)
The adoption of a probabilistic notation whereby Var[#] ≡∥#∥
2
2 for any P-centered argument and
a conversion of utility gain to the combination value CVX→X+I leads to formula (12).

ec28
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
To prove inequality (13), we need only develop the right-hand side in expression (EC.36). By
using the very deﬁnition of maximal correlation rXI and the elementary inequality 2ab ⩽a2 + b2,
we have
∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥
2
2 = ∥G∗
0 (I)∥2
2 −2⟨G∗
0 (I),E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]⟩+ ∥E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2
2
⩾∥G∗
0 (I)∥2
2 −2rXI∥G∗
0 (I)∥2∥E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2 + ∥E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2
2
⩾∥G∗
0 (I)∥2
2 −r2
XI∥G∗
0 (I)∥2
2 −∥E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2
2 + ∥E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥2
2
= (1 −r2
XI)∥G∗
0 (I)∥2.
(EC.37)
Formula (EC.35) leads to:
∥ΠI
0∥2 = ∥G∗
0 (I) −E[E[G∗
0 (I) | FX] | FI]∥2 ⩽∥G∗
0 (I)∥2.
(EC.38)
By combining (EC.37) and (EC.38), we obtain:
∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥
2
2 ⩾(1 −r2
XI)∥ΠI
0∥2
2,
(EC.39)
which we insert into (EC.36) and arrive at the desired lower bound:
U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX ⩾a
2(1 −r2
XI)∥ΠI
0∥2
2
after converting utility gains into the combination value CVX→X+I.
Q.E.D.
EC.3.5. Proof of Proposition 2
According to inequality (13), we must estimate:
VarP(EP [(K0 −EP[K0 | FX]) | FI] = ∥EP [(K0 −EP[K0 | FX]) | FI]∥
2
2 .
This is relatively straightforward: since K0 = π + ϱ
a
dQ
dP and ϱ
a is small, the main contribution to the
L2-norm originates in naked position revenues π. More precisely, by using the triangular inequality,
∥E[(K0 −E[K0 | FX]) | FI]∥2
⩾∥E[π −E[π | FX] | FI]∥2 −
 ϱ
a
E
 dQ
dP −E
 dQ
dP | FX

| FI

2
⩾∥E[π −E[π | FX] | FI]∥2 −
 ϱ
a
 dQ
dP

2 .
Assumption (14) leads to:
∥E[(K0 −E[K0 | FX]) | FI]∥2 ⩾∥E[π −E[π | FX] | FI]∥2 −ε1/2Var[π]1/2.
(EC.40)

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec29
By using the separable form of π, the ﬁrst summand in the right-hand side of this expression can
be computed as follows:
π −E[π | FX] = α(X)β(Y ) −E[α(X)β(Y ) | FX] = α(X)β(Y ) −α(X)E[β(Y )]
≡α(X)(β(Y ) −m) =: α(X)β0(X),
where m := E[β(Y )]. By taking the conditional expectation with respect to FI and denoting the
orthogonal projection on (L2
Y )⊥by E[· |F ⊥
Y ], we obtain:
E[π −E[π | FX] | FI] = E[E[α(X)β0(Y ) | FY ] | FI] + E[E[α(X)β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y ] | FI]
= E[α(X)]E[β0(Y ) | FI] + E[E[α(X)β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y ] | FI]
= E[α(X)]β0(Y ) −E[α(X)]E[β0(Y ) | F ⊥
I ] + E[E[α(X)β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y ] | FI].
The triangular inequality leads to:
∥E[(π −E[π | FX]) | FI]∥2 ⩾∥E[α(X)]β0(Y )∥2
−(∥E[α(X)]E[β0(Y ) | F ⊥
I ]∥2 + ∥E[E[α(X)β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y ] | FI]∥2).
(EC.41)
Clearly,
∥E[α(X)]β0(Y )∥2 = |E[α(X)]|E

(β(Y ) −E[β(Y )])21/2 = |mα(X)|σβ(Y ),
while:
∥E[α(X)]E[β0(Y ) | F ⊥
I ]∥2 = |mα(X)|∥E[β0(Y ) | F ⊥
I ]∥2 ⩽|mα(X)|σβ(Y )
p
1 −r2
Y I.
As long as X is independent of Y , α(X) is F ⊥
Y measurable, hence:
E

α(X)β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y

= α(X)E

β0(Y ) | F ⊥
Y

= α(X)E[β0(Y )] = 0.
By inserting these estimates into expression (EC.41), we arrive at:
∥EP[π −EP[π | FX] FI]∥2 ⩾|mα(X)|σβ(Y )

1 −
p
1 −r2
Y I

.
Finally, by using (EC.40), letting ε →0+, and switching to combination value, we obtain the
approximate estimate (15).
Q.E.D.
EC.3.6. Proof of Proposition 3
Since H♭
0 (X) = −E[K0 |FX], the utility gain (EC.31) and the Pythagorean theorem yield:
U ∗
HX −U0 = a
2

∥K0∥2
2 −∥K0 −E[K0 | FX]∥
2
2

= a
2 ∥E[K0 | FX]∥
2
2 .
(EC.42)
According to Theorem (3), the utility gain:
U ∗
HXI −U0 =
 U ∗
HXI −U ∗
HX

+
 U ∗
HX −U0

(EC.36)
=
a
2 ∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥
2
2 + a
2 ∥E[K0 | FX]∥
2
2 .
(EC.43)

ec30
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
By inserting (EC.42) and (EC.43) into the very deﬁnition of eﬃciency (formula (16)), closed-form
expression (17) follows. Note that:
EX = 1,
⇔
∥G∗
0 (I) −E[G∗
0 (I) | FX]∥
2
2 = 0,
⇔
G∗
0 (I) = E[G∗
0 (I) | FX] a.s.-P.
This leads to the following alternative. If G∗
0 (I) is a constant, then G∗
0 (I) ≡0 as long as E[G∗
0 (I)] =
0. If G∗
0 (I) is varying, then identity G∗
0 (I) = E[G∗
0 (I) | FX] implies that G∗
0 (I) is a non-zero r.v.
that is measurable with respect to both FI and FX. Hence, rXI = 1.
Q.E.D.
EC.3.7. Proof of Proposition EC.1
We show that the optimization problem in question may equivalently be cast as one over the space
of P-centered claims, which allows us to invoke a projection argument to derive an explicit solution.
Indeed, to each claim P ∈P : EQ[P] = 0, we associate P-centered claim P0 := P −E[P]. Conversely,
any P-centered claim P0 induces a unique P ∈P such that EQ[P] = 0, i.e.,
P := P0 −EQ[P0].
(EC.44)
Clearly,
Var[π + P] = Var[π + P0] = E

(π + P0)2 −E[π]2
.
Therefore:
min
P ∈P: EQ[P ]=0Var[π + P] =

min
P0∈P : E[P0]=0E
h
(P0 −(−π))
2i
−E[π]2 →P ∗
0 .
That is seeking the zero P-mean element in P which is the nearest to −π in the sense of L2 (Ω,F,P)-
distance. Condition E[P0] = 0 may be written as ⟨P0,1⟩= 0 and space P is closed by assumption.
Then, P ∗
0 is the component in the orthogonal projection of −π onto P that is orthogonal to 1,
namely:
P ∗
0 = Proj[−π]P −⟨ProjP[−π],1⟩1.
Orthogonal projection is self-adjoint and 1 ∈P by assumption, hence ⟨⟨ProjP[−π],1⟩=
−⟨π,ProjP1⟩= −⟨π,1⟩= −E[π]. Therefore:
P ∗
0 = −ProjPπ + E[π].
(EC.45)
A simple computation shows that:
EQ[P ∗
0 ] = E

P ∗
0
dQ
dP

= −

π,ProjP
dQ
dP

+ E[π].
(EC.46)
By replacing expressions (EC.45) and (EC.46) into (EC.44), we obtain the desired result (EC.6).
Q.E.D.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec31
EC.3.8. Proof of Proposition EC.2
Optimal hedges are orthogonal projections on the subspaces of X-measurable and I-measurable
r.v.’s. As long as X admits only two values, any contingent claim written on X only exhibits
two values as well. In particular, the optimal custom hedge on X may be written as H♭(X) =
h+1X=x+ +h−1X=x−for suitable constants h+ and h−. Here, 1 denotes the usual indicator function.
Because the space of X measurable r.v.’s considered here is ﬁnite-dimensional, we may identify
an orthonormal basis to compute the required orthogonal projections. Since P = Q, the assumed
balance conditions yields E[H♭(X)] = EQ[H♭(X)] = 0. By inserting the previous expression for
H♭(X) into this equality, we easily obtain h−= −
pX
1−pX h+, hence:
H♭(X) = h+

1X=x+ −
pX
1 −pX
1X=x−

= h+ 1X=x+ −pX
1 −pX
.
Note that:
E[1X=x+ −pX] = 0,
E[(1X=x+ −pX)2] = pX(1 −pX)2 + (1 −pX)p2
X = pX(1 −pX).
We may thus write H♭(X) = αU, where:
U := 1X=x+ −pX
p
pX(1 −pX)
is a unit vector. Therefore, H♭(X) lies in the linear span SX := Span(U) of versor U. However,
we know that H♭(X) = −E[π|X] = −⟨π,U⟩U. Hence,
α = −⟨π,U⟩= −
1
√
pX(1−pX)E[π(X,Y ;q)(1X=x+ −pX)]
= −
1
√
pX(1−pX) [π(x+,y+;q)pXY (1 −pX) + π(x+,y−;q)(pX −pXY )(1 −pX)
−π(x−,y+;q)pX(pY −pXY ) −π(x−,y−;q)pX(1 −pX −pY + pXY )],
(EC.47)
where pXY := P(X = x+, I = i+). Similarly, we can show the optimal single-claim hedge on index
I may be expressed as:
G♭(I) = βV,
where β is a constant and:
V = 1I=i+ −pI
p
pI(1 −pI)
is a unit vector. Therefore G♭(I) lies in SI := Span(V ) and:
β = −⟨π,V ⟩V = −
1
√
pI(1−pI) [π(x+,y+;q)pXY I + π(x+,y−;q)(pXI −pXY I)
+π(x−,y+;q)(pY I −pXY I) + π(x−,y−;q)(pI −pXI −pY I + pXY I)
−π(x+,y+;q)pX(pY −pXY ) −π(x−,y−;q)pX(1 −pX −pY + pXY )]
(EC.48)

ec32
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
with pXI := P(X = x+,I = i+) and pY I := P(Y = y+,I = i+). These expressions prove statement
(EC.7).
Notice that U and V are linearly dependent if and only if
∃λ : 1X=x+ −pX = λ(1I=i+ −pI).
(EC.49)
It is easy to verify that either {X = x+} = {I = i+} or {X = x−} = {I = i+}. Let us focus on the
ﬁrst of the two. Condition (EC.49) amounts to having:

1 −pX = λ(1 −pI),
−pX = −λpI;
whereby λ = 1 and pX = pI. If we deﬁne f(i+) := x+ and f(i−) := x−, we have X = f(I). We have
shown that X is a function of I (and vice versa) provided that U and V are linearly dependent. Let
us assume that X = f(I) for some bijection f . (The same argument applies whenever I = g(X)).
We see that:
{X = x+} = {f(I) = x+} = {I = f −1(x+)}.
Since X and I are Bernoulli variables, then f −1(x+) must match either i+ or i−, whereas f −1(x−)
assumes the other of the two values. For instance, suppose f −1(x+) = i+. Then {X = x+} = {I = i∗}
and pX = P(X = x+) = P(I = i+) = pI. This shows that U = V . We conclude that vectors U and V
are linearly independent as long as X and I are not functionally dependent upon one another.
The naively combined custom hedge is just the sum of the two optimal single-claim hedges:
H♭(X) + G♭(I) = −⟨π,U⟩U −⟨π,V ⟩V = αU + βV.
(EC.50)
This hedge lies in the sum space SX ⊕SI and entails variance VX+I := Var

π + H♭(X) + G♭(I)

.
Our optimal combined custom hedge is deﬁned as the element H∗(X) + G∗(I) in SX ⊕SI
attaining the minimum variance V ∗
HXI := minH∈SX,G∈SI Var[π + H (X) + G(I)]. That is the pro-
jection of naked position revenues π over the sum space SX ⊕SI. This quantity matches the sum
of projections on space SX and space SI, namely expression (EC.50), provided that they form
an orthogonal basis for SX ⊕SI, i.e., ⟨U,V ⟩= 0. Simple computations show that ρ := ⟨U,V ⟩=
const × (pXI −pXpI). According to the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, ρ2 ⩽1 and ρ2 = 1 if and only
if U = ±V , i.e., provided that X is function of I and vice versa. Here, we have ρ2 < 1. Moreover,
⟨U,V ⟩= 0 if and only if pXI = pXpI, that is X and I are independent r.v.’s. In all other cases, opti-
mal and naively combined hedges diﬀer. To compute our optimal combined custom hedge, we need
to project revenues π on an orthonormal basis for SX ⊕SI. If X is not statistically independent of
I, pair (U,V ) cannot be an orthonormal basis. We may thus perform a standard orthogonalization
procedure leading to a basis (U,V ∗), where:
V ∗:= V −⟨V,U⟩U
∥V −⟨V,U⟩U∥= V −ρU
√1 −ρ2 .

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec33
Hence:
H∗(X) + G∗(I) = −⟨π,U⟩U −⟨π,V ∗⟩V ∗= αU + β∗V ∗,
with:
β∗= −⟨π,V ∗⟩= −
1
√1 −ρ2 (⟨π,V ⟩−ρ⟨π,U⟩) = β −ρα
√1 −ρ2 ,
which proves expression (EC.8).
Q.E.D.
EC.3.9. Proof of Example EC.5
Naked operating revenues variance is easily computed as follows:
V ∗
0 (q) = Var[XY ]
1
q −C(Y,XY )
Var[XY ]
2
+

Var[Y ] −C(Y,XY )2
Var[XY ]

,
where C denotes the covariance operator. Note that C(Y,XY )2 = q2ρY,XY Var[Y ]1/2Var[XY ]1/2 > 0
as long as ρY,XY > 0 by assumption. This quantity thus attains a minimum value:
V ∗
0 = Var[Y ] −C(Y,XY )2
Var[XY ]
at point:
q∗
0 = Var[XY ]
C (Y,XY ).
The optimal variance under optimal single-claim custom hedging is given by:
V ∗
HX(q) = Var[π(q)] −α(q)2,
where α(q) = −⟨π,U⟩= −(⟨Y,U⟩−q−1⟨XY,U⟩). By inserting V ∗
0 (q) into this expression, we obtain:
V ∗
HX(q) = (Var[XY ] −⟨XY,U⟩2)

1
q −C(Y,XY )−⟨Y,U⟩⟨XY,U⟩
Var[XY ]−⟨XY,U⟩2
2
+(Var[XY ] −⟨Y,U⟩2) −(C(Y,XY )−⟨Y,U⟩⟨XY,U⟩)2
Var[XY ]−⟨XY,U⟩2
=: aX

1
q −
1
q∗
HX
2
+ bX,
where aX, bX, and q∗
HX are deﬁned accordingly. Clearly, q∗
HX is the corresponding point of minimum.
The operational ﬂexibility gain yielded by optimal single-claim custom hedging on X is given by
the range of operations levels q such that:
q−1 −q∗−1
HX
 ⩽
q
a−1
X (V ∗
0 −bX),
namely:
Iq∗
HX =















"
1
q∗
HX
+
q
V ∗
0 −bX
aX
−1
,

1
q∗
HX
−
q
V ∗
0 −bX
aX
−1#
, if
1
q∗
HX
−
q
V ∗
0 −bX
aX
> 0,
"
1
q∗
HX
+
q
V ∗
0 −bX
aX
−1
,+∞
"
,
if
1
q∗
HX
−
V ∗
0 −bX
aX
< 0.
(EC.51)

ec34
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Similarly, the optimal variance under optimal combined custom hedging is:
V ∗
HXI(q) = Var[π(q)] −

α(q)2 + β(q)2
,
where β(q) = −⟨π,V ⟩= −(⟨Y,V ⟩−q−1⟨XY,V ⟩). By inserting V ∗
0 (q) into this expression, we
obtain:
V ∗
HXI(q) = aXI
 q−1 −q∗−1
HXI
2 + bXI,
where:
aXI := aX −⟨Y,V ⟩2 < aX,
bXI :=
 Var[XY ] −⟨Y,U⟩2 −⟨Y,V ⟩2
−(C(Y,XY ) −⟨Y,U⟩⟨XY,U⟩−⟨Y,V ⟩⟨XY,V ⟩)2
Var[XY ] −⟨XY,U⟩2 −⟨XY,V ⟩2
< bX,
q∗−1
HXI := C(Y,XY ) −⟨Y,U⟩⟨XY,U⟩−⟨Y,V ⟩⟨XY,V ⟩
Var[XY ] −⟨XY,U⟩2 −⟨V Y,V ⟩2
.
The operational ﬂexibility gain yielded by optimal combined custom hedging on X and I is given
by the set of operations levels q such that:
q−1 −q∗−1
HXI
 ⩽
q
a−1
XI (V ∗
0 −bXI),
namely:
Iq∗
HXI =















"
1
q∗
HXI
+
q
V ∗
0 −bXI
aXI
−1
,

1
q∗
HXI
−
q
V ∗
0 −bXI
aXI
−1#
, if
1
q∗
HXI
−
q
V ∗
0 −bXI
aXI
> 0,
"
1
q∗
HXI
+
q
V ∗
0 −bXI
aXI
−1
,+∞
"
,
if
1
q∗
HXI
−
V ∗
0 −bXI
aXI
< 0.
EC.3.10. Proof of Example EC.10
The pair (X,I) deﬁnes a complete market where claims written on Y need not be replicable.
Model 1: State vector (X(T),I(T)) is jointly lognormal, i.e.,
log
X(T)
X(0) , I(T)
I(0)

∼N (⃗mT,CT),
with:
⃗m =
α −∥σX∥2
2
β −∥σI∥2
2

,
C =
∥σX∥2
σX · σI
σX · σI
∥σI∥2

.
According to property 5 reported in Appendix EC.2(C), rXI =
ρlog X(T ),log I(T )
. Thus:
rXI = 1 ⇔σX · σI = ±∥σX∥∥σI∥.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec35
By using the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, the condition on the right hand side holds true provided
that σX ∝σI, namely σX and σI are linearly dependent. This statement violates our working
assumption. Hence, rXI < 1.
Model 2: The stochastic diﬀerential equations for X (t) and I (t) admit solutions:
X(t)
X(0) = exp

α −∥σX∥2
2

t + σX · W(t)

,
I(t)
I(0) = exp

β −∥σI∥2
2

t + σI · W(t)

.
These expressions entail the following representation:
(X,Y ) := (X(t1),...,X(tN),I(t1),...,I(tN))
= (Φ(σX · W(t1),...,σX · W(tN)),Ψ(σI · W(t1),...,σI · W(tN))),
for suitable functions Φ and Ψ. Maximal correlation can easily be computed by using property 4
reported in Appendix EC.2(C):
rXI = r(σX·W (t1),...,σX·W (tN )),(σI·W (t1),...,σI·W (tN )).
Clearly, the right-hand side in the previous expression is the maximal correlation of a multivariate
Gaussian variate. By using property 6 reported in Appendix EC.2(C), we see that:
rXI = 1 ⇔∃a,b ̸= 0 :
N
X
j=1
ajσX · W(tj) =
N
X
j=1
bjσI · W(tj).
(EC.52)
We claim that the condition on the right hand side violates our model assumptions. Indeed, we
note that:
N
X
j=1
ajσX · W(tj) =
N
X
j=1
ajσX · (W(tj) −W(t1)) +
 N
X
j=1
aj
!
σX · W(t1).
A similar condition holds for PN
j=1 bjσI · W(tj). By conditioning with respect to Ft1, we get to:
 N
X
j=1
aj
!
σX · W(t1) =
 N
X
j=1
bj
!
σI · W(t1),
namely:
ρσX·W (t1),σI·W (t1)
 = 1 ⇔σX ∝σI,
which contradicts our assumption of linear independent coeﬃcients σX and σI. Consequently,
N
X
j=1
aj =
N
X
j=1
bj = 0
and
N
X
j=2
ajσX · f
W(tj) =
N
X
j=2
bjσI · f
W(tj),

ec36
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
where f
W(t) := W(t) −W(t1) is deﬁned for all t ⩾t1. Because process f
W conditioned to W(t1) is a
Brownian motion starting at t = t1, condition (EC.52) holds true for index N −1 replacing N. By
following the same argument, we see that:
N
X
j=2
aj =
N
X
j=2
bj = 0,
and, by iteration, we may conclude that:
N
X
j=k
aj =
N
X
j=k
bj = 0, ∀k = 1,...,N.
These conditions lead to aj = bj = 0 for all j = 1,...,N. This result clearly contradicts the condition
on the right hand side in formula (EC.52). We thus conclude that rXI < 1.
Q.E.D.
EC.3.11. Proof of Proposition EC.3
To proceed in the proof we need an auxiliary
Lemma EC.2 (Maximal correlation for separable integral kernels). If the integral kernel
k is separable, then rXI = min{1,∥α∥L2
X∥β∥L2
I}.
Proof. Let φ,ψ be Borel measurable functions satisfying:
E[φ(X)] =
Z
RN φ(x)fX(x) dx = 0,
E[ψ(I)] =
Z
RN ψ(i)fI(i) di = 0,
E[φ(X)2] =
Z
RN φ(x)2fX(x) dx = 1,
E[ψ(I)2] =
Z
RN ψ(i)2fI(i) di = 1.
Then:
E[φ(X)ψ(I)] =
Z
RN ×RN φ(x)ψ(i)fXI(x,i) dxdi
=
Z
RN ×RN φ(x)ψ(i)fX(x)fI(i)(1 + α(x)β(i)) dxdi
=
Z
RN φ(x)α(x)fX(x) dx
Z
RN ψ(i)β(i)fI(i) di

.
The Cauchy–Schwarz inequality shows that:

Z
RN φ(x)α(x)fX(x) dx
 ⩽
Z
RN φ(x)2fX(x) dx
1/2 Z
RN α(x)2fX(x) dx
1/2
= ∥α∥L2
fX .
Similarly, we can show that:

Z
RN ψ(i)β(i)fI(i) di
 ⩽∥β∥L2
fI .

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec37
A bound for the maximal correlation between X and I follows:
rXI = sup{E[φ(X)ψ(I)] : E[ψ(X)] = E[ψ(I)] = 0, E[φ(X)2] = E[ψ(I)2] = 1}
⩽∥α∥L2
fX ∥β∥L2
fI .
By deﬁnition, rXI ⩽1. Thus:
rXI ⩽min{1,∥α∥L2
fX ∥β∥L2
fI },
which is the desired statement. This bound is tight: if φ(x) = α(x)/∥α∥L2
fX and ψ(i) = β(i)/∥β∥L2
fI ,
then the previous expression clearly turns into an equality.
Q.E.D.
We are now ready to prove the Proposition EC.3. The proof is simply a matter of calculation of
the terms appearing in the design equation. In light of the assumed form for density fXI (x,i), we
may compute the integral kernel as follows:
k(x,ξ) =
Z
RN(1 + α(x)β(i))(1 + α(ξ)β(i))fX(ξ)fI(i) di
= fX(ξ)
Z
RN
 1 + α(ξ)β(i) + α(x)β(i) + α(x)α(ξ)β(i)2
fI(i) di
= fX(ξ)

1 + ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(x)α(ξ)

.
By inserting this expression into the design equation (8), we obtain:
H∗
0(x) = ΠX
0 (x) +
Z
RN fX(ξ)(1 + ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(x)α(ξ))H∗
0(ξ) dξ = ΠX
0 (x) + γ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(x),
where:
γ =
Z
RN α(ξ)H∗
0(ξ)fX(ξ) dξ
as long as E[H∗
0(X)] = 0. Thus, we may further specify the expression for γ as follows:
γ =
Z
RN α(ξ)

ΠX
0 (ξ) + γ∥β∥2
L2
Iα(ξ)

fX(ξ) dξ
=
Z
RN α(ξ)ΠX
0 (ξ)fX(ξ) dξ + γ∥α∥2
L2
X∥β∥2
L2
I.
Hence:
γ =
1
1 −∥α∥2
L2
X∥β∥2
L2
I
Z
RN α(ξ)ΠX
0 (ξ)fX(ξ) dξ.
The proof is ﬁnished.
Q.E.D.

ec38
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
EC.3.12. Proof of Theorem EC.1
To proceed with the proof we need the following auxiliary
Lemma EC.3. Let e1,...,en be orthonormal vectors in L2
X and Mn be the n×n matrix deﬁned as:
Mn := (⟨I [ek],ej⟩)k,j=1,...,n ,
(EC.53)
where I [w] :=
R
RN k(x,ξ)w(ξ) dξ deﬁned in L2
X. Then
∥Mn∥⩽rXI,
(EC.54)
where ∥.∥denotes the matrix norm corresponding to the standard norm in Rn.
Proof. Let v ∈Rn. Then
Mnv =
 n
X
k=1
⟨I [ek],ej⟩vk
!
j=1,...,n
=
 *
I
" n
X
k=1
vkek
#
,ej
+!
j=1,...,n
.
Estimate (EC.28) leads to:
∥I [w](X)∥2 ⩽rXI∥w(X)∥2,
where ∥· ∥2 is the L2(Ω,F,P) norm. In particular,
∥I [w]∥L2
X ⩽rXI∥w∥L2
X.
(EC.55)
By using Bessel inequality and this bound, we see that:
∥Mnv∥2 =
n
X
j=1
*
I
" n
X
k=1
vkek
#
,ej
+2
⩽
I
" n
X
k=1
vkek
#
2
2
(EC.55)
⩽
r2
XI

n
X
k=1
vkek

2
L2
X
= r2
XI∥v∥,
hence our claim.
Q.E.D.
We are now ready to prove the Theorem EC.1. Let us consider an approximate solution of design
equation (8) in the form:
H∗
0,n(x) :=
n
X
j=1
hn
j wj(x).
(EC.56)
A simple substitution in the equation shows that:
n
X
j=1
hn
j wj = ΠX
0 +
n
X
j=1
hn
j
Z
Rn k(x,ξ)wj(ξ) dξ ≡ΠX
0 +
n
X
j=1
hn
j I [wj].
(EC.57)
Whereas the left-hand side lies in Span⟨w1,...,wn⟩, the right-hand side may not. Let
Pn : L2
X →Span⟨w1,...,wn⟩

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec39
denote the orthogonal projection on Span⟨w1,...,wn⟩. We modify (EC.57) as follows:
n
X
j=1
hn
j wj = Pn
 
ΠX
0 +
n
X
j=1
hn
j I [wj]
!
= PnΠX
0 +
n
X
j=1
hn
j PnI [wj].
(EC.58)
This is an equation in the unknown variable hn := (hn
j )j=1,...,n ∈Rn. We ﬁrst prove that it admits a
unique solution provided that rXI < 1. If e1,...,en is an orthonormal basis for ⟨w1,...,wn⟩(possibly
obtained through the Gram-Schmidt algorithm), then:
PnΠX
0 =
n
X
j=1
⟨ΠX
0 ,ej⟩ej,
and
Pn (I [wj]) =
n
X
i=1
⟨I [wj],ei⟩ei.
If Tn := (Tjk) denotes the matrix operating the following change of basis:
wj =
n
X
k=1
Tkjek,
(EC.59)
then we may write:
Pn (I [wj]) = Pn
 n
X
ℓ=1
TℓjI [eℓ]
!
=
n
X
ℓ=1
TℓjPn (I [eℓ]) =
n
X
k,ℓ=1
Tℓj⟨I [eℓ],ek⟩ek.
(EC.60)
By inserting expressions (EC.59) and (EC.60) into (EC.58), we arrive at:
n
X
k=1
 n
X
j=1
Tkjhn
j
!
ek =
n
X
k=1
 n
X
j=1
Tkjγn
j
!
ek +
n
X
k=1
 
n
X
j,ℓ=1
Tℓjhn
j ⟨I [eℓ],ek⟩
!
ek.
(EC.61)
Let hn :=
 hn
j

j and γn := (γn
j )j. Then expression (EC.61) may be expressed as:
(I −Mn)Tnhn = Tnγn,
(EC.62)
where Mn is the matrix deﬁned in (EC.53). Assumption rXI < 1 entails bound (EC.54), which in
turn implies that matrix I−Mn is invertible. Consequently, expression (EC.62) immediately yields
a unique solution of (EC.58):
hn = T −1
n
(I −Mn)
−1 Tnγn.
Let us deﬁne H∗
0,n(x) as in expression (EC.56). We can prove the convergence relation H∗
0,n
L2
X
−→
H∗
0 (X), where H∗
0 (X) solves the ﬁrst-order equation system (5). Since:
H∗
0 (X) = ΠX
0 + I [H∗
0 (X)] = ΠX
0 + PnI [H∗
0 (X)] + (I −Pn)I [H∗
0 (X)],
H∗
0,n = PnΠX
0 + PnI [H∗
0,n],

ec40
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
we have:
H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n = (I −Pn)ΠX
0 + PnI

H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n

+ (I −Pn)I [H∗
0 (X)].
By taking norms on both sides in the previous identity, we obtain the following upper bound:
∥H∗
0 −H∗
0,n∥L2
X ⩽
(I −Pn)ΠX
0

L2
X +
PnI [H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n]

L2
X + ∥(I −Pn)I [H∗
0 (X)]∥L2
X .
(EC.63)
Let us focus on the second of the three summands on the right-hand side in this expression. We
recall that I is the nested double conditioning:
I [H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n](X) = E

E[H∗
0(X) −H∗
0,n(X) | FI] | FX

.
Hence, bound (EC.28) and bound ∥Pn∥⩽1 imply that:
PnI [H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n]

L2
X ⩽∥I [H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n]∥L2
X ⩽rXI∥H∗
0 (X) −H∗
0,n∥L2
X.
Bound (EC.63) may thus be written as follows:
∥H∗
0 −H∗
0,n∥L2
X ⩽
(I −Pn)ΠX
0

L2
X + rXI
H∗
0 −H∗
0,n

L2
X + ∥(I −Pn)I [H∗
0]∥L2
X ,
or, equivalently,
∥H∗
0 −H∗
0,n∥L2
X ⩽
1
1 −rXI
(I −Pn)ΠX
0

L2
X + ∥(I −Pn)I [H∗
0]∥L2
X

.
(EC.64)
Finally, as long as (wn)n∈N is a basis for L2
X,0, we have: ∥(I −Pn)φ∥L2
X −→0 for every φ ∈L2
X,0.
The convergence relation we set out to prove thus holds true.
Q.E.D.
EC.3.13. Proof of Proposition EC.4
We follow a path similar to the strictly risk averse case. According to (13), we must estimate
Var[E[K0 −E[K0|FX]|FI]] , where K0 = dQ
dP −E
 dQ
dP

. By assumption, π exhibits a lower order
than ϱ
a
dQ
dP . Hence, the main contribution in the previous expression stems from the market price of
risk. By using the triangular inequality,
Var[E[K0 −E[K0|FX]|FI]]
1
2
=
E[π −E[π | FX] | FI] +
  ϱ
a

E
 dQ
dP −E
 dQ
dP | FX

| FI

2
⩾ϱ
a
E
 dQ
dP −E
 dQ
dP | FX

| FI

2 −∥E[π −E[π | FX] | FI]∥2 .
Let us deﬁne a new index:
rX⊥I := sup

ρ(Z,W) : Z ∈L2
I, W ∈(L2
X)⊥ 
.

e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
ec41
We may write:
∥E[π −E[π | FX] | FI]∥2 ⩽rX⊥IVar[π]1/2 ⩽εrX⊥I
ϱ
a
Var
dQ
dP
1/2
.
Following arguments used in the proof of the strictly risk averse case, we may easily derive a bound:
E
dQ
dP −E
dQ
dP | FX

| FI

2
⩾

1 −
q
1 −r2
X⊥I

Var
dQ
dP
1/2
.
By combining these estimates together, we get to:
Var[E[[(K0 −E[K0 | FX]) | FI]] ⩾
ϱ
a
2
Var
dQ
dP

1 −
q
1 −r2
X⊥I
2
−εr2
X⊥I

.
The approximate bound (EC.14) follows by letting ε →0+ and switching to the combination value.
Q.E.D.
References
Basak, S., Chabakauri, G. (2010). Dynamic Mean-Variance Asset Allocation. Rev. Financial Stud. 23, 2970-
3016.
Benth, F.E., Benth, J., Koekebakker, S. (2008). Stochastic Modeling of Electricity and Related Markets.
Advanced Series on Statistical Science & Applied Probability, Vol. 11, World Scientiﬁc.
Bj¨ork, T., Murgoci, A. (2014). A Theory of Markovian Time-Inconsistent Stochastic Control in Discrete
Time. Finance Stochastics 18, 545-592.
Carr, P., Ellis, K., Gupta V. (1998). Static Hedging of Exotic Options.J. Finance 53(3), 1165-1190.
Froot, K.D., Stein, J. (1998). Risk Management, Capital Budgeting and Capital Structure Policy for Financial
Institutions: An Integrated Approach. J. Financial Econom. 47, 55-82.
Guiotto, P. (2019). Kolmogorov’s Canonical Correlation Problem for Multivariate Gaussian.Working Paper.
University of Padova.
Hackbush, W. (1995), Integral Equations: Theory and Numerical Treatment, Birkhauser.
Hicks, J. (1939). Value and Capital. Oxford University Press, New York.
Joskow, P. L., Kahn, E. (2001). A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s Wholesale
Electricity Market during Summer 2000. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 8157.
Keynes, J. (1923). Some Aspects of Commodity Markets. Manchester Guardian Commercial - European
Reconstruction Series (Section 13), 784-786.
Kolos, S.P., Ronn, E.I. (2008). Estimating the Commodity Market Price of Risk for Energy Prices. Energy
Economics 30, 621-641.
Kouvelis, P., Gutierrez, G. (1997). The Newsvendor Problem in a Global Market: Optimal Centralized and
Decentralized Control Policies for a Two-Market Stochastic Inventory System. Management Science
43(5), 571-585.

ec42
e-companion to Guiotto and Roncoroni: Combined Custom Hedging
Lence, S. H. (1995). The Economic Value of Minimum-Variance Hedges.American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 77, 353-364.
Leppard, S. (2005). Energy Risk Management: A Non-Technical Introduction to Energy Derivatives. Risk
Books, London.
Markowitz, H. (2014). Mean–Variance Approximations to Expected Utility. European Journal of Operational
Research 234, 346-355.
Mart´ınez-de-Alb´eniz, V., Simchi-Levi, D. (2006). Mean-Variance Trade-oﬀs in Supply Contracts. Naval
Research Logistics 53, 603-616.
Mello, A.S., Parsons, J.E., Triantis, A.J. (1995). An Integrated Model of Multinational Flexibility and Finan-
cial Hedging. Journal of International Economics 39, 27-51.
Myint, S., Famery, F. (2012). The Handbook of Corporate Financial Risk Management. Risk Books, London.
Ramirez, J. (2011). Handbook of Corporate Equity Derivatives and Equity Capital Markets. Wiley & Sons,
Chichester.
Schweizer, B., Wolﬀ, E.F. (1981). On Nonparametric Measures of Dependence for Random Variables. Annals
of Statistics 9(4), 879-885.
Smith, J. E., Nau, R.F. (1995). Valuing Risky Projects: Option Pricing Theory and Decision Analy-
sis.Management Sci. 41, 795–816.
Staum, J. (2008). Incomplete Markets. In: Birge, J.R., Linetsky, V. (Eds.). Handbook in Operations Research
and Management Science, Vol. 15, Elsevier B.V., 511-563.
Stulz, R. (1984). Optimal Hedging Policies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 19, 127-140.
Zhao, L., Huchzermeier, A. (2015). Operations–Finance Interface Models: A Literature Review and Frame-
work. European Journal of Operational Research 244, 905-917.