TITLE: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2017.1680
---

On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
Laurent Massoulie
Microsoft Research-Inria Joint Centre, 91120 Palaiseau, France
Kuang Xu
Operations, Information and Technology, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
We propose and analyze a family of information processing systems, where a ﬁnite set of experts or servers
are employed to extract information about a stream of incoming jobs. Each job is associated with a hidden
label drawn from some prior distribution. An inspection by an expert produces a noisy outcome that depends
both on the job’s hidden label and the type of the expert, and occupies the expert for a ﬁnite time duration.
A decision maker’s task is to dynamically assign inspections so that the resulting outcomes can be used to
accurately recover the labels of all jobs, while keeping the system stable. Among our chief motivations are
applications in crowd-sourcing, diagnostics, and experiment designs, where one wishes to eﬃciently learn the
nature of a large number of items, using a ﬁnite pool of computational resources or human agents.
We focus on the capacity of such an information processing system. Given a level of accuracy guarantee, we
ask how many experts are needed in order to stabilize the system, and through what inspection architecture.
Our main result provides an adaptive inspection policy that is asymptotically optimal in the following sense:
the ratio between the required number of experts under our policy and the theoretical optimal converges to
one, as the probability of error in label recovery, δ, tends to zero. *
Key words : stochastic resource allocation, hypothesis testing, information processing system, ﬂuid model.
1.
Introduction
An increasing number of modern processing systems has been designed and deployed for the pur-
pose of learning and information extraction. In these applications, which we refer to broadly as
information processing systems, a group of experts or servers is tasked with performing (noisy)
inspections on a large collection of jobs, with the objective of uncovering some hidden features
associated with each job up to a level of desirable accuracy. Below are some examples:
1. Crowd-sourcing (Karger et al. (2014)): a collection of images is dispatched to a group of human
agents, where an agent attaches a label to each assigned image based on her own judgment. A
decision maker then aggregates agents’ responses to produce a “best” label for each image.
2. Medical diagnostics (Gerdtz and Bucknall (2001)): medical data of patients is reviewed by
physicians or nurses with diﬀerent domains of expertise, with the goal of correctly identifying
the patients’ diseases.
* This version: May 15, 2016. An extended abstract of this paper is accepted for presentation at the Conference on
Learning Theory (COLT) 2016. We are grateful for the comments from the anonymous COLT referees.
1
arXiv:1603.00544v2 [math.PR] 30 May 2016

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
2
3. Quality management (Baker and von Beers (1996)): a set of products undergoes a number of
diﬀerent tests performed by specialized machines, to identify whether a product is faulty and
the type of fault it contains.
The presence of resource constraints is a crucial feature shared across many of these systems:
the amount of processing resources, such as human agents, machines, or computer servers, is ﬁnite,
and yet, each inspection or test requires the corresponding resource to commit a non-trivial amount
of eﬀort. This raises a natural question:
How much information can we extract using a ﬁnite amount of processing resources?
The main objective of the present paper is to address this question, and gain understanding of
the “capacity” of an information processing system. We will approach this problem by studying
the minimum required system size, deﬁned, roughly speaking, as the minimum number of experts
needed in order to learn a suﬃcient amount of information about every job in a stream of arrivals,
while ensuring system stability. 1
We now informally describe our model. The system consists of m experts with diﬀerent types
(expertise), where the fraction of experts of type k is ρk. The system receives a stream of incoming
jobs arriving at unit rate, where each job is associated with a label, hidden from the decision maker,
which is drawn i.i.d. from some prior distribution, π. An atomic unit of processing is called an
inspection: the decision maker may assign an expert to perform an inspection on a job, which
occupies the expert for a random period of time, with a mean that depends on the type of the
expert. The inspection leads to a (noisy) outcome, whose distribution, p(k,h,·), depends on both
the type of the expert, k, and the true label of the job under inspection, h. The goal of the decision
maker is to assign inspections intelligently, and use the resulting outcomes to produce, for each job,
a classiﬁcation (i.e., prediction) of its hidden label. We say that the system is stable if all jobs will
receive a classiﬁcation in a ﬁnite amount of time.
Note that we cannot have a meaningful discussion on the resource requirement of this system
without specifying how accurate the classiﬁcations need to be. Indeed, in the absence of any accu-
racy constraint, the decision maker can simply make up classiﬁcations without performing a single
inspection, and the system would always be trivially stable. Therefore, we will designate an accuracy
parameter, δ ∈(0,1), and demand that the probability of mis-classiﬁcation for each job be at most
δ. Since inspections take up the experts’ bandwidth, we expect that a smaller δ would demand more
inspections, which, in turn, require more experts.
The main goal of this paper is to understand the minimum number of experts needed for a given
accuracy parameter, δ, and how to achieve it via intelligent policies. This deﬁnition of minimum
1 Throughout the paper, we will use the term “expert” to refer to a single unit of processing resource, with the under-
standing that it may represent a computer server, testing machine, or human agent, depending on the application.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
3
system size is motivated by the intuition that a decision policy that requires the least number of
experts to stabilize the system also, in a sense, most eﬃciently utilizes the processing resources.
Preview of main result. The main result of this paper proposes an inspection architecture
which, for any non-trivial outcome distributions, asymptotically achieves the minimum system size
in the regime of high accuracy (δ →0). Speciﬁcally, the ratio between the required number of experts
under our policy, m, and that of a theoretical minimum, m∗, converges to 1 uniformly across all
prior distributions of job labels, as δ →0:
sup
π
m
m∗= 1 + O
 s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ)
!
,
as δ →0.
(1)
Moreover, the policy does not require knowing the prior distribution, π, but adapts to it automati-
cally.
We conclude this section by highlighting two main design challenges in creating an eﬃcient deci-
sion policy for information processing systems. The ﬁrst challenge arises from the fact that the
processing resources are often heterogeneous, a result of the variations in expertise, machine func-
tionality, or personal trait. In our model, this is captured by the fact that the outcomes distributions,
{p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K, may vary signiﬁcantly depending on the type of the inspecting expert. A key
implication of such heterogeneity is that the decision policy must be suﬃciently adaptive to a job’s
past inspection outcomes, because depending on what we “believe” the job’s label to be, some
combinations of expert types may be more eﬃcient than others. For instance, consider a testing
system where job labels correspond to three domains that might have caused an error in a product:
{network, hardware, software}, and the experts are of two kinds:
1. General experts: they know a little about all domains, and produce noisy inspection outcomes.
2. Specialists: who have deep expertise in one of the three domains but know nothing about the
other two. Their inspections contribute strong signals towards conﬁrming an error in their own
domain, but are otherwise non-informative if the job’s true label lies elsewhere.
Intuitively, a sensible decision policy for this setting should be adaptive: a job can be ﬁrst inspected
by a few general experts to zone in on a possible domain, and depending on their opinions, the
job will then be sent to the corresponding specialists to further “conﬁrm” the diagnosis, with some
small possibility of back-and-forth if the initial diagnosis had been incorrect. In contrast, sending a
job directly to a specialist at the beginning would risk the specialist being of the wrong kind, and
never sending a job to any specialist would overwhelm the generalists who can only provide limited
information per inspection; in both cases, there would be waste of processing resources.
The second challenge is more nuanced, and stems from the combined eﬀect of the resource con-
straint and expert heterogeneity: the “optimal” course of inspections for an individual job does not

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
4
only depend on the types of experts available, but also on the prior distribution governing the pro-
portions of labels among its fellow jobs. In other words, there will be contention among jobs as they
“compete” for the same processing resources. For instance, in the above-mentioned testing example,
suppose there emerges a disproportionately large fraction of jobs with the label “network”, while
the fraction of specialists in “network” remains ﬁxed. In such a case, it is plausible that some of the
generalists may now need to be enlisted to provide assistance by performing more inspections on
these jobs than they would before. Therefore, the mixture of inspections that a job receives may
shift as the prior distribution changes, which shows that a good decision policy cannot be overly
centered around individual jobs, and must be aware of the overall arrival pattern.
1.1.
Related Research
The present paper intersects with two main areas of research: statistics and dynamic resource alloca-
tion. Most related to our work is the literature on sequential hypothesis testing in statistics, dating
back to the seminal work of Wald (1945), which studies the problem of distinguishing hypotheses
of a distribution by sequentially drawing samples from it, with the objective of minimizing a com-
bined cost involving the number of samples and the resulting probability of error (see also Siegmund
(2013) and the references therein). Notably, Chernoﬀ(1959) considers an important generalization
of Wald’s problem, where, instead of drawing samples from the same distribution and deciding
when to stop, the decision maker has the additional freedom to choose from multiple available
experiments, and the distribution of the experimental outcome depends on both the true hypothesis
and the type of the experiment. Chernoﬀidentiﬁes a dynamic testing policy that asymptotically
achieves the minimum sample complexity, and computes explicitly the leading factor via the solution
to a zero-sum game. The current paper draws inspiration from this literature, and especially the
multi-experiment version of Chernoﬀ(1959). Yet, there are some key diﬀerences: while sequential
hypothesis testing aims to reduce the sample complexity associated with testing a single distribu-
tion, we are interested in performing tests for multiple jobs simultaneously using ﬁnite resources.
The resource constraint creates contention and coupling among the jobs, and as was alluded to in
Introduction, policies designed to minimize the sample complexity associated with testing a single
hypothesis do not easily extend to our problem.
Our work is also related to the literature on dynamic resource allocation, and particularly multi-
class, multi-server queueing networks (Harrison and López (1999), Talreja and Whitt (2008), Tsitsik-
lis and Xu (2015)). In our model the inspection outcomes may have diﬀerent distributions depending
on the expert’s type and the job’s label, which is roughly analogous to a queueing network where
the service rate depends on the class of the server and the job being served. However, our system
diﬀers from this literature in two major aspects. First, while in conventional processing systems jobs

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
5
typically come with an exogenous service requirement, also referred to as workload or job size, in
our system a job’s service requirement is deﬁned endogenously in relation to how much information
needs to be gathered in order to uncover its label. Second, in a queueing network the class of an
incoming job is typically known to the decision maker, while in our model the job labels are hidden,
and the very objective of processing is to uncover them.
There have also been a growing interest in the connections between information acquisition and
resource allocation Alizamir et al. (2013), Bimpikis and Markakis (2015), Johari et al. (2016),
Harrison and Sunar (2015), Retsef et al. (2015). They are similar to our work in spirit, but diﬀer
in models and objectives. The authors of Alizamir et al. (2013) study a single-server queue where
the server decides on how many tests to perform on each job to reach a binary diagnosis, while
achieving an optimal delay-accuracy trade-oﬀ. The information structure in Alizamir et al. (2013)
is substantially more restricted than in our model: the tests are identical, and outcomes and job
types are binary; on the other hand, Alizamir et al. (2013) analyzes queueing delay which we do not
consider. The recent papers Johari et al. (2016), Bimpikis and Markakis (2015) study processing
systems with heterogeneous job and server types and capacitated processing resources, where, similar
to our model, it is important for the decision maker to learn about the job types in order to identify
the best processing scheme. These models diﬀer from ours in that learning serves as a means towards
another objective, such as maximizing total rewards in Johari et al. (2016) or improving throughput
or delay in Bimpikis and Markakis (2015), Retsef et al. (2015), whereas information extraction is
the intrinsic purpose of processing in our problem.
On the technical end, we build on several existing techniques and ideas. To establish the stabil-
ity of our decision policy, which involves three interconnected stages, we will leverage a program
pioneered by Rybko and Stolyar (1992) and Dai (1995) in the context of queueing networks, which
approximates the system dynamics using a certain ﬂuid limit, and subsequently uses a contrac-
tion property of the ﬂuid limits to derive the stability of the original system. A sub-routine of our
inspection policy dynamically creates workload vectors by dynamically solving a linear program to
minimize the incremental change to a potential function, which is reminiscent of, and inspired by,
the family of max-weight scheduling policies (Tassiulas and Ephremides (1992)). Finally, to derive
upper and lower bounds on the probability of error under an inspection policy, we make elementary
uses of well-known techniques in probability theory and statistics, such as changes of measures and
concentration inequalities for martingales.
2.
Model and Metrics
2.1.
The Model
System primitives. The system evolves in continuous time, indexed by t ∈R+. There is a stream
of jobs that arrives to the system according to a Poisson process with rate λ0 > 0. Without loss of

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
6
generality, we assume that λ0 = 1, because one can simply scale the expressions of system size by
λ0 so that the results in the paper apply to other values of λ0 as well. We index jobs by the order in
which they arrive, and refer to the ith job that arrives to the system as job i. Job i is associated with
a label, Hi, which belongs to a ﬁnite set, H, whose cardinality is cH. The job labels are independent
and identically distributed according to a prior distribution, π = {πh}h∈H, with P(H1 = h) = πh,
and the labels are unknown to the decision maker. We assume all entries of π to be positive.
The system is equipped with m experts. Let E be the set of experts. Each expert is associated
with a type, k, from a ﬁnite set, K, with cardinality cK. The number of type-k experts is ρkm, k ∈K,
where ρk is the fraction of type-k experts in the system, with ρk > 0 and P
k∈K ρk = 1. We will refer
to {ρk}k∈K as the expert mixture.
Inspections and resource constraints. An expert can be called upon to perform an inspection of
any job in the system. At the end of an inspection, a random outcome is produced which takes
values in a ﬁnite set, X. We denote by Xi,j the outcome of the jth inspection performed on job i.
Suppose that the true label of job i is h, and that the jth inspection is performed by an expert of
type k, then Xi,j is a random variable distributed according to the outcome distribution, p(h,k,·),
and is independent from all other parts of the system. Note that this implies also that an expert
may inspect a job multiple times, producing i.i.d. outcomes. The diversity in the set of outcome
distributions, {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K, captures the possibility that experts of various types may have
diﬀerent expertise. We assume the set of outcome distributions is known to the decision maker.
The pool of experts is resource constrained, in the sense that each individual expert can only
perform, on average, a ﬁnite number of inspections per unit time. Formally, at any time t, we assume
that each of the m experts can be in one of the two states: IDLE and BUSY, and all experts are
initialized in state IDLE. An IDLE expert of type k can be assigned to initiate an inspection of
a job currently in the system. Once the inspection starts, the expert enters the state BUSY for a
duration that is exponentially distributed with mean 1/µk, µk > 0, independent from the rest of the
system. We refer to {µk}k∈K as the inspection rates, since µk corresponds to the average number of
inspections that a type-k expert can perform in unit time. The expert returns to the IDLE state
once the inspection is completed. The inspections are non-preemptive, so that an expert cannot
start inspecting a diﬀerent job before the previous inspection has been ﬁnished. We assume that
multiple experts are allowed to inspect the same job at the same time. The latter assumption is
motivated by applications where jobs, such as images or data ﬁles, can be duplicated at relatively
low costs or be accessible to multiple experts concurrently.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
7
Note that the inspection rate depends on the expert’s type but not the job’s hidden label. Similar
to the earlier assumption that the arrival rate λ0 = 1, without loss of generality, we assume that
{µk}k∈K is normalized so that the average inspection rate across diﬀerent expert types is 1:2
µ
△=
X
k∈K
ρkµk = 1.
(2)
Departure rule. At any time t, the system operator can choose to let a job depart from the system.
Upon job i’s departure from the system, the operator must produce a classiﬁcation, bHi, representing
her belief of job i’s true label. We say that there is an error if the classiﬁcation does not match the
true label, i.e., if bHi ̸= Hi.
2.2.
Conditions on Outcome Distributions
The set of outcome distributions, {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K, plays a central role in our model, because the
job labels can only be diﬀerentiated via the inspection outcomes. In the present paper, we allow for
essentially any outcome distribution over X, with the exception of two conditions. Informally, we
assume that (1) all outcomes are “noisy”, so that no single outcome can distinguish between two job
labels with certainty, and (2) for any two job types, there exists at least one type of experts who
can distinguish them. Neither assumption leads to a severe loss of generality, as we explain shortly.
We now give formal deﬁnitions of the two conditions. In our regime of interest, where the target
classiﬁcation error is small, it turns out that an important measure of the informativeness of an
inspection outcome is that of KL-divergence, deﬁned as follows. Fix i,j ∈N, h,l in H, and k ∈K,
denote by Zi,j(h,l,k) the likelihood associated with the jth inspection to job i done by a type-k
expert, as follows:
Zi,j(h,l,k) = ln p(h,k,Xi,j)
p(l,k,Xi,j) .
(3)
The KL-divergence from the outcome distribution p(h,k,·) to p(l,k,·), denoted by D(h,l,k), is
deﬁned by the expected value of Zi,j(h,l,k) conditional on the true label of job i being h:
D(h,l,k) = E
 Z1,1(h,l,k)
H1 = h

=
X
x∈X
p(h,k,x)ln p(h,k,x)
p(l,k,x) .
(4)
Intuitively, the value of D(h,l,k) captures the ability of an expert of type k in telling apart whether
a job’s label is h versus l; a higher value of D(h,l,k) indicates that the expert’s inspection, on
average, provides stronger evidence that the true label of a job is more likely to be h than l.
We assume that the outcome distributions {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K satisfy two conditions as follows,
expressed in terms of KL-divergence.
2 In particular, if µ ̸= 1, then one can scale our results that concern the minimal system size by 1/µ.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
8
1. The outcome distributions should be suﬃciently diverse so that accurate classiﬁcations are
possible. For any two distinct job labels, h,l ∈H, we assume that there exists at least one
expert type, k, for whom the outcome distributions, p(h,k,·) and p(l,k,·), are non-identical.
This is equivalent to saying that there exists d > 0, such that
d =
min
h,l∈H,h̸=l max
k∈K D(h,l,k) > 0.
(5)
2. All KL-divergences should be ﬁnite, so that a single inspection cannot distinguish two job
labels with absolute certainty:
d =
max
h,l∈H, h̸=l
k∈K
D(h,l,k) < ∞.
(6)
We note that the above two conditions do not signiﬁcantly restrict the outcome distributions. The
ﬁrst condition is in fact necessary for the problem to be non-trivial, for otherwise one would not be
able to distinguish between jobs of labels h and l. The second condition requires all inspections to
be “noisy”, and it is a natural assumption in applications where the inspections have some intrinsic
variability, such as when inspections are performed by human agents, or by machines that are
subject to idiosyncratic noise.
3.
An example of outcome distributions
For concreteness, we describe here a simple example of a family of outcome distributions. Con-
sider the case where a job is an image, containing one out of three possible animals, with H =
{cat,dog,rabbit}. There are three types of experts, with K = {1,2,3}, who are asked to perform
inspections leading to binary outcomes (e.g., “like” or “dislike”), with X = {0,1}. Fix p,q ∈(0,1),
p ̸= q. Denote by A and B the Bernoulli distribution with mean p and q, respectively. The outcome
distributions, p(h,k,·), are given by the following matrix, where the column corresponds to the
labels and the row to the expert types:


A A B
A B A
B A A

. For instance, the entry (2,1) indicates that a
type-2 expert’s inspection of an image containing a ‘cat’ is distributed according to A. Note that the
outcomes are statistically identical when a type-1 expert inspects an image with a cat versus a dog,
but are diﬀerent from the outcome when the image contains a rabbit. However, it is not diﬃcult
to see that if we were to obtain many inspections from any two expert types, one could eventually
uncover the true label of an image. This example illustrates that for the overall processing system
to be eﬀective, it is not necessary that a single expert be able to distinguish all job labels.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
9
3.1.
Inspection Policies and Performance Metrics
Inspection policies. To facilitate our discussion, we now introduce the concept of an inspection
policy. An inspection policy, ψ, has access to the entire system state and all past history. At any
time t, it has the ability to: (1) let an IDLE expert initiate an inspection on a job; (2) let a job i
depart from the system, in which case the policy will have to produce a classiﬁcation, bHi, for the
job’s label, Hi. In addition, the inspection policy can take as input the following parameters: (1)
the number of experts, m, the expert mixture, {ρk}k∈K, and the inspection rates, {µk}k∈K; (2) the
outcome distributions, {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K; (3) an accuracy parameter, δ; (4) (potentially) the prior
distribution, π, of the job labels. An inspection policy that does not require the knowledge of the
prior distribution, π, is said to be prior-oblivious.
In our system, there are two main performance criteria for an inspection policy that are of interest.
First, we would like an inspection policy to accurately recover the true labels of all jobs, quantiﬁed
in the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (δ-accuracy) A policy is δ-accurate, if for all h ∈H and i ∈N, we have that
P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h) ≤δ.
That is, the resulting probability of misclassiﬁcation on any job of type h is at most δ under a δ-
accurate policy. Since the fundamental task of our processing system is to recover job labels reliably,
we assume throughout the paper that an inspection policy should always be δ-accurate, where δ is
the accuracy parameter set by the decision maker.
In addition to accuracy, a second important benchmark is stability. That is, every job should be
able to depart from the system in a ﬁnite amount of time. Formally, denote by Q(t) the total number
of jobs in the system at time t. We say that the system is stable under an inspection policy, if the
resulting process {Q(t)}t∈R+ is positive recurrent. Compared to the deﬁnition of accuracy, the notion
of stability is more delicate, because whether an inspection policy can stabilize a system depends
on the relative magnitudes between the number of experts, m, and the accuracy requirement, δ:
because the inspections are noisy, as δ decreases, each job will require a larger number of inspections
to achieve a desired classiﬁcation accuracy. Since the arrival rate of jobs is assumed to be ﬁxed, this
further implies that the number of experts, m, must also grow accordingly.
Therefore, as alluded to in the Introduction, a natural way of assessing how eﬃcient an inspection
policy is at stabilizing the system is to measure the minimum system size (i.e., m) needed in order for
the system to be stable for a given accuracy target, δ. This inspires the following notion of resource
eﬃciency, where we compare the minimum system size required by an inspection policy against
that of a theoretical optimal, as follows. Fix an expert mixture, {ρk}k∈K, inspection rates, {µk}k∈K,

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
10
and outcome distributions, {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K. For a policy, ψ, deﬁne mψ(δ,π) as the smallest system
size required under ψ in order to ensure stability:
mψ(δ,π) = min{m ∈N : given δ and π, a system with m experts is stable under ψ}.
(7)
Given prior distribution π and δ > 0, we deﬁne m∗(δ,π) as the smallest system size for which there
exists a δ-accurate inspection policy that stabilizes the system. That is, m∗(δ,π) represents the
minimal amount of processing resources required to ensure stability under an “optimal” inspection
policy. The following deﬁnition serves as the main performance metric of this paper.
Deﬁnition 3.2 We say that an inspection policy, ψ, is resource eﬃcient, if
limsup
δ→0
mψ(δ,π)
m∗(δ,π) = 1,
for all prior distribution, π.
(8)
We say that ψ is strongly resource eﬃcient, if the above convergence occurs uniformly over all
prior distributions:
limsup
δ→0
sup
π
mψ(δ,π)
m∗(δ,π) = 1.
(9)
4.
Main Result
The main result of the current paper is the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 Fix an expert mixture, {ρk}k∈K, inspection rates, {µk}k∈K, and outcome distribu-
tions, {p(h,k,·)}h∈H,k∈K. There exists a prior-oblivious, strongly resource eﬃcient inspection policy,
ψ. In particular, there exist c0,δ0 > 0, such that
sup
π
mψ(δ,π)
m∗(δ,π) ≤1 + c0
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) ,
∀δ ∈(0,δ0).
(10)
We highlight two important features of the theorem. First, the inspection policy is strongly
resource eﬃcient, which implies that its performance guarantee in comparison to the theoretical
optimal holds independently of the prior distribution. Second, the inspection policy is prior-oblivious
so that it can operate without any knowledge of the prior distribution of the job labels. This feature
is especially important for our problem, since knowing the prior distribution would have likely
required ﬁrst learning the labels of the incoming jobs, which is the very task that we are trying
to solve! Moreover, because a prior-oblivious policy automatically adapts to any prior distribution,
it is also more robust if the prior distribution were to shift over time, a likely scenario for many
applications. We will provide in Section 6 a complete description of the strongly resource-eﬃcient
inspection policy in Theorem 4.1, which is based on a three-stage architecture that ﬁrst generates a
coarse label estimate for each job, and subsequently uses the majority of the processing resources to
verify the validity of the coarse estimates, in an adaptive manner. This policy also inspires a simple
heuristic algorithm, discussed in Appendix D, which can be much easier to implement in practice.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
11
5.
Proof Overview and Preliminaries
5.1.
The Main Ideas
The remainder of the paper is devoted to the proof of Theorem 4.1. Before delving into the details,
we will start by illustrating the main ideas of the proof. Our main goal is to design an inspection
architecture to extract information eﬃciently using a ﬁnite number of experts. We will break this
general problem further into three sub-problems, in the following order:
(a) What type of information is suﬃcient for making accurate classiﬁcation decisions?
(b) How much information do we need to gather for an individual job, via inspections, in order to
produce an accurate classiﬁcation of its label?
(c) How can we gather such information for all jobs simultaneously in a resource-eﬃcient manner?
We now address each of the three points in order. For point (a), the following notion of cumulative
log-likelihood ratio, a concept widely used in statistics, will be central in quantifying information in
our problem. Fix i ∈N and t ∈R+. Denote by Ni,t the total number of inspections received by job i
by time t, and by Ki,j the type of the expert who performed the jth inspection on job i. For h and
l in H, we deﬁne the cumulative log-likelihood ratios for job i at time t as
Si,t(h,l) =
Ni,t
X
j=1
Zi,j(h,l,Ki,j) = ln


Ni,t
Y
j=1
p(h,Ki,j,Xi,j)
p(l,Ki,j,Xi,j)

,
h,l ∈H,
(11)
where Zi,j(h,l,k) is the log-likelihood ratio deﬁned in Eq. (3). Intuitively, the fact that Si,t(h,l) > 0
implies that given the inspections and their outcomes up till time t, the label of job i is more likely
to be h than l, and such likelihood intensiﬁes as the value of Si,t(h,l) increases. As we will see
in a moment, the set {Si,t(h,l)}h,l∈H serves as a summary statistic that is suﬃcient for producing
classiﬁcations for job i’s label.
Point (b) concerns the quantity of information needed to make an accurate classiﬁcation. In light
of the preceding discussion, we could equally ask: at the time when a classiﬁcation has to be made
about job i’s label, what conditions should {Si,t(h,l)}h,l∈H satisfy in order for the classiﬁcation error
to be small? The next lemma provides such a suﬃcient condition. Deﬁne bHi,t as the maximum-
likelihood (ML) estimator for the true label of job i, Hi, given the inspections performed on job i
up till time t, i.e.,
bHi,t ∈{h ∈H : Si,t(h,l) ≥0, ∀l ̸= h} = arg max
h∈H
Ni,t
Y
j=1
p(h,Ki,j,Xi,j),
(12)
with ties broken arbitrarily3. We will denote by SF
i (h,l) and bHF
i the value of Si,t(h,l) and bHi,t at
the time when job i departs from the system, respectively. We have the following lemma, which is
a special case of a more general result, Lemma A.1, in Appendix A.4.
3 Note that the equality in the above equation follows from the deﬁnition: the most likely label is also the one that
is no less likely than any other labels.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
12
Lemma 5.1 Fix i ∈N and x > 0. Denote by Gx the event:
Gx = {∃h′ ∈H, s.t. SF
i (h′,l) ≥x,
∀l ∈H,l ̸= h′}.
(13)
We have that
P( bHF
i ̸= h, Gx
Hi = h) ≤cH exp(−x),
∀h ∈H.
(14)
Lemma 5.1 shows that if, for a large value of x, the event Gx occurs with high probability under
any job label, then the resulting probability of mis-classiﬁcation must be small. This achievability
result is complemented by the following converse, which states that in order for any inspection policy
to be δ-accurate, the expected value of the cumulative log-likelihood ratio, E(Si(h,l)), must satisfy
a lower bound that is approximately ln(1/δ). The proof of the lemma utilizes a coupling argument
similar to that in Wald (1945) for establishing a lower bound on sample complexity in sequential
hypothesis testing, and is given in Appendix A.1.
Lemma 5.2 Fix δ ∈(0,1). If an inspection policy is δ-accurate, then for all i ∈N and h ∈H,
E
 SF
i (h,l)
Hi = h

≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1,
∀l ∈H\{h}.
(15)
The preceding lemmas combined hence give us a more complete picture of the information require-
ment for accurate classiﬁcation: it suﬃces that by the time a job i departs from the system, there
exists one label, h, whose cumulative log-likelihood ratio when compared against any other alter-
native label, l, is suﬃciently large, i.e., Si,t(h,l) is at least ln(cH/δ) for all l ̸= h (Lemma 5.1), and
this is essentially necessary (Lemma 5.2).
More importantly, the above discussion reveals a natural link from information need to service
requirement. While in a traditional processing system a job may come with a certain size, we can
think of a job in the information processing system as having a vector-valued service requirement:
for a job i with true label h, if we interpret the quantity Si,t(h,l) as the amount of “work” already
performed along the lth coordinate, then the job’s service requirement would be, roughly speaking,
that the work performed along all coordinates, l ∈H\{h}, should surpass ln(cH/δ).
This brings us to the last, and arguably most complex, sub-problem, (c): how do we satisfy
these service requirements in an eﬃcient manner, and simultaneously for multiple jobs? Going back
to the deﬁnition of Si,t(h,l) in Eq. (11), we see that it can be written as the summation of the
Zi,j(h,l,Ki,j)’s. Notably, if job i has true label h, then E(Zi,1(h,l,k)) = D(h,l,k), where D(h,l,k)
is the KL-divergence deﬁned in Eq. (4). In other words, one inspection performed by an expert of
type k contributes, in expectation, D(h,l,k) amount of “work” to Si,t(h,l). Viewing our processing
task from this angle reveals a resemblance with a certain multi-class multi-server queueing system,

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
13
where jobs come in diﬀerent classes (and in this case, labels), and the amount of work a server can
contribute to a job’s service requirement during a unit time period depends both on the server’s
type and the type of the job being treated.
Unfortunately, there remains a diﬃcult yet fundamental obstacle that prevents us from directly
applying our understanding of multi-class queueing systems to designing inspection policies. The
above analogy makes it clear that some expert types may be more informative for a certain job label
than others, because the values of D(h,l,k) can vary across h,l, and k. Hence, to best harness the
processing power of the experts and satisfy the service requirements across all jobs, the inspections
should be arranged in a way that takes into account the types of experts performing the inspections
and the labels of jobs being inspected, for otherwise an expert could end up wasting her time
working on jobs that she has little expertise on. However, this brings us to a circular argument:
while eﬃcient inspection beckons a policy to be aware of job labels, we simply do not know the job
labels, for otherwise there would have not been a need to perform any inspection to begin with!
5.1.1.
Overview of the Inspection Policy Our inspection policy will make use of a three-
stage architecture to circumvent the above-mentioned “circular” logic, illustrated in Figure 1.
1. In the ﬁrst stage (Preparation), the policy “boot-straps” each incoming job, by inspecting it
using randomly chosen experts with the goal of generating a coarse estimate of its true label.
2. In the second stage (Adaptive), the policy performs the majority of the inspections and in an
adaptive manner, with the main goal of verifying whether the coarse estimates are correct.
Most of the jobs with a correct coarse estimate will be able to obtain an accurate classiﬁcation
by the end of the Adaptive stage and depart from the system.
3. The third stage (Residual) treats those jobs whose coarse estimates were erroneous to ensure
that they, too, will receive an accurate classiﬁcation.
We will show that (1) the coarse estimates in the Preparation stage are suﬃciently accurate so
that little resource is wasted in the Adaptive stage, and (2) the processing resources required in the
Preparation and Residual stages amount to only a small fraction of the total resources. Together,
they lead to the resource eﬃciency of our inspection policy.
We can also interpret the high-level structure of this three-stage architecture through a learning
versus veriﬁcation dichotomy: all jobs are ﬁrst inspected by some “generalists” (i.e., random experts)
to learn a coarse label estimate. The system then enlists the “specialists” to verify the validity of
these estimates to a high accuracy. If a coarse estimate is deemed incorrect by the “specialists”,
the job is then sent back to the “generalists” to perform learning thoroughly to reach an accurate
estimate, albeit in a less eﬃcient manner.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
14
Figure 1
Overall architecture associated with the proposed inspection policy.
5.2.
Proof Outline
We now provide a brief outline of the main steps of the proof. Expanding upon the informal discus-
sion in the previous subsection, we formally describe in Section 6 a prior-oblivious inspection policy
that will be used to achieve the scaling in Theorem 4.1. In Section 7, we build on Lemma 5.2 and
establish a lower bound on the number of experts that any δ-accurate policy must satisfy, which
is expressed in terms of a solution to a certain linear optimization problem. This lower bound will
serve as our performance benchmark of what an “optimal” inspection policy could achieve in terms
of minimum system size. In Sections 8 and 9, we establish a suﬃcient condition for the number of
experts under which the proposed policy would stabilize all three stages. In particular, Section 8
contains the most technical portion of our proof, which relies on a ﬂuid model to analyze the joint
dynamics of the Preparation and Adaptive stages. We complete the proof of Theorem 4.1 in Section
10, in two steps. We ﬁrst show that the proposed policy is δ-accurate, which, in light of Lemma
5.1, follows by construction in a straightforward manner. We then compare the suﬃcient condition
on the number of experts, established in Sections 8 and 9, to the lower bound in Section 7, and
demonstrate that the ratio between the two converges to 1 uniformly over all prior distributions for
the job labels. This completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.
6.
Design of the Inspection Policy
We present in this section the inspection policy that we will use to prove Theorem 4.1. The main
job-ﬂow of the policy consists of three stages: Preparation, Adaptive, and Residual, as is illustrated
in Figure 1. We begin by explaining some basic actions of the experts.
6.1.
Randomized Expert Visits
We ﬁrst introduce some notation. Deﬁne
rk = µkρk,
k ∈K,
(16)
and from the assumption in Eq. (2), we have that P
k∈K rk = µ = 1.. Because the lengths of inspec-
tions are exponentially distributed, rk is the probability that the next available expert is of type k
assuming that all experts are in BUSY in the present moment, and mrk is the average number of

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
15
inspections that the pool of type-k experts can complete in unit time. Let d(h,l) be the average
KL-divergence for when a job is inspected by an expert whose type is randomly drawn according
to the distribution {rk}k∈K:
d(h,l) =
X
k∈K
D(h,l,k)rk.
(17)
Denote by da the minimum value among the d(h,l), da = minh,l∈H,h̸=l d(h,l), and by z the maximum
log-likelihood ratio4
z =
max
h,l∈H, k∈K
max
x:p(l,k,x)̸=0
ln p(h,k,x)
p(l,k,x)
.
(18)
Finally, deﬁne the constant
ζ0 = 8z2 + 2da
d2a
.
(19)
Expert visits. We say that an expert of type k goes on a vacation to mean that she starts processing
a “dummy” job and remains in state BUSY for a period of time that is exponentially distributed
with mean 1/µk. Suppose that an expert completes inspecting a previous job at time t, then she
will choose to visit one of the three stages, which means that the expert will either initiate an
inspection for a job in that stage, or go on a vacation, depending on the inspection rules which will
be speciﬁed in the next subsection. The choice of which stage to visit will be made by a simple
randomized rule, independent of the rest of the system: the expert visits the Preparation, Adaptive,
and Residual stage, with probability qP, qA, and qR, respectively, where
qP =ζ0 lnln(1/δ) + ln−1(1/δ)
m
,
qR = 3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)) + 1
m
,
(20)
qA =1 −qP −qR,
(21)
and we assume that the policy will be applied under a range of parameters where all expressions
above lie in the interval (0,1).
6.2.
Multi-stage Inspection Policy
We now describe our inspection policy in detail, where the exposition for each stage is broken down
into three parts: (1) Workload: how many inspections need be completed on a job in each stage; (2)
Departure rules: where the job goes next; (3) Expert actions: how experts perform inspections.
6.2.1.
Preparation Stage Every job that arrives to the system will ﬁrst be processed in the
Preparation stage. The objective is to produce a coarse estimate of the job’s label using only a small
number of inspections, performed by random experts whose types are drawn according to {rk}k∈K.
The randomization in the expert types ensures that information is gained about the job’s true label
at a non-zero rate. The coarse label estimate will then be used to “bootstrap” processing in the
Adaptive stage to further enhance the classiﬁcation accuracy.
4 The set X being ﬁnite ensures that z < ∞.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
16
Workload. Every job will receive nP inspections in the Preparation stage, where
nP = ζ0 lnln(1/δ).
(22)
Departure rules. When a job has received the outcomes from all nP inspections, it departs from
the Preparation stage and enters the Adaptive stage.
Expert actions. Denote by W0(t) the total number of uninitiated inspections in the Preparation
stage at time t. An expert who visits the Preparation stage at time t will attempt to initiate an
inspection for a job in the Preparation stage in a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-serve fashion. If W0(t) = 0, then
the expert goes on a vacation.
6.2.2.
Adaptive Stage The Adaptive stage is the “power-house” of the system that performs
the majority of all inspections. Its deﬁning feature is that the number of inspections that a job
receives from each expert type will be decided adaptively depending both on the coarse label estimate
from the Preparation stage, and on the existing aggregate workload in the Adaptive stage. The main
objective of this stage is to verify the correctness of the coarse label estimates: most jobs with a
correct coarse estimate depart from the system after the Adaptive stage, while those with incorrect
coarse estimates are likely to be sent to the Residual stage for further processing.
Workload. The workload generation in this stage is more complex than that of the Preparation
stage. Upon arriving to the Adaptive stage, a job, i, is assigned a workload vector {Λi,k}k∈K, where
Λi,k is the number of inspections to be performed by experts of type k on job i during its stay in the
Adaptive stage. We will denote by Λi,k(t) the remaining number of inspections by experts of type
k at time t, deﬁned by the diﬀerence between Λi,k and the number of inspections already initiated
by experts of type k for job i by time t. Denote by QA(t) the set of jobs in the Adaptive stage at
time t. We deﬁne the workload at expert pool k as
Wk(t) =
X
i∈QA(t)
Λi,k(t),
t ∈R+.
(23)
We will refer to W(·) = {Wk(·)}k∈K as the workload process.
We now explain how the workload vectors, {Λi,k}k∈K, are generated. Denote by bHP
i the maximum
likelihood estimator of job i, bHi,t (Eq. (12)), at the time it exits the Preparation stage, and suppose
that bHP
i = h. Let {nh,k}k∈K be an optimal solution to the following linear optimization problem:
minimize
X
k∈K
nkWk(t),
(24)
s.t.
X
k∈K
D(h,l,k)nk ≥ln(2cH/δ) + gδ,
∀l ∈H\{h},
(25)
nk ≥0,
∀k ∈K,
(26)
X
k∈K
nk ≤vδ,
(27)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
17
with ties broken arbitrarily, where gδ and vδ are two auxiliary constants that do not depend on h:
gδ =3zd−1/2p
ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ)
(28)
vδ =2d−1 ln(1/δ)

1 + (ln(2cH) + gδ)ln−1(1/δ)

.
(29)
We will denote by Nh the set of all vectors {nk}k∈K which satisfy the constraints in Eqs. (25) through
(27). One can verify that the above optimization problem always admits a feasible solution. Finally,
the workload vector for job i will be obtained by rounding down {nh,k}k∈K:
Λi,k = ⌊nh,k⌋,
∀k ∈K.
(30)
Interpretation of workload: The workload vector captures the combinations of inspections job
i should receive assuming that its true label is indeed bHP
i , in which case Eq. (25) ensures that
the cumulative log-likelihoood ratios are suﬃciently large to make an accurate classiﬁcation. As
mentioned earlier, the optimization in Eq. (24) is reminiscent of the family of max-weight scheduling
policies (cf. Tassiulas and Ephremides (1992)): our policy aims to create workload in order to
minimize an inner-product between the new workload and the existing inspections. The proof in
subsequent sections will demonstrate that this adaptive procedure allows the inspection policy to
work well with any prior distribution, hence making the policy prior-oblivious.
Departure rules. A job i departs from the Adaptive stage as soon as it has received the outcomes
of all Λi,k inspections from experts of type k, for all k ∈K. Suppose that the departure occurs at
time t. The policy then executes the following decision:
1. If there exists h ∈H, such that
Si,t(h,l) ≥ln(2cH/δ),
∀l ∈H,l ̸= h,
(31)
then job i departs from the system, and a classiﬁcation is produced by setting bHi = bHi,t = h.
2. Otherwise, job i enters the Residual stage.
Expert actions. Suppose that an expert of type k visits the Adaptive stage at time t ∈R+. If
the workload for the kth expert pool, Wk(t), is non-zero (Eq. (23)), then the expert initiates an
inspection for a job associated with one unit of work in Wk(t), in a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-serve fashion. If
Wk(t) = 0, then the expert goes on a vacation.
6.2.3.
Residual Stage The Residual stage acts as a “clearing house" that treats those jobs
whose inspections in the Adaptive stage failed to produce an accurate classiﬁcation. Similar to
the Preparation stage, jobs are inspected by random experts, but they receive signiﬁcantly more
inspections in the Residual stage in order to produce a highly accurate label classiﬁcation.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
18
Workload. The moment a job enters the Residual stage, all of its previous inspections and out-
comes are discarded. Similar to the Preparation stage, each job will receive a ﬁxed number of
inspections, nR, where
nR = ζ0 ln(4cH/δ).
(32)
Departure rules. A job i in the Residual stage departs from the system as soon as it has received
the results from all nR inspections, and a classiﬁcation of job i’s type is produced by setting bHi =
bHi,t. Note that the classiﬁcation is made solely based on the inspections in the Residual stage, as
we have discarded all inspections from the earlier stages.
Expert actions. An expert who visits the Residual stage will attempt to initiate an inspection
for a job in the Residual stage in a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-serve fashion. If there is no job currently in the
Residual stage, or if all jobs in the Residual stage have all of their nR inspections already initiated,
then the expert goes on a vacation. This concludes the description of our inspection policy.
7.
Lower Bound on Optimal System Size
We establish in this section a fundamental lower bound on the minimum number of experts required
in order for the system to be stable that holds for any δ-accurate policy. The following Fundamental
Linear Program is central to this lower bound as well as our subsequent analysis.
Deﬁnition 7.1 The Fundamental Linear Program, denoted by FLP, is deﬁned as follows.
minimize
m
(33)
s.t.
X
h∈H
nh,kπh ≤rkm,
k ∈K,
(34)
X
k∈K
nh,kD(h,l,k) ≥ln(1/δ),
∀h,l ∈H,h ̸= l,
(35)
nh,k ≥0,
∀h ∈H,k ∈K,
(36)
where D(h,l,k) and rk are deﬁned in Eqs. (4) and (16), respectively.
We provide some intuition to motivate the above deﬁnition. Recall from Lemma 5.2 that in order
for any policy to be δ-accurate, for a job i with label h, the expected value of the cumulative
log-likelihood ratio Si,t(h,l) should be at least ln(1/δ) by the time job i departs from the system.
Furthermore, an inspection by an expert of type k increases the value of Si,t(h,l) by D(h,l,k)
in expectation. If we interpret the variables, nh,k, as the number of inspections a job with true
label h should receive from an expert of type k, then Eq. (34) in FLP corresponds to the resource
constraint of having mρk type-k experts, each of whom can perform µk inspections per unit time,
and Eq. (35) to the above-mentioned constraint on E(Si,j(h,l)) imposed by Lemma 5.2. Therefore,
FLP captures the problem of ﬁnding minimal system size faced by a decision maker who already

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
19
knows the true labels of the jobs and is only interested in “verifying” them in order to satisfy the
condition of Lemma 5.2, and we would expect the optimal value of FLP to be a lower bound for
what is achievable in our problem, where the job labels are unknown.
The following proposition is the main result of this subsection, which states that the minimum
system size under any δ-accurate policy is essentially no smaller than the solution to FLP, as δ →0.
The proof builds upon the lower bound in Lemma 5.2, and is given in Appendix A.2.
Proposition 7.2 Fix δ ∈(0,1) and π. Denote by m∗
F the optimal value of FLP. We have that
m∗(δ,π) ≥bδ · m∗
F,
(37)
where bδ = (1 −δ)
h
1 −

ln
1
1−δ + e−1
ln−1(1/δ)
i
. In particular, bδ ↑1 as δ ↓0.
The next lemma states some useful properties of FLP. The proof is given in Appendix A.3.
Lemma 7.3 There exists an optimal solution of FLP, (m∗
F,{n∗
h,k}), such that the following holds:
d
−1 ≤
1
ln(1/δ)
X
k∈K
n∗
h,k ≤d−1,
∀h ∈H,
(38)
m∗
F ≥d
−1 ln(1/δ).
(39)
8.
Stability of Preparation and Adaptive Stages
We establish in this section a suﬃcient condition on the number of experts, m, in order for the
Preparation and Adaptive stages to be jointly stable under the proposed inspection policy. An
analogous result for the Residual stage will be established in a subsequent section. We denote by
QP(t), QA(t) and QR(t) the number of jobs in the Preparation, Adaptive and Residual stages,
respectively, at time t. A stage being stable means that the process Q·(·) for that stage is positive
recurrent. The main result of this section is the following theorem.
Theorem 8.1 Deﬁne r = mink∈K rk = mink∈K ρkµk. The Preparation and Adaptive stages are stable
whenever mqP > nP = ζ0 lnln(1/δ), and
mqA >

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

m∗
F,
(40)
where m∗
F is the optimal value of the Fundamental Linear Program in Deﬁnition 7.1.
Proof Overview for Theorem 8.1. The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of
Theorem 8.1, and, unless stated otherwise, we will use the word “system” to refer to the Preparation
and Adaptive stages only. We begin by giving an overview of the proof and highlighting some of the
main technical challenges that motivate our approach.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
20
Let us ﬁrst recall some high-level features of the system dynamics. The expert actions are fairly
simple in both stages by simply trying to initiate an inspection in a non-adaptive manner. Creating
inspection workloads is also straightforward for the Preparation stage where each job has a ﬁxed
number of inspections. The main complexity therefore lies in how the vector-valued workloads are
created in the Adaptive stage, which depends both on the job’s type estimate from the Preparation
stage, and the aggregate workloads in the Adaptive stage. Given the disparity of complexity, a
natural approach would be to treat the two stages separately: the Preparation stage admits simpler
dynamics and is easy to analyze while the Adaptive could be tackled using the Foster-Lyapunov
criterion. Unfortunately, this approach falls short because the processing in the Preparation stage
destroys the memoryless property of the initial arrival process, rendering its output process non-
Markovian. Therefore, the Adaptive stage cannot be treated as an isolated Markov process without
taking into account the state of the Preparation stage as well.
To overcome this problem, we will model the dynamics in both stages jointly, and formulate a
set of ﬂuid solutions, expressed as solutions to a system of ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE),
to capture the essential dynamics of this joint process. Speciﬁcally, following a general program
developed by Rybko and Stolyar (1992), Dai (1995), we will show that, under proper scaling, the
process of system workloads converges almost surely to a set of ﬂuid solutions. We then show that if
the number of experts satisﬁes the conditions stated in Theorem 8.1, then the ﬂuid solutions exhibit
a certain global contraction property with respect to a one-homogeneous Lyapunov function. These
two properties will then be used to show that the original workload process is positive recurrent,
which in turn implies the stability of the system. The proof will be carried out in the following main
steps:
1. We deﬁne in Section 8.2 the Markov process that captures the system dynamics, as well as the
ﬂuid solutions.
2. We show in Section 8.3 (Proposition 8.4) that the workload process converges to a ﬂuid solution
almost surely over an appropriately deﬁned probability space.
3. We establish the global contraction property of the ﬂuid solutions in Section 8.4 (Proposition
8.11) by showing a multiplicative decay in a quadratic Lyapunov function along the trajectory
of any ﬂuid solution.
4. Finally, we complete the proof in Section 8.5 by combining Propositions 8.4 (convergence)
and 8.11 (contraction) with a variant of the Foster-Lyapunov criterion (Theorem 8.13, Robert
(2003)).
There are two main technical challenges which we develop novel tools to overcome: (1) the proof
requires characterizing the limit points of the solutions to the linear optimization sub-routine in
Eq. (24) under ﬂuid scaling, which is diﬃcult because the parameters in the objective function,

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
21
{Wk(·)}k∈K, are themselves stochastic variables. We will employ a careful analysis of the (semi-
)continuity properties of the optimization problem to study these limit points; (2) the jobs’ transi-
tions from the Preparation stage to the Adaptive stage are complex because a job can depart from
the Preparation stage only after all of its inspection have completed (for otherwise the inspection
outcomes would not have been available). This in turn causes the order of departures from a stage
to deviate from that of the arrivals, making standard techniques ineﬀective in showing the conver-
gence of the system’s stochastic trajectory to a ﬂuid limit. We will prove convergence by developing
explicit bounds on the degree of “shuﬄing”, which allows us to conclude that the deviation is not
too substantial to invalidate convergence.
8.0.4.
Additional Notation For a vector x = (x1,...,xn), we will denote by ∥x∥2 the l2 norm
of x: ∥x∥2 =
pPn
i=1 x2
i . We will denote by ∥·∥T the maximal norm of a function over the interval
[0,T]: ∥f(t)∥T = supt∈[0,T ] |f(t)|. For x,y ∈R, we will use x ∨y and x ∧y to denote min{x,y} and
max{x,y}, respectively. For two vectors of the same dimension, x and y, we write x ≤y if all
coordinates of x are dominated by those of y. Similarly, for a set of vectors, Y, we write x ≤Y if x ≤y
for all y ∈Y. The addition of two sets X + Y is deﬁned to be the set {z : z = x + y, x ∈X,y ∈Y}.
8.1.
Classiﬁcation Accuracy of Preparation Stage
We begin in this subsection with a result that bounds the classiﬁcation error of the coarse label
estimate from the Preparation stage. Denote by bHP
i the maximum likelihood estimator, bHi,t, when
job i exits the Preparation stage. Recall from the construction of our policy that each job will be
inspected for the same, deterministic number of times in the Preparation stage, and it is not diﬃcult
to verify that { bHP
i }i∈N are i.i.d. We will denote by πP the distribution of the estimator bHP
1 ,
πP
h
△= P

bHP
1 = h

,
h ∈H.
(41)
and by ϵP as the error probability ϵP △= maxh∈H P( bHP
1 ̸= h
H1 = h). The following proposition
provides an upper bound on ϵP, which in turn upper-bounds the distance from πP to the original
prior distribution, π. The proof is given in Appendix A.5, which relies on a generalization of Lemma
5.1 in combination with fact that Si,t(h,l) can be viewed as a martingale under proper conditioning.
Proposition 8.2 We have that ϵP ≤2cH ln−1(1/δ), and
πP
h ≤πh + ϵP X
h′̸=h
πh′ ≤πh + 2cH ln−1(1/δ),
∀h ∈H.
(42)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
22
8.2.
State Representation and Fluid Solutions
We describe in this subsection a Markovian representation of the Preparation and Adaptive stages
as well as the notion of ﬂuid solutions. We will index jobs in the two stages according to the order
in which they arrive. Denote by I(t) the total number of jobs in the system at time t, and let
I(t) = {1,2,...,I(t)}. For instance, job 1 corresponds to the oldest job in system at time t, and
job I(t) corresponds to the youngest. The indices will be updated accordingly in the event of the
departure of job i, where all jobs with an index greater than i will have their index reduced by 1.
For each i ∈I(t), we deﬁne a job state, Yi(t), which consists of the following variables:
1. Y S
i (t) ∈{1,2} represents the stage the job is currently, with 1 and 2 corresponds to job i being
in the Adaptive and Preparation stage, respectively.
2. {(Xi,s,Ei,s)}
Ni,t
s=1 contains all the past inspection responses of job i, along with the corresponding
expert types, where Ni,t the number of inspections received by job i by time t.
3. Y E
i (t) ⊂E is the set of experts who are in the process of inspecting job i at time t.
4. N P
i (t) is the number of remaining inspections that job i has left in the Preparation stage.
5. Λi,k(t) is job i’s remaining number of inspections to be completed by experts of type k in the
Adaptive stage.
The above variables completely specify the state of the Preparation and Adaptive stages at time
t, and it is not diﬃcult to verify that {I(t),{Yi(t)}i∈I(t)}t∈R+ is a countable-state Markov process.
We now formally deﬁne the workload process using the above state representation. Denote by W0(t)
the total number of remaining uninitiated inspections in the Preparation stage
W0(t) =
X
i∈I(t),Y S
i (t)=1
N P
i (t).
(43)
Similarly, the workload in the kth expert pool in the Adaptive stage, is deﬁned by:
Wk(t) =
X
i∈I(t),Y S
i (t)=2
Λi,k(t).
(44)
The following notion of ﬂuid solutions will serve as an approximation to the workload process.
Deﬁnition 8.3 (Fluid Solutions) The functions wk : R+ →R+,k ∈{0} ∪K are called a ﬂuid
solution if there exist Lipschitz-continuous functions ak,dk : R+ →R+, k ∈{0} ∪K, with ak(0) =
dk(0) = 0 with Lipschitz constant cL > 0 such that
wk(t) = wk(0) + ak(t) −dk(t),
(45)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
23
where, for almost all t ∈R+,
˙a0(t) = np,
˙d0(t) =

mqP,
if w0(t) > 0,
nP,
if w0(t) = 0,
{˙ak(t)}k∈K ≤(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h N ∗
h(w(t)),
˙dk(t) =

rkmqA,
if wk(t) > 0,
˙ak(t),
if wk(t) = 0,
∀k ∈1,...,cK,
(46)
where qP,qA and nP were deﬁned in Section 6, and πP
h in Eq. (41). N ∗
h(w(t)) is the set of optimal
solutions for the optimization problem
min
{nk}∈Nh
X
k∈K
nkwk(t),
(47)
and the set Nh was deﬁned in Eqs. (25) through (27). Fix w0 ∈RcK+1
+
. We denote by W(w0) the set
of all ﬂuid solutions with the initial condition w(0) = w0.
8.3.
Convergence of Stochastic Sample Paths to the Fluid Solutions
We show in this section that the workload process converges to a ﬂuid solution under proper scaling.
We will consider a sequence of systems, indexed by s ∈N, which have diﬀerent initial conditions for
the workload process at t = 0 but are otherwise identical. We will denote by Ws(·) the workload
process W(·) in the sth system. For n ∈N, and a process {X(t)}t∈R+, we will use {X(n,t)}t∈R+ to
denote the normalized process:
X(n,t) = 1
nX(nt),
t ∈R+.
(48)
The following proposition is the main result of this subsection.
Proposition 8.4 Fix w0 ∈RcK+1
+
. Consider a sequence of initial conditions {w(s)}s∈N, such that
for a sequence of positive numbers {zs}s∈N with lims→∞zs = ∞, we have that lims→∞z−1
s w(s) = w0.
Suppose Ws(0) = w(s), for all s ∈N. Then, for all T > 0, the following convergence takes place:
lim
s→∞
inf
w∈W(w0)∥Ws(zs,t) −w(t)∥T = 0,
almost surely.
(49)
The remainder of this sub-section is devoted to the proof Proposition 8.4. Because the system
dynamics is quite complex, we will prove convergence using a sample-path-based approach that
helps us isolate the probabilistic aspect of the dynamics from its deterministic counterpart (Similar
sample-path-based approaches have also been used in Bramson (1998), Tsitsiklis and Xu (2012)). In
particular, we ﬁrst identify a large subset of the sample space, called the regular set, which contains
the sample paths that exhibit certain typical behaviors. We then show that convergence to the ﬂuid
solutions occurs over every sample path in the regular set.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
24
8.3.1.
Regular Set We now construct the regular set. We will deﬁne all random quantities of
the system on the same probability space, (Ω,F,P).
Deﬁnition 8.5 Fix T > 0. We deﬁne the following elements of F.
1. C0: Denote by Ξ0(t) the number of jobs that have arrived to the Preparation stage in the interval
[0,t]. Deﬁne C0 as the event where
lim
z→∞∥Ξ0(z,t) −t∥T = 0,
(50)
2. CE: Denote by Re,P(t) and Re,A(t) the total number of times an expert e ∈E visits the Prepa-
ration and Adaptive stage, respectively, during the interval [0,t]. Let ke be the type of expert e.
Deﬁne CE as the event where
lim
z→∞max
e∈E
Re,P(z,t) −qPµket

T = 0,
and
lim
z→∞max
e∈E
Re,A(z,t) −qAµket

T =0.
(51)
3. CH: Denote by bHP
i
the ML estimator of the type of the ith job upon leaving the Preparation
stage. Let gh(t) = P⌊t⌋
i=1 I( bHP
i = h). Deﬁne CH as the event where
lim
z→∞max
h∈H
gh(z,t) −πP
h t

T = 0.
(52)
Deﬁne the regular set, C, as the intersection of all three events in Deﬁnition 8.5: C = C0 ∩CE ∩CH.
We have the following useful lemma. The proof is a direct consequence of the (functional) law of
large numbers applied to each of the three events, and is omitted.
Lemma 8.6 Fix T > 0. We have that P(C0) = P(CE) = P(CH) = 1, and, consequently, P(C) = 1.
8.3.2.
Proof of Proposition 8.4 We return to the proof Proposition 8.4, which will be com-
pleted in two parts. Fix any sample path ω ∈C. In the ﬁrst part, we will show that over any ﬁnite
interval, any sub-sequence of {Wzs(·)}s∈N admits a further converging sub-sequence that converges
coordinate-wise to a Lipschitz-continuous function. We will then show, in the second part, that
all such limiting functions are in fact ﬂuid solutions, i.e., for almost all t, their derivatives satisfy
the conditions given in Deﬁnition 8.3. The next result summarizes the ﬁrst part of the proof. Fix
k ∈{0,1,...,cK}. We will write
Ws
k(t) = Ws
k(0) + As
k(t) −∆s
k(t),
t > 0,
(53)
where As
k(t) and ∆s
k(t) denote the total number of inspections associated with the arrivals, and the
number of inspections that have been initiated, during [0,t], respectively, for jobs associated with
the workload Ws
k(·). The proof of the following proposition is given in Appendix A.6.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
25
Proposition 8.7 Fix T > 0. Denote by Lc the set of coordinate-wise c-Lipschitz functions from
[0,T] to R3(cK+1)
+
. Fix the sample, ω ∈C, and an increasing sequence, {si}i∈N, and let c = [qA +(vδ +
1)qP]m + nP, where vδ was deﬁned in Eq. (29). Then, there exists (w,a,d) ∈Lc, and an increasing
sequence, {ij}j∈N ⊂N, such that
lim
j→∞
(W,A,∆)
sij (zsij ,t) −(w,a,d)(t)

T = 0.
(54)
We will refer to these w(·)’s as limit points of {Ws(zsi,·)}i∈N.
The next result states that all of the limit points in Proposition 8.7 are in fact ﬂuid solutions.
Proposition 8.8 Let w(·) be a limit point as deﬁned in Proposition 8.7. Then w(·) is also a ﬂuid
solution, as deﬁned by Deﬁnition 8.3.
Proof.
Fix ω ∈C, and a limit point, (w,a,d), with the corresponding sequence {ij}j∈N, as deﬁned
in Proposition 8.7. To avoid excessive use of subscripts, we will use ¯sj and ¯zj in place of sij and zsij ,
respectively. Fix t ∈(0,T) to be a time where all coordinates of the limit point are diﬀerentiable.
We begin with the Preparation stage, with k = 0. As was mentioned in the proof of Proposition 8.7,
each new job that arrives to the Preparation stage creates nP inspections. We have that
lim
z→∞
A0(z,t) −nPt

T = lim
z→∞nP ∥Ξ0(z,t) −t∥T = 0,
(55)
where the second equality follows from Eq. (50). This shows that ˙a0(t) = nP.
For d0(t), we consider two cases depending on the value of w0(t). First, suppose that w0(t) > 0.
Then there exists ϵ > 0, such that for all ϵ ∈(0,ϵ), there exists Nϵ > 0 such that, for all j ≥Nϵ,
W¯sj(t′¯zj) > 0,
∀t′ ∈[t,t + ϵ].
(56)
Fix j and t′ so that Eq. (56) is true. Because the workload is non-zero, any expert who visits the
Preparation stage at time t′¯zj will necessarily lead to a unit increment in the process ∆
¯sj
0 (·). We
thus have that, for all j ≥Nϵ,
∆
¯sj
0 ((t + ϵ)¯zj) −∆
¯sj
0 (t¯zj) =
X
e∈E
Re,P((t + ϵ)¯zj) −Re,P(t¯zj),
(57)
which, with scaling, implies that
lim
j→∞(∆
¯sj
0 (¯zj,t + ϵ) −∆
¯sj
0 (¯zj,t)) = lim
j→∞
 X
e∈E
Re,P(¯zj,t + ϵ) −Re,P(¯zj,t)
!
= qPmϵ,
(58)
where the last step follows from Eq. (51), and the fact that P
k ρkµk = µ = 1 (Eq. (2)). Taking the
limit as ϵ →0, we obtain
˙d0(t) =lim
ϵ→0ϵ−1

lim
j→∞(∆
¯sj
0 (¯zj,t + ϵ) −∆
¯sj
0 (¯zj,t))

= lim
ϵ→0ϵ−1(qPmϵ) = qPm,
if w0(t) > 0.
(59)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
26
Now suppose that w0(t) = 0. In this case, we will exploit the properties that w0(·) is diﬀerentiable
at t, and is non-negative over [0,T]. Since w0(t) = 0, the two properties together imply ˙w0(t) must
be zero. We have that ˙d0(t) = −( ˙w0(t) −˙a0(t)) = nP, if w0(t) = 0. This proves the case for k = 0.
We next consider the case of k = 1,...,cK. For ˙dk(t), the analysis is identical to the case of k = 0,
which we shall omit. We now turn to the analysis for ˙ak(·). In particular, we will show that
{˙ak(t)}k∈K ≤(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h N ∗
h(w(t)),
(60)
where N ∗
h(w(t)) was deﬁned in Eq. (47). The proof of Eq. (60) is more involved than for the other
coordinates of the ﬂuid solution, because our inspection policy determines the workload vector of
a job entering the Adaptive stage using two sources of information: (1) the coarse estimate of the
job’s label from the Preparation stage, and (2) the existing workload in the Adaptive stage. Our
proof will also proceed in two steps:
(a) We ﬁrst show that the arrival process of jobs with the same coarse label estimate converges
locally to its “mean value” under ﬂuid scaling.
(b) We then show that the average workload vector among jobs with the same coarse estimator
converges locally to a point that is dominated by the set (1 + ln−1(1/δ))N ∗
h(w(t)).
These two steps together then yield Eq. (60).
For t ∈(0,T), denote by Bs(t) the set of all jobs that arrived to the Adaptive stage during the
interval [0,t] in the s-th system, and by Bs
h(t) the subset of jobs in Bs(t) whose ML estimators
upon exiting the Preparation stage, bHP
i , are equal to h. Let Bs
h(t) be the size of the set Bs
h(t). The
following lemma formalizes step (a) above, whose proof is given in Appendix A.7. As was mentioned
in the beginning of Section 8, the proof of this lemma involves a careful analysis of the potential
shuﬄing in the order in which jobs depart from the Preparation stage.
Lemma 8.9 Fix h ∈H. For almost all t ∈(0,T), we have that
˙bh(t)
△= lim
ϵ→0 lim
j→∞
B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t + ϵ) −B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t)
ϵ
=



mqP
nP πP
h ,
if w0(t) > 0,
πP
h ,
if w0(t) = 0,
(61)
where πP
h
△= P

bHP
1 = h

, as was deﬁned in Eq. (41).
Step (b) is summarized in the following lemma. It states that, over a small time interval around
t, the average workload among the jobs in B
¯sj
h (·) stays close to a point that is dominated by the set
N ∗
h(w(t)). The proof, which utilizes a semi-continuity property of the solution set of the workload-
generating optimization problem (Eq. (24)), is given in Appendix A.8.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
27
Lemma 8.10 Fix t ∈(0,T), and h ∈H. Let Λh(t,ϵ,j) be the average workload across all jobs
arriving to the Adaptive stage during [¯zjt, ¯zj(t + ϵ)) whose ML estimator is h, i.e.,
Λh(t,ϵ,j) =
1
B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)) −B
¯sj
h (¯zjt)
X
i∈B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t+ϵ))\B
¯sj
h (¯zjt)
Λi.
(62)
We have that
limsup
ϵ↓0
limsup
j→∞
inf
y≤N ∗
h(w(t))∥Λh(t,ϵ,j) −y∥2 = 0.
(63)
We are now ready to complete the proof of Proposition 8.8. Let t ∈(0,T) be a point where all
coordinates of a(·) are diﬀerentiable. We have that
(˙ak(t))k=1,...,cK =lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
A¯sj(¯zj,t + ϵ) −A¯sj(¯zj,t)
ϵ
(a)
= lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
1
ϵ¯zj
X
h∈H
X
i∈B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t+ϵ))\B
¯sj
h (¯zjt)
Λi
=lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
X
h∈H
B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)) −B
¯sj
h (¯zjt)
ϵ¯zj
·
P
i∈B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t+ϵ))\B
¯sj
h (¯zjt) Λi
B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)) −B
¯sj
h (¯zjt)
=lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
X
h∈H
B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t + ϵ) −B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t)
ϵ
Λh(t,ϵ,j)
(b)
= lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
X
h∈H
˙bh(t)Λh(t,ϵ,j),
(64)
where step (a) follows from the deﬁnition of the policy in Eq. (30): As
k(t) = P
h∈H
P
i∈Bs
h(t) Λi,k, and
step (b) from Lemma 8.9. Applying Lemma 8.10 for every h ∈H, we have that
limsup
ϵ↓0
limsup
j→∞
inf
y≤P
h∈H ˙bh(t) N ∗
h(w(t))
y −
X
h∈H
˙bh(t)Λh(t,ϵ,j)

2
= 0.
(65)
Since Nh, the feasible solutions of the linear program in Eq. (24), is a compact set, the set of optimal
solutions, N ∗
h(w(t)), is also compact. The compactness of N ∗
h(w(t)) combined with Eq. (65) implies
lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
X
h∈H
˙bh(t)Λh(t,ϵ,j) ≤
X
h∈H
˙bh(t)N ∗
h(w(t)) ≤(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h N ∗
h(w(t)),
(66)
where the last inequality follows from the fact that ˙bh(t) ≤πP
h
mqP
nP ≤πP
h (1 + ln−1(1/δ)) (Eq. (20)).
Eqs. (64) and (66) together imply that
(˙ak(t))k=1,...,cK ≤(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h N ∗
h(w(t)).
(67)
We have veriﬁed that the all conditions in Deﬁnition 8.3 are met, and w(·) is a ﬂuid solution. This
completes the proof of Proposition 8.8.
Q.E.D.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
28
8.4.
Drift Properties of Fluid Solutions
We show in this subsection that the ﬂuid solutions exhibit a certain contraction property with
respect to the Lyapunov function, L : RcK+1
+
→R+, deﬁned as:
L(w) = ∥w∥2 =
v
u
u
t
cK
X
k=0
w2
k,
w ∈RcK+1
+
.
(68)
The following proposition is the main result of this subsection, which shows that when m is suﬃ-
ciently large, the value of the Lyapunov function always decreases by a constant amount starting
from any initial condition with unit value.
Proposition 8.11 Let m∗
F be the optimal value of FLP. Suppose that mqP > nP, and
mqA >

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

(1 + ln−1(1/δ))m∗
F.
(69)
Then, there exist τ,ϵ′ > 0, such that, for any w0 ∈RcK+1
+
with L(w0) = 1,
L(w(τ)) ≤1 −ϵ′,
∀w ∈W(w0).
(70)
The proof of the proposition is given in Appendix A.9. A main step of the proof is to couple the
drift properties of the ﬂuid solutions, a result of the workload creation in the Adaptive stage, to the
structure of the Fundamental Linear Program (FLP) in Deﬁnition 7.1, and show that the contraction
property holds as long as the system size is approximately greater than the optimal solution of
FLP. To this end, we leverage an upper bound on the error of the coarse label estimate produced
by the Preparation stage, and show that its accuracy is suﬃciently high so that the appropriation
of resouces in the Adaptive stage resembles an optimal solution to FLP.
8.5.
Proof of Stability of Preparation and Adaptive Stages
We now complete the proof of Theorem 8.1 by establishing the joint stability of the Preparation
and Adaptive stages. We will use the following version of the Foster-Lyapunov criterion. The main
steps in this subsection are similar to those used in Massoulié (2007).
Proposition 8.12 (Theorem 8.13, Robert (2003)) Let {X(t)}t∈R+ be a Markov jump process
on a countable state space, X. Suppose that there exists a function L : X →R+, constants C,ϵ > 0,
and an integrable stopping time ˆτ > 0, such that for all x ∈X such that L(x) > C, we have that
E
 L(X(ˆτ))
X(0) = x

≤L(x) −ϵE
 ˆτ
X(0) = x

.
(71)
Suppose, in addition, that the set {x : L(x) ≤C} is ﬁnite, and that E
 L(X(ˆτ))
X(0) = x

< ∞for
all x ∈X. Then, {X(t)}t∈R+ is positive recurrent.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
29
Denote by {U(t)}t∈R+ the Markov process that describes the system dynamics in the Preparation
and Adaptive stages, where the states are deﬁned in Section 8.2, and by U the state space. We will
denote by Pu(·) the probability distribution associated with the process U(·) with initial condition
u ∈U. Deﬁne the function ˆL : U →R+ as the extension of L(·) on U, i.e., ˆL(U(t)) = L(W(t)) =
∥W(t)∥2. Let τ and ϵ′ be deﬁned as in Proposition 8.11. For every ˜u ∈U, let
ˆτ = ˆL(˜u)τ = L( ˜w)τ.
(72)
Consider the family of probability measures

P˜u
 Wk(ˆτ)/ˆL(˜u) ∈·
 
k=0,...,cK,˜u∈U, ˜w̸=0.
(73)
We ﬁrst show that the above family is uniformly integrable. We have the dominance relation:
Wk(t) ≤Wk(0) + max{vδ,nP}Ξ0(t),
t ∈R+,k = 0,...,cK.
(74)
To see why this is true, recall that a job creates nP inspections in the Preparation stage (k = 0) and
at most vδ total inspections in the Adaptive stage (k = 1,...,cK). Hence, the second term on the
right-hand side of Eq. (74) dominates the total number of inspections that could have been added
to Wk(·) by time t. Scaling both sides of Eq. (74) by ˆL(˜u) and setting t = ˆτ, we have that, when
U(0) = ˜u,
Wk(ˆτ)/ˆL(˜u) ≤˜wk/ˆL(˜u) + max{vδ,nP}Ξ0(ˆτ)/ˆL(˜u)
= ˜wk/L( ˜w) + max{vδ,nP}Ξ0(ˆL(˜u)τ)/ˆL(˜u)
(a)
≤1/α1 + max{vδ,nP}Ξ0(ˆL(˜u)τ)/ˆL(˜u),
(75)
for some constant α1 > 0, where step (a) follows from the ﬁrst inequality in Eq. (239) of Lemma
B.1 in Appendix B. Since Ξ0(·) is a unit-rate Poisson process, we have E

Ξ0(ˆL(˜u)τ)/ˆL(˜u)

=
Var

Ξ0(ˆL(˜u)τ)/ˆL(˜u)

= τ. The above arguments show that the ﬁrst and second moments of
Wk(ˆτ)/ˆL(˜u) are both bounded from above uniformly over all ˜u ∈U, so long as ˜w ̸= 0. This implies
the uniform integrability of the family of distributions in Eq. (73). Using again Eq. (239) of Lemma
B.1, we have that
ˆL(U(ˆτ))/ˆL(˜u) =L(W(ˆτ))/ˆL(˜u) ≤α2∥W(ˆτ)∥∞/ˆL(˜u) ≤α2
α1
+ max{vδ,nP}Ξ0(ˆL(˜u)τ)/ˆL(˜u).
(76)
Using the same arguments as those following Eq. (75), we have that the set of probability measures

P˜u
 ˆL(U(ˆτ))/ˆL(˜u) ∈·
 
˜u∈U, ˜w̸=0
(77)
is also uniformly integrable.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
30
We now prove the validity of Eq. (71) in our context. In particular, we will show that there exist
A,ϵ > 0, such that for all ˜u ∈U, if ˆL(˜u) ≥A, then we have that
E˜u

ˆL(U(ˆL(˜u)τ))

≤ˆL(˜u)(1 −ϵτ),
(78)
where we have used the substitution ˆτ = ˆL(˜u)τ. By the deﬁnitions of ˆL and ˆτ, we have that
E˜u

ˆL(U(ˆL(˜u)τ))/ˆL(u)

=E˜u
 L(W(L( ˜w)τ))/L( ˜w)
 (a)
= E˜u
 L(L( ˜w)−1W(L( ˜w)τ))

=E˜u
 L(W(L( ˜w),τ))

,
(79)
where step (a) is based on the second property in Lemma B.1 (one-homogeneity of L(·)). In light
of Eq. (79), the condition in Eq. (78) is equivalent to
E˜u (L(W(L( ˜w),τ))) ≤1 −ϵτ.
(80)
We will now prove Eq. (80) by contradiction. For the sake of contradiction, suppose that there exists
a sequence of initial conditions, {˜us}s∈N, where ˆL(˜us) →∞as s →∞, such that
limsup
s→∞E˜us (L(Ws(L( ˜ws),τ))) ≥1,
(81)
where we have re-introduced the superscript s in W to signify the initial condition Ws(0) = ˜ws. In
particular, after scaling, we can deﬁne the quantity ws:
ws △= Ws(L( ˜ws),0) = Ws(0)/L( ˜ws) = ˜ws/L( ˜ws).
(82)
Since L(w) = ∥w∥2, we have that ∥ws∥2 = L(ws/L( ˜ws)) = 1, i.e., ws belongs to the compact set
{w ∈RcK+1
+
: ∥w∥2 = 1}. The compactness implies that there exists w0 ∈RcK+1
+
, with L(w0) =
∥w0∥2 = 1, and a sub-sequence of {ws}, {wsi}i∈N, such that
lim
i→∞wsi = w0.
(83)
Since L( ˜ws) = ˆL( ˜ws) →∞as s →∞by our assumption, by Proposition 8.4 and Eq. (83), we have
lim
i→∞
inf
y∈V(w0,τ)∥y −Wsi(L( ˜wsi),τ)∥2 = 0,
a.s.,
(84)
where V(w0,t) is deﬁned to be the set of all states of the ﬂuid solution at time t ∈R+, starting
with an initial condition w0: V(w0,t) = S
w(·)∈W(w0) w(t). It can be veriﬁed from the deﬁnition of
the ﬂuid solutions that the set V(w0,t) is compact for all t and w0. The compactness of V(w0,τ)
along with Eq. (84) implies that there exist y ∈V(w0,τ) and a sub-sequence of { ˜wsi}, { ˜w
sij }j∈N,
such that
lim
j→∞W
sij (L( ˜w
sij ),τ) = y,
a.s.
(85)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
31
Since L(·) is a continuous function, the above equation further implies that
lim
j→∞L(W
sij (L( ˜w
sij ),τ)) = L(y) ≤1 −ϵ′,
a.s.,
(86)
where the last inequality follows from the fact that L(w0) = 1, y ∈V(w0,τ), and Proposition 8.11.
As was shown earlier, the family of distributions,
n
P˜u

ˆL(U(ˆτ))/ˆL(˜u) ∈·
o
˜u∈U, ˜w̸=0, is uniformly
integrable (Eq. (77)), and hence one of its subsets

P˜u
sij (L(W
sij (L( ˜w
sij ),τ) ∈·)
 
i∈N
(87)
is also uniformly integrable. Combining Eq. (86) with the above uniform integrability implies that
lim
j→∞E˜u
sij (L(W
sij (L( ˜w
sij ),τ))) = L(y) ≤1 −ϵ′ < 1,
(88)
which contradicts with Eq. (81). This completes the proof of Eq. (78).
The fact that E˜u(˜L(U(ˆτ)) < ∞for all ˜u is readily veriﬁable from Eq. (76). Finally, for any ﬁnite
C, the set {u ∈U : L(u) < C} contains states where the total number of jobs currently in system is
bounded. Since each job can receive at most nP + vδ inspections, and the result of each inspection
belongs to a ﬁnite set, it follows (Section 8.2) that the set {u ∈U : L(u) < C} is ﬁnite. We have thus
veriﬁed all the conditions in Proposition 8.12, and established the positive recurrence of U(·). This
completes the proof of Theorem 8.1.
Q.E.D.
9.
Stability of Residual Stage
The following result gives a suﬃcient condition on the stability of the Residual stage; the proof is
given in Appendix A.10.
Proposition 9.1 Suppose that the Preparation and Adaptive stages are stable. Then, the Residual
stage is stable whenever
mqR > 3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)).
(89)
10.
Proof of Theorem 4.1
We now complete the proof of our main result, Theorem 4.1. We begin by showing that the policy
proposed in Section 6 is δ-accurate: for every job i that departs from the system, the probability of
it being misclassiﬁed is at most δ. The proof is given in Appendix A.11.
Proposition 10.1 Fix δ ∈(0,1). Under the inspection policy described in Section 6,
P

bHi ̸= Hi
Hi = h

≤δ,
∀h ∈H,i ∈N.
(90)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
32
Completing the Proof of Theorem 4.1. We now show that the minimum value of m required
to stabilize the system under the proposed inspection policy satisﬁes the inequality in Eq. (10).
Combining Theorem 8.1 and Proposition 9.1, we have that the system is stable as long as all of the
following hold:
mqA >

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

m∗
F,
(91)
mqP >ζ0 lnln(1/δ),
mqR > 3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)),
(92)
where
m∗
F
is
the
optimal
value
of
FLP
(Deﬁnition
7.1).
Recall
from
the
deﬁnition
of
our
policy
in
Eqs.
(20)
and
(21)
that
qP =
 ζ0 lnln(1/δ) + ln−1(1/δ))

/m,
qR =

3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)) + 1

/m, and qA = 1−qP −qR. We have that Eq. (92) is automatically
satisﬁed by construction, whenever qP,qR ∈(0,1). Therefore, the system is stable if Eq. (91) is true,
which, by inserting the expressions for qP and qR, requires that
m >

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

(1 + ln−1(1/δ))m∗
F + ιδ,
(93)
where ιδ
△= ζ0 lnln(1/δ) + 3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)) + 1 + ln−1(1/δ). By dividing both sides of
Eq. (93) by m∗
F, the condition becomes
m
m∗
F
>

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

(1 + ln−1(1/δ)) + ιδ
m∗
F
.
(94)
The two terms on the right-hand side of the above equation can be bounded as follows. For the ﬁrst
term, recall from the deﬁnition in Eq. (28) that gδ = 3zd−1/2p
ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ). It is not diﬃcult
to see that there exist constants ¯c1 and ¯δ1 > 0, independent of π, such that for all δ < ¯δ1

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 +
2c2
Hd
dr ln(1/δ)

(1 + ln−1(1/δ)) <1 + ¯c1
p
ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ)
= 1 + ¯c1
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) .
(95)
For the second term in Eq. (94), ιδ/m∗
F, note that the dominating term in ιδ is of order lnln(1/δ).
Recall from Lemma 7.3 that m∗
F ≥d
−1 ln(1/δ), and hence there exist constants ¯c2 and ¯δ2 > 0,
independent of π, such that for all δ < ¯δ2, we have that
ιδ
m∗
F ≤
ιδ
d−1 ln(1/δ) ≤¯c2
ln ln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) . This, along
with Eqs. (94) and (95), implies that, for all δ < min{¯δ1, ¯δ2}, it suﬃces to have
m
m∗
F
> 1 + ¯c1
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) + ¯c2
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) .
(96)
Finally, the lower bound in Proposition 7.2 shows that the optimal system size, m∗(δ,π), satisﬁes
m∗(δ,π) ≥(1 −δ)

1 −

ln
1
1 −δ + e−1

ln−1(1/δ)

m∗
F.
(97)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
33
In particular, there exist constants ¯c3 and ¯δ3 > 0, independent of π, such that for all δ < ¯δ3
m∗
F ≤

1 +
¯c3
ln(1/δ)

m∗(δ,π).
(98)
Substituting Eq. (98) into Eq. (96), and noticing that the leading term in

m
m∗(δ,π) −1

is of order
q
ln ln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) , we conclude that there exist c0,δ0 > 0, independent of π, such that, for all δ ∈(0,δ0), the
system is stable under the proposed policy whenever
m
m∗(δ,π) > 1 + c0
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) .
(99)
Together with Proposition 10.1, this completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.
Q.E.D.
11.
Concluding Remarks
The main objective of this paper is to understand the design principles and fundamental limitations
involved as one aims to eﬃciently classify a large set of items using a ﬁnite amount of processing
resources. The main result demonstrates a prior-oblivious inspection architecture that asymptot-
ically uses the minimum number of experts, in the regime where the required classiﬁcation error
tends to zero. More broadly speaking, our result could be viewed as an attempt towards understand-
ing how to build eﬀective processing architectures and algorithms for large-scale statistical learning
or information extraction tasks, given limited resources or processing power. We believe that there
are many other problems in this domain, situated at the intersection between stochastic modeling
and statistics, that may be of interest for future research.
The present paper leaves open three main questions. First, we have thus far required the inspection
policies to be stable, while the more reﬁned metric of delays experienced by the jobs has not been
investigated. Second, the resource eﬃciency property of the proposed policy applies only in the
regime where the allowable error is close to zero. If signiﬁcantly greater errors can be tolerated,
however, it becomes less clear what inspection policy one should choose and whether a diﬀerent
criterion of resource eﬃciency should be adopted. Finally, it would be interesting to identify, and
provide rigorous guarantees for, simpler heuristic policies, such as the one we propose in Appendix
D, which are more easily implementable in practical applications.
References
Alizamir, Saed, Francis de Véricourt, Peng Sun. 2013. Diagnostic accuracy under congestion. Management
Science 59(1) 157–171.
Baker, Keith, J von Beers. 1996. Shmoo plotting: The black art of IC testing. Proceedings of IEEE Interna-
tional Test Conference. 932–933.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
34
Berge, Claude. 1963. Topological Spaces: Including a Treatment of Multi-Valued Functions, Vector Spaces
and Convexity. Courier Corporation.
Bimpikis, Kostas, Mihalis G. Markakis. 2015. Learning and hierarchies in queueing systems with unknown
customer types. unpublished manuscript .
Bramson, Maury. 1998. State space collapse with application to heavy traﬃc limits for multiclass queueing
networks. Queueing Systems 30(1-2) 89–140.
Chernoﬀ, Herman. 1959. Sequential design of experiments. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 30(3) 755–770.
Dai, Jim G. 1995. On positive harris recurrence of multiclass queueing networks: a uniﬁed approach via ﬂuid
limit models. The Annals of Applied Probability 49–77.
Gerdtz, Marie F, Tracey K Bucknall. 2001. Triage nurses’ clinical decision making. An observational study
of urgency assessment. Journal of Advanced Nursing 35(4) 550–561.
Grimmett, Geoﬀrey, David Stirzaker. 2001. Probability and random processes. Oxford university press.
Harrison, J. Michael, Marcel J López. 1999. Heavy traﬃc resource pooling in parallel-server systems. Queue-
ing systems 33(4) 339–368.
Harrison, J. Michael, Nur Sunar. 2015. Investment timing with incomplete information and multiple means
of learning. Operations Research 62(2) 442–457.
Johari, Ramesh, Vijay Kamble, Yash Kanoria. 2016. Know your customer: Multi-armed bandits with capacity
constraints. unpublished manuscript .
Karger, David R, Sewoong Oh, Devavrat Shah. 2014. Budget-optimal task allocation for reliable crowd-
sourcing systems. Operations Research 62(1) 1–24.
Massoulié, Laurent. 2007. Structural properties of proportional fairness: stability and insensitivity. Annals
of Applied Probability 17(3) 809–839.
Retsef, Levi, Thomas Magnanti, Yaron Shaposhnik. 2015. Scheduling with testing. under submission .
Robert, Philippe. 2003. Stochastic Networks and Queues. Springer.
Rybko, Aleksandr N., Alexander L. Stolyar. 1992. Ergodicity of stochastic processes describing the operation
of open queueing networks. Problemy Peredachi Informatsii 28(3) 3–26.
Siegmund, David. 2013. Sequential analysis: tests and conﬁdence intervals. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Talreja, Rishi, Ward Whitt. 2008. Fluid models for overloaded multiclass many-server queueing systems with
ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served routing. Management Science 54(8) 1513–1527.
Tassiulas, Leandros, Anthony Ephremides. 1992. Stability properties of constrained queueing systems and
scheduling policies for maximum throughput in multihop radio networks. IEEE Transactions on Auto-
matic Control 37(12) 1936–1948.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
35
Tsitsiklis, John N., Kuang Xu. 2012. On the power of (even a little) resource pooling. Stochastic Systems
2(1) 1–66.
Tsitsiklis, John N., Kuang Xu. 2015. Flexible queueing architectures. under submission .
Wald, Abraham. 1945. Sequential tests of statistical hypotheses. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 16(2)
117–186.
Ye, Heng-Qing, Jihong Ou, Xue-Ming Yuan. 2005. Stability of data networks: Stationary and bursty models.
Operations Research 53(1) 107–125.
Appendix A:
Proofs
A.1.
Proof of Lemma 5.2
Proof.
Fix i ∈N. Denote by Ni the total number of inspections job i receives before departing
from the system. Let Yi,n be the inspection history of job i up till the nth inspection:
Yi,n = {(Ki,j,Xi,j)}j=1,...,n.
(100)
We will use yn = {(kj,xj)}j=1,...,n to denote a speciﬁc realization of Yi,n. Deﬁne ph(yn) as the likeli-
hood associated with an inspection history, yn = {(kj,xj)}j=1,...,n under label h:
ph(yn) =
n
Y
j=1
p(h,kj,xj).
(101)
Deﬁne qh(yn) as the probability
qh(yn) =P(Ni = n,Yi,n = yn
Hi = h).
(102)
We have that
qh(yn) =P(Ni = n,Yi,n = yn
Hi = h)
=P(Ni = n
Yi,n = yn)
n
Y
j=1
p(h,kj,xj)P(Ki,j = kj,Ni ≥j
Yi,j−1 = yj−1)
=

n
Y
j=1
p(h,kj,xj)

P(Ni = n
Yi,n = yn)
n
Y
j=1
P(Ki,j = kj,Ni ≥j
Yi,j−1 = yj−1)

=ph(yn)v(yn)
(103)
where yj, 1 ≤j ≤n, denotes the ﬁrst j inspections in yn, with y0
△= ∅, and v(yn)
△= P(Ni = n
Yi,n =
yn)Qn
j=1 P(Ki,j = kj,Ni ≥j
Yi,j−1 = yj−1). Importantly, note that for a given policy, v(yn) only
depends on the realization of the history, and not on the choice of h.
We have that
E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi = h,Hi = h

= E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)I( bHi = h)
Hi = h

/P( bHi = h
Hi = h),
(104)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
36
where
E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)I( bHi = h)
Hi = h

(a)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
pl(yn)
ph(yn)P(Ni = n,Yi,n = yn, bHi = h
Hi = h)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
pl(yn)
ph(yn)qh(yn)P( bHi = h
Ni = n,Yi,n = yn,Hi = h)
(b)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
pl(yn)v(yn)P( bHi = h
Ni = n,Yi,n = yn,Hi = h)
(c)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
pl(yn)v(yn)P( bHi = h
Ni = n,Yi,n = yn,Hi = l)
(d)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
ql(yn)P( bHi = h
Ni = n,Yi,n = yn,Hi = l)
=
∞
X
n=1
X
yn
P(Ni = n,Yi,n = yn, bHi = h
Hi = l)
=P( bHi = h
Hi = l).
(105)
The second summation in step (a) is over all possible realizations of Yi,n for which ph(yn) is non-zero.
Steps (b) and (d) follow from Eq. (103). For step (c), we used the fact that conditioning on the event
{Ni = n,Yi,n = yn}, the event { bHi = h} is independent from the true label of job i. Eqs. (104) and
(105) combined yield that
E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi = h,Hi = h

= P( bHi = h
Hi = l)
P( bHi = h
Hi = h)
≤
δ
1 −δ,
(106)
where the last equality follows from the assumption of the policy being δ-accurate.
Deﬁne
δh = P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h).
(107)
Using essentially the same steps of deduction as those leading to Eq. (106), we have that
E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi ̸= h,Hi = h

= P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = l)
P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h)
≤1
δh
(108)
We are now ready to prove the main claim of the lemma. We have that
E
 Si(h,l)
Hi = h

=E
 Ni
X
j=1
ln p(h,Ki,j,Xi,j)
p(l,Ki,j,Xi,j)
Hi = h
!
=E

−ln pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
Hi = h

= −E

ln pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi = h,Hi = h

P( bHi = h
Hi = h)
−E

ln pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi ̸= h,Hi = h

P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
37
(a)
≥−ln

E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi = h,Hi = h

P( bHi = h
Hi = h)
−ln

E
 pl(Yi,Ni)
ph(Yi,Ni)
 bHi ̸= h,Hi = h

P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h)
(b)
≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
+ δh lnδh
(c)
≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1.
(109)
Step (a) is based on the Jensen’s inequality, by noting that that −ln(·) is a convex function. Step
(b) follows from Eqs. (106) and (108), and the policy being δ-accurate. Step (c) is based on the
observation that (xlnx) is monotonically decreasing over x ∈(0,e−1) and monotonically increasing
over (e−1,1). This proves Lemma 5.2.
Q.E.D.
A.2.
Proof of Proposition 7.2
Proof.
Fix a stable inspection policy, ψ. Denote by Ni the total number of inspections received
by job i before a classiﬁcation is produced, and by Si(h,l) the sum of the log-likelihood ratios by
the time when job i departs from the system:
Si(h,l) =
Ni
X
j=1
Zi,j(h,l,Ki,j).
(110)
Deﬁne:
1. In
h, the set of the ﬁrst nπh jobs of true label h to depart from the system;
2. ij
h, the index of the jth job of true label h to depart from the system;
3. T n
h , the ﬁrst time when nπh jobs of true label h have departed form the system;
4. Ni,k, the number of times that job i has been inspected by an expert of type k by the time of
its departure;
5. M t
k, the total number of inspections completed by the type-k experts by time t.
Fix h ∈H. Let T n be the time by which there has been at least πhn departures from every job
label:
T n = max
h∈H T n
h .
(111)
We have that, for all k ∈K,
M T n
k
≥
X
h∈H
X
i∈In
h
Ni,k =
X
h∈H
nπh
X
j=1
Nij
h,k,
(112)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from the deﬁnition of M t
k and T n. Take expectations of both sides
of Eq. (112), and deﬁne the variables
υn
h,k =
1
nπh
nπh
X
j=1
E

Nij
h,k

.
(113)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
38
We have that
E(M T n
k ) ≥
X
h∈H
nπh
X
j=1
E

Nij
h,k

= n
X
h∈H
πhυn
h,k.
(114)
Recall that jobs arrive to the system according to a unit rate Poisson process, and each job has
label h with probability πh. Since we have assumed that the inspection policy is stable, the time
when there are nπh jobs with label h that have departed from the system, T n
h , cannot be much later
than when the (nπh)th job with label h arrived to the system, which, by the strong law of large
numbers applied to a Poisson process, is at most n + o(n) almost surely, as n →∞. Formally, there
exists a function f : R+ →R+, with limx→∞x−1f(x) = 0, such that, almost surely,
limsup
n→∞[T n
h −(n + f(n))] ≤0,
∀h ∈H.
(115)
We thus have that
limsup
n→∞
1
nE(M T n
k )
(a)
≤limsup
n→∞
1
nE(M n+f(n)
k
)
(b)
≤limsup
n→∞mrk(1 + f(n)/n) = mrk,
(116)
Step (a) follows from Eq. (115) and the deﬁnition of T n. Step (b) is based on the fact that the
total number of completed inspections by experts of type k during an interval [0,x] is stochastically
dominated by a Poisson random variable with mean mrkx, which corresponds to the case where all
experts of type k work without any idling during that interval. Deﬁne
nh,k = limsup
n→∞υn
h,k.
(117)
Combining Eqs. (114) and (116), we have that
X
h∈H
πhnh,k =
X
h∈H
πh limsup
n→∞υn
h,k ≤limsup
n→∞
1
nE(M T n
k ) ≤mrk,
∀k ∈K.
(118)
By Lemma 5.2, we have that, for any job i whose true label is h,
X
k∈K
E(Ni,k)D(h,l,k)
(a)
= E
 Ni
X
j=1
Zi,j(h,l,Ki,j)

= E(Si(h,l)) ≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1,
(119)
where step (a) follows from Wald’s identity by noting that Ni,k is a stopping time with respect to
the sequence Zi,1(h,l,Ki,1),Zi,2(h,l,Ki,2),.... Summing both sides of Eq. (119) over the set In
h, we
have that, for all l ̸= h,
X
k∈K
υn
h,kD(h,l,k) =
X
k∈K
 1
nπh
nπh
X
j=1
E
 Nij
h,k

D(h,l,k)
= 1
nπh
nπh
X
j=1
X
k∈K
E
 Nij
h,k

D(h,l,k)

≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1.
(120)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
39
Taking the limits as n →∞on both sides of the above equation, we obtain that
X
k∈K
nh,kD(h,l,k) ≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1.
(121)
Note that the υn
h,k’s are non-negative by deﬁnition (Eq. 113) and hence nh,k ≥0 for all h and
k. From Eqs. (118) and (121), we conclude that the number of experts, m, under any δ-accurate
inspection policy must be no more than the optimal value of the following linear program:
minimize
m
(122)
s.t.
X
k∈K
nh,kD(h,l,k) ≥(1 −δ)ln 1 −δ
δ
−e−1,
∀h,l ∈H,h ̸= l,
(123)
X
h∈H
nh,kπh ≤rkm,
∀k ∈K,
(124)
nh,k ≥0,
∀h ∈H,k ∈K
(125)
where Eqs. (118) and (121) correspond to the constraints in Eqs. (124) and (123), respectively. Note
that the above linear program diﬀers from FLP (Deﬁnition 7.1) only through changing ln(1/δ) to
(1 −δ)ln 1−δ
δ
−e−1 in Eq. (124). Hence, it is not diﬃcult to verify that any value, m, associated
with a feasible solution of FLP must satisfy
m
m(δ,π) ≥(1 −δ)ln 1−δ
δ −e−1
ln(1/δ)
= 1 −δ −
(1 −δ)ln
1
1−δ + e−1
ln(1/δ)
.
(126)
The completes the proof of Proposition 7.2.
Q.E.D.
A.3.
Proof of Lemma 7.3
Proof.
The ﬁrst inequality in Eq. (38) in fact holds for any feasible solution of FLP, and it
follows directly from the constraints in Eq. (35) by noting that D(h,l,k) is always no greater than
d. To show the second inequality in Eq. (38), note that since D(h,l,k) is always no smaller than
d, if we were to have
1
ln(1/δ)
P
k∈K n∗
h,k > d−1, for some h ∈H, then we would be able to decrease
one coordinate of {n∗
h,k}k∈K without violating any constraint, and hence the second inequality in
Eq. (38) must hold for some optimal solution of FLP. Finally, to show Eq. (39), we sum both sides
of the the constraints in Eq. (34) over K, and obtain
m∗
F =
X
k∈K
rkm∗
F
≥
X
k∈K
X
h∈H
n∗
h,kπh
=
X
h∈H
πh
X
k∈K
n∗
h,k
(a)
≥d
−1 ln(1/δ)
X
h∈H
πh
=d
−1 ln(1/δ),
(127)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
40
where step (a) follows from the ﬁrst inequality in Eq. (38), which we have just shown. This proves
Lemma 7.3.
Q.E.D.
A.4.
A Suﬃcient Condition for Accurate Classiﬁcation
Fix i,n ∈N, and denote by Yi,n = {(Xi,j,Ki,j)}j=1,...,n, the inspection history of job i up till
the nth inspection it receives, where the inspections are ranked according to their time of ini-
tiation. Let Si,[n](h,l) be the cumulative log-likelihood from the ﬁrst n inspections: Si,[n](h,l) =
Pn
j=1 Zi,j(h,l,Ki,j), and similarly, let bHi,[n] be the ML estimator of Hi from the ﬁrst n inspections.
Lemma A.1 Fix i ∈N and x > 0. Let N F
i
be the total number of inspections job i receives before
its departure from the system. Let N ∈N, N ≤N F
i , be a stopping time with respect to Yi,NF
i . Denote
by Gx the event:
Gx = {∃l ∈H, s.t. Si,[N](l,h′) ≥x, ∀h′ ∈H,h′ ̸= l}.
(128)
We have that
P( bHi,[N] ̸= h, Gx
Hi = h) ≤cH exp(−x),
∀h ∈H.
(129)
Note that Lemma 5.1 follows from the above lemma by setting N = N F
i .
Proof.
Fix i ∈N. Let yn = {(xj,kj)}j=1,...,n be a particular realization of Yi,n. We will use the
notation of qh(yn), deﬁned in Eq. (102) in Appendix A.1, with a slight modiﬁcation of changing Ni
to N, i.e.,
qh(yn) =P(N = n,Yi,n = yn
Hi = h).
(130)
Using a derivation that is identical to Eq. (103) in Appendix A.1, we have that
qh(yn) = v(yn)
n
Y
j=1
p(h,kj,xj).
(131)
where v(yn)
△= P(N = n
Yi,n = yn)Qn
j=1 P(Ki,j = kj,N ≥j
Yi,j−1 = yj−1), and it does not depend
on h. We thus have that
qh(Yi,n)
ql(Yi,n) =
Qn
j=1 p(h,Ki,j,Xi,j)
Qn
j=1 p(l,Ki,j,Xi,j) = exp(−Si,[n](l,h)).
(132)
Fix h,l ∈H, h ̸= l. Denote by Cl
n the event
Cl
n = {N = n, bHi,[n] = l}.
(133)
In particular,
P( bHi,[N] = l , Gx
Hi = h) =
∞
X
n=0
P(Cl
n , Gx
Hi = h).
(134)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
41
We now employ a change-of-measure argument. Denote by Yn the set of realizations, yn, for which
P(Cl
n,Yi,n = yn
Hi = h) > 0, and
Si,[n](l,h′) ≥x,
∀h′ ∈H,h′ ̸= l.
(135)
We then obtain that
P(Cl
n , Gx
Hi = h) =
X
yn∈Yn
qh(yn)
=
X
yn∈Yn
qh(yn)
ql(yn) ql(yn)
(a)
=
X
yn∈Yn
exp(−Si,[n](l,h))ql(yn)
(b)
≤exp(−x)
X
yn∈Yn
ql(yn)
=exp(−x)P(Cl
n , Gx
Hi = l),
(136)
where step (a) is based on Eq. (132), and step (b) from Eq. (135). Because Eq. (136) holds for any
l ̸= h and n ∈N, using a union bound, we have that
P( bHi ̸= h, Gx
Hi = h) =
X
l∈H,l̸=h
P( bHi = l , Gx
Hi = h)
(a)
=
X
l∈H,l̸=h
 ∞
X
n=0
P(Cl
n , Gx
Hi = h)
!
(b)
≤
X
l∈H,l̸=h
exp(−x)
 ∞
X
n=0
P(Cl
n , Gx
Hi = l)
!
=exp(−x)
X
l∈H,l̸=h
P( bHi,[n] = l
Hi = l)
≤cH exp(−x),
(137)
where step (a) follows from Eq. (134), and step (b) from Eq. (136). This proves our claim.
Q.E.D.
A.5.
Proof of Proposition 8.2
Proof.
Fix h ∈H and i ∈N. Denote by SP
i (h,l) the value of Si,t(h,l) at the time when job i
exits the Preparation stage. Deﬁne the event
B =

SP
i (h,l) ≥lnln(1/δ), ∀l ∈H\{h}
 
.
(138)
The following lemma is the main technical result that we will use. Its proof makes use of the
Azuma-Hoeﬀding ineuqality by noting that Si,t(h,l) is a martingle under proper conditioning.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
42
Lemma A.2 Denote by B the complement of B. For all h ∈H,
P
 B
Hi = h

≤cH ln−1(1/δ).
(139)
Proof.
We will index all inspections received by job i in the Preparation stage in an arbitrary
fashion, and denote by Kj the type of the expert who performed the jth inspection for job i, and
by Zj(·,·,Kj) the corresponding log-likelihood ratio. Deﬁne
M l
n =
n∨nP
X
s=1
Zs(h,l,Ks) −d(h,l),
n ∈N,
(140)
where
d(h,l) =
X
k∈K
D(h,l,k)rk.
(141)
Recall that the experts visit the three stages according to the randomized rule described in Sec-
tion 6.1, and hence the probability of the jth expert to inspect job i being type k is equal to
rk. Conditional on the true label of job i being h, we have that the Zs(h,l,Ks)’s are i.i.d., with
E(Z1(h,l,K1)|Hi = h) = d(h,l). It is hence not diﬃcult to verify that {M l
n
Hi = h}n∈N is a martin-
gale. Recall that da
△= minh,l∈H,h̸=l d(h,l). We have that for any l ∈H\{h},
P(SP
i (h,l)) ≤lnln(1/δ)
Hi = h) =P(SP
i (h,l) −nPd(h,l) ≤lnln(1/δ) −nPd(h,l)
Hi = h)
≤P(SP
i (h,l) −nPd(h,l) ≤lnln(1/δ) −nPda
Hi = h)
=P(SP
i (h,l) −nPd(h,l) ≤−(da −lnln(1/δ)/nP)nP Hi = h)
(a)
≤exp

−(da −lnln(1/δ)/nP)2(nP)2
8z2nP

≤exp

−d2anP −2da lnln(1/δ)
8z2

(b)
= exp(−lnln(1/δ))
=ln−1(1/δ).
(142)
Step (a) follows from the Azuma-Hoeﬀding’s Inequality (Lemma C.1 in Appendix C), and that
|M l
n −M l
n−1| ≤2z for all n ∈N. Step (b) follows from the fact that
nP = ζ0 lnln(1/δ) = 8z2 + 2da
d2a
lnln(1/δ).
(143)
Because Eq. (142) holds for all l, Lemma A.2 follows by applying a union bound over l ∈H.
Q.E.D.
We now return to the proof of Proposition 8.2. Combining Lemmas 5.1 and A.2, we have that
P( bHP
i ̸= h
Hi = h) ≤P(B
Hi = h) + P( bHP
i ̸= h, B
Hi = h)
(a)
≤cH ln−1(1/δ) + P( bHP
i ̸= h, B
Hi = h)
(b)
≤cH ln−1(1/δ) + cH exp(−lnln(1/δ))
=2cH ln−1(1/δ),
(144)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
43
where step (a) follows from Lemma A.2, and (b) from Lemma A.1 by setting x = lnln(1/δ), N = nP,
and noting that B ⊂Gx. Our claim that ϵP ≤2cH ln−1(1/δ) follows by noting that the above equation
holds for all h ∈H. To show Eq. (42), note that, for all h ∈H,
πP
h ≤πh +
X
h′̸=h
πh′P( bHP
1 = h
H1 = h′)
≤πh + ϵP X
h′̸=h
πh′
≤πh + 2cH ln−1(1/δ).
(145)
where the last inequality follows from the upper bound on ϵP, and that P
h′̸=h πh′ ≤1. This completes
the proof of Proposition 8.2.
Q.E.D.
A.6.
Proof of Proposition 8.7
Proof.
We start by looking at the workload process for the Preparation stage, Ws
0(t). For every
a,b > 0, with a > b, s ∈N, and z > 0, applying the triangle inequality to Eq. (53), we have that
|Ws
0(z,a) −Ws
0(z,b)| ≤|As
0(z,a) −As
0(z,b)| + |∆s
0(z,a) −∆s
0(z,b)|
(a)
=nP|Ξ0(z,a) −Ξ0(z,b)| + |∆s
0(z,a) −∆s
0(z,b)|
(b)
≤nP|Ξ0(z,a) −Ξ0(z,b)| +
X
e∈E
|Re,P(z,a) −Re,P(z,b)|.
(146)
where Ξ0(·) and Re,T(·) are deﬁned in Eqs. (50) and (51), respectively. Step (a) follows from the
design of our inspection policy, where each job that arrives to the Preparation stage adds nP new
inspections to W0(t). Step (b) is due to the fact that the number of initiated inspections during an
interval is no greater than the total number of times that an expert visits the Preparation stage
during the same period.
Recall that the average inspection rate, µ, is equal to 1 (Eq. (2)). Because ω ∈C and lims→∞zs =
∞, by Eqs. (50), (51) and (146), we have that there exists a positive sequence {ϵs}s∈N, with ϵs →0
as s →∞, such that for all s ∈N and a,b ∈[0,T],a > b,
|As
0(z,a) −As
0(z,b)| ≤np(a −b) + ϵs,
(147)
|∆s
0(z,a) −∆s
0(z,b)| ≤qPm(a −b) + ϵs,
(148)
|Ws
0(zs,a) −Ws
0(zs,a)| ≤(nP + qPm)(a −b) + ϵs.
(149)
Recall that W0(0) = w(s) in the sth system, and lims→∞zs
−1w(s) = w0. We invoke the following
variation of the Arzelà-Ascoli theorem (Lemma 6.3 of Ye et al. (2005)).
Lemma A.3 Fix T > 0. Let {fs(·)}s∈N a sequence of functions that satisﬁes

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
44
1. sups∈N |fs(0)| < ∞.
2. There exists a positive sequence {ϵs}s∈N with ϵs →0 as s →∞, such that
|fs(a) −fs(b)| ≤c|a −b| + ϵs,
∀a,b ∈[0,T], s ∈N.
(150)
Then, there exists a c-Lipschitz function f ∗(·), and an increasing sequence {sj}j∈N ⊂N, such that
lim
j→∞
fsj(t) −f ∗(t)

T = 0.
(151)
Using Lemma A.3 and Eqs. (147) through (149), we have that there exist (nP + qPm)-Lipschitz
functions, a0(·), d0(·), and w0(·), and an increasing sequence {i0
j}j∈N, such that
lim
j→∞
(W0,A0,∆0)
si0
j (zsi0
j ,t) −(w0,a0,d0)(t)

T
= 0.
(152)
This shows that the sequence {(W0,A0,∆0)si(zsi,·)}i∈N admits Lipschitz-continuous limit points.
We now repeat essentially the same argument for the workload in the Adaptive stage, and use a
diagonal argument to identify a family of nested sub-sequences along which the workload converges
coordinate-wise to a Lipschitz function. Fix k ∈{1,...,K}. We claim that
|As
k(a) −As
k(b)| ≤vδ
 
m +
X
e∈E
|Re,P(a) −Re,P(b)|
!
,
∀a,b ∈[0,T],a > b.
(153)
To justify the above inequality, note that by Eq. (27), each job that arrives to the Adaptive stage
could add at most vδ inspections to the aggregate workload in the Adpative stage. Also, an arrival
to the Adaptive stage corresponds to a departure to the Preparation stage, and the number of
such departures during an interval is at most the number of times an expert visits the Preparation
stage, P
e∈E |Re,P(a) −Re,P(b)|, plus the number of experts who were already inspecting a job in
the Preparation stage prior to time t = a, which is at most m. This yields Eq. (153). Analogous to
Eq. (146), we have that
|Ws
k(z,a) −Ws
0(z,b)| ≤nP|As
k(z,a) −As
k(z,b)| + |∆s
k(z,a) −∆s
k(z,b)|
≤γδ
 
m
z +
X
e∈E
|Re,P(z,a) −Re,P(z,b)|
!
+
X
e∈E
|Re,A(z,a) −Re,A(z,b)|. (154)
Using the fact that ω ∈C, lims→∞zs = ∞, and Eqs. (51) and (154), we have that there exists a
positive sequence {ϵs}s∈N, with lims→∞ϵs = 0, such that, for all s ∈N and a,b ∈[0,T],a > b,
|As
k(z,a) −As
k(z,b)| ≤vδqPm(a −b) + ϵs,
(155)
|∆s
k(z,a) −∆s
k(z,b)| ≤qAm(a −b) + ϵs,
(156)
|Ws
k(zs,a) −Ws
k(zs,b)| ≤(vδqP + qA)m(a −b) + ϵs.
(157)
Using Eq. (157) and the same argument involving Lemma A.3 as before, we have that there exist

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
45
1. a collection of coordinate-wise (vδqP + qA)m-Lipschitz functions, {(wk,ak,dk)}k∈K, and
2. a family of sequences, {{ik
j}j∈N}k∈K, where {ik
j} is a sub-sequence of {ik−1
j
} for all k ∈K, and
{i0
j} was deﬁned in Eq. (152),
such that
lim
j→∞
(Wk,Ak,∆k)
sik
j (zsik
j ,t) −(wk,ak,dk)(t)

T
= 0,
∀k ∈{1,...,cK}.
(158)
Because the sequences, {ik
j}k∈K, are nested, by setting k = cK, the above equation further implies
that
lim
j→∞
(W,A,∆)
sicK
j (zsik
j ,t) −(w,a,d)(t)

T
= 0,
(159)
Note that, by construction, all coordinates of (w,a,d) are Lipschitz-continuous, with a Lipschitz
constant of c = [qA + (vδ + 1)qP]m + nP. We complete the proof of Proposition 8.7 by setting
{ij}j∈N = {icK
j }j∈N.
Q.E.D.
A.7.
Proof of Lemma 8.9
Proof.
The general strategy of our proof is to relate the behavior of Bs
h(·) to the number of
initiated inspections in the Preparation stage, ∆s
0(·), while being cautious of the fact that the lengths
of inspections are random and can cause the order of job departures from the Preparation stage to
be diﬀerent from that of the arrivals. Let Bs(t) = |Bs(t)|. Fix t ∈(0,T) and t′ ∈(t,T). We ﬁrst show
that the following property holds:
(Bs(t′) −Bs(t)) −(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP ≤2m.
(160)
In words, this means that the number of jobs that enter the Adaptive stage during the interval (t,t′]
multiplied by nP deviates from the number of initiated inspections during the same period by at
most 2mnP.
To prove Eq. (160), recall that each job must receive nP inspections in the Preparation stage
before it moves to the Adaptive stage, and hence having (∆s
0(t′)−∆s
0(t)) initiated inspections means
that there could be at most ⌈(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP⌉+ m jobs arriving at the Adaptive stage during
(t,t′], where the addition of m captures the possibility that all m servers were processing a job from
the Preparation stage at the start of the interval, t. This shows that
(Bs(t′) −Bs(t)) −(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP ≤m + 1 ≤2m.
(161)
We next invoke the following fact:
Lemma A.4 Fix x ∈N and an interval J ⊂R+. If there are x inspections initiated in the Prepa-
ration stage during J, then there are at least (x/nP −m) jobs departing from the Preparation stage
during J.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
46
Proof.
Denote by I′ the set of jobs who have had any inspection initiated during the interval
J. We partition I′ into I′
0 ∪I′
1, where I′
0 corresponds to those jobs who have departed from the
Preparation stage by the end of J, and I′
1 to those who have not. Because the experts perform
inspections in a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-server manner, a job cannot start receiving inspections until all nP
inspections for the previous job have been initiated. Since there are m experts, this implies that at
any point in time, there can be at most m jobs in the Preparation stage who have initiated any
inspection, and therefore
|I′
1| ≤m.
(162)
Recall that x is the total number of initiated inspections in the Preparation stage during J. We
have that
x
(a)
≤nP|I′| = nP(|I′
0| + |I′
1|)
(b)
≤nP(|I′
0| + m),
(163)
where step (a) follows from the fact that each job can lead to at most nP inspections, and step (b)
from Eq. (162). This yields
|I′
0| ≥x/nP −m.
(164)
That is, there are at least (x/nP −m) jobs departing from the Preparation stage during J.
Q.E.D.
We now apply Lemma A.4 with x = (∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t)), and obtain
Bs(t′) −Bs(t) ≥(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP −m,
(165)
or
(Bs(t′) −Bs(t)) −(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP ≥−m,
(166)
which, combined with Eq. (161) leads to Eq. (160).
To prove the main claim of Lemma 8.9, we will invoke the functional law of large number on
the sequence of ML estimators, { bHP
i }i∈N, as expressed in Eq. (52). However, we have to be careful
in doing so: the jobs that depart from the Preparation stage do not necessarily preserve the order
in which they arrived to the system, since the lengths of inspections in the Preparation stage are
random and can potentially cause a job to depart earlier than another with a smaller index. Thus,
we begin by showing that such “shuﬄing” is relatively minor and can essentially be ignored when
studying the local behavior of Bs
h(·). This is formalized in the next lemma, which states that the
set Bs(t′)\Bs(t) can be “sandwiched” by two intervals of consecutive integers that diﬀer by no more
than 2m elements from one another. The use of consecutive integers will allow us to invoke the law
of large numbers with greater ease.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
47
We will adopt the following short-hand notation. For a set-valued process {S(t)}t∈R+, and t,t′ ∈
R+, we will denote by S(t′\t) the diﬀerence between S(t′) and S(t):
S(t′\t)
△= S(t′)\S(t).
(167)
For a,b ∈N, we will use {a →b} to denote the set of consecutive integers {a,a + 1,...,b}, if a ≤b,
and ∅, otherwise. We have the following lemma.
Lemma A.5 Fix t,t′ ∈R+, t′ > t. There exist a,a′,b and b′ ∈N, with max{|a −a′|,|b −b′|} ≤m,
such that
{a →b} ⊂Bs(t′\t) ⊂{a′ →b′}.
(168)
It follows that
(b −a) −|Bs(t′\t)|
 ≤2m, and
(b′ −a′) −|Bs(t′\t)|
 ≤2m.
(169)
Proof.
Denote by Ds(t) the set of jobs in the Preparation stage for whom at least one inspection
has been initiated by time t. Because a job can depart from the Preparation stage only after
completing nP inspections, we have
Bs(t) ⊂Ds(t),
∀t ∈R+.
(170)
On the other hand, the initiations of inspections in the Preparation stage are performed in a ﬁrst-
come-ﬁrst-serve (FCFS) manner. Recall also that at any given point in time there can be at most
m experts performing inspections. Combining the above two facts, we know that an inspection for
job i + m can be initiated only after all jobs prior to, and including, job i have departed from the
Preparation stage. We thus have that
{1 →maxDs(t) −m} ⊂Bs(t),
∀t ∈R+.
(171)
where maxDs(t) is the index of the last job in Ds(t). Combining Eqs. (170) and (171), we have
Bs(t′\t) ⊃{1 →maxDs(t′) −m}\Ds(t),
(172)
Bs(t′\t) ⊂Ds(t′)\{1 →maxDs(t) −m}
(173)
Finally, the above-mentioned FCFS property of the inspection initiation rule further implies that
Ds(t) is a set of consecutive positive integers. Therefore, it follows that the right-hand sides of
Eqs. (172) and (173) are both intervals of consecutive integers. We can prove Eq. (168) by setting
{a →b} ={1 →maxDs(t′) −m}\Ds(t),
(174)
{a′ →b′} =Ds(t′)\{1 →maxDs(t) −m},
(175)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
48
or, equivalently, that
a =maxDs(t) + 1,
a′ = maxDs(t) + 1 −m
b =maxDs(t′) −m + 1,
b′ = maxDs(t′) + 1
(176)
and it is clear from the above equations that max{|a−a′|,|b−b′|} ≤m. For Eq. (169), note that by
the ordering in Eq. (168) and the triangle inequality, we have
(b −a) −|Bs(t′\t)|| ≤
(b′ −a′) −(b −a)| ≤2max{|a −a′|,|b −b′|} ≤2m,
(177)
and a similar argument shows
(b′ −a′) −|Bs(t′\t)|| ≤2m. This proves Lemma A.5.
Q.E.D.
We are now ready to prove the main claim of Lemma 8.9. Fix t ∈(0,T) and ϵ > 0. Let a,a′,b and
b′ be deﬁned as in Lemma A.5, corresponding to the set Bsj(zj(t + ϵ)\zjt), all of which depend on
j and ϵ, though we will suppress the dependencies in our notation for simplicity. We have that, for
every suﬃciently small δ′ > 0, there exists j∗> 0, such that for all j > j∗,
B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t + ϵ) −B
¯sj
h (z¯sj,t)
ϵ
=B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)) −B
¯sj
h (z¯sjt)
ϵzj
= 1
ϵzj
X
i∈Bsj (zj(t+ϵ)\zjt)
I( bHP
i = h)
(a)
≥1
ϵzj
b
X
i=a
I( bHP
i = h)
(b)
≥1
ϵzj
a+(Bsj (zj(t+ϵ)−Bsj (zjt))−2m
X
i=a
I( bHP
i = h)
(c)
≥1
ϵzj
a+(∆
sj
0 (zj(t+ϵ)−∆
sj
0 (zjt))/nP −4m
X
i=a
I( bHP
i = h)
(d)
≥1
ϵzj
a+(d0(t+ϵ)−d0(t)−δ)zj/nP −4m
X
i=a
I( bHP
i = h)
(e)
≥πP
h
ϵnP (d0(t + ϵ) −d0(t) −2δ′)
=πP
h
nP · d0(t + ϵ) −d0(t) −2δ′
ϵ
.
(178)
Step (a) follows from Eq. (168) of Lemma A.5, and step (b) from the ﬁrst inequality in Eq. (169)
in the same lemma. Step (c) is a consequence of |(Bs(t′) −Bs(t)) −(∆s
0(t′) −∆s
0(t))/nP| ≤2m
(Eq. (160)). Step (d) follows from the uniform convergence of ∆
sj
0 (·) to d0(·) over [0,T]. Finally,
step (e) is based on the functional law of large number for the sequence { bHP
i }i∈N (Eq. (52)).
Since Eq. (178) holds for all suﬃciently small δ′ > 0, we have that
lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞
B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t + ϵ) −B
¯sj
h (z¯sj,t)
ϵ
≥lim
ϵ↓0 lim
j→∞lim
δ′↓0
πP
h
nP · d0(t + ϵ) −d0(t) −2δ′
ϵ

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
49
=πP
h
nP ˙d0(t)
=



mqP
nP πP
h ,
if w0(t) > 0,
πP
h ,
if w0(t) = 0,
(179)
A line of argument identical to Eqs. (178) through (179) shows the other direction of the inequality,
namely, that limϵ↓0 limj→∞
B
¯sj
h (¯zj,t+ϵ)−B
¯sj
h (z¯sj ,t)
ϵ
≤
πP
h
nP ˙d0(t). This completes the proof of Lemma 8.9.
Q.E.D.
A.8.
Proof of Lemma 8.10
Proof.
We ﬁrst state a useful technical lemma. The proof makes use of Berge’s maximum theorem
concerning the continuity of optimal solutions to a convex optimization problem.
Lemma A.6 Fix h ∈H and w ∈RcK+1
+
. The set-valued function, N ∗
h(·), satisﬁes the following semi-
continuity property. For every δ > 0, there exists ϵ > 0 such that, for all w′ ∈RcK+1
+
, ∥w′ −w∥2 ≤ϵ,
sup
x∈N ∗
h(w′)
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w)∥x −y∥2 ≤δ.
(180)
Proof.
The set Nh(·) represents the set of feasible solutions of the linear optimization problem
deﬁned in Eq. (24). We ﬁrst invoke Berge’s maximum theorem (pp. 116 of Berge (1963)), which
roughly states that Nh(·) depends semi-continuously in its argument. More speciﬁcally, it is easy
to verify that the set, Nh, is compact (Eq. (25) to (27)), and the objective function is continuous.
Berge’s maximum theorem thus implies that N ∗
h(·) is upper-hemicontinuous at w, in the following
sense: let {wn}n∈N be a sequence, where wn →w as n →∞, and {λn}n∈N be a sequence where
λn ∈N ∗
h(wn) for all n ∈N. Then, if λn →λ as n →∞, we have that λ ∈N ∗
h(w).
We now use the above upper hemicontinuity property, along with the boundedness of the con-
straint set, Nh, to prove our claim. Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that there exists a sequence
{wn}n∈N with limn→∞wn = w, such that
liminf
n→∞
sup
x∈N ∗
h(wn)
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w)∥x −y∥2 > 0.
(181)
This implies the existence of a sequence {λn}n∈N, with λn ∈N ∗
h(wn) for all n ∈N, such that
liminf
n→∞
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w)∥λn −y∥2 > 0.
(182)
By deﬁnition, for every w, the coordinates of the elements of N ∗
h(w) are non-negative and bounded
from above by vδ. Therefore, by sequential compactness, there exist λ ∈RcK+1
+
and a sub-sequence
of {λn}, {λnk}k∈N, such that limk→∞λnk = λ. By Eq. (182), we have that
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w)∥λ −y∥2 > 0.
(183)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
50
This contradicts with the hemicontinuity of N ∗
h(·), which would imply that λ ∈N ∗
h(w), and thus
proves Lemma A.6.
Q.E.D.
We now return to the proof of Lemma 8.10. Fix ϵ ∈(0,T −t). We ﬁrst observe that the set N ∗
h(·)
is scale-invariant, in the sense that for every w ∈RcK+1
+
N ∗
h(aw) = N ∗
h(w),
a > 0.
(184)
Therefore,
N ∗
h(Ws(zt)) = N ∗
h(z−1Ws(zt)) = N ∗
h(Ws(z,t)),
(185)
Recall that Wsj(¯zj,·) converges uniformly over [0,T] to w(·) as j →∞, and that w(·) is a
continuous function. These two facts, along with the semi-continuity property of Lemma A.6, imply
that for every δ > 0, there exist ϵ,j∗> 0, such that for all j ≥j∗
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w(t))∥λ −y∥2 ≤δ,
∀t′ ∈(t,t + ϵ], λ ∈N ∗
h(W¯sj(¯zj,t′)).
(186)
Note that all jobs in the set B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)\¯zjt) arrived during the interval (¯zjt, ¯zj(t + ϵ)]. Therefore,
for all i ∈B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)\¯zjt), there exists t′ ∈(t,t + ϵ], such that
Λi ≤N ∗
h(W¯sj(¯zj,t′)),
(187)
where the inequality follows from round-down procedure in Eq. (30).
Combining Eqs. (186) and (187), we conclude that for every δ > 0, there exist ϵ∗,j∗> 0, such that
for all j ≥j∗,ϵ < ϵ∗,
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w(t))max
k∈K (Λi,k −yk) ≤δ,
∀i ∈B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)\¯zjt).
(188)
Since the above inequality holds for all jobs in B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t+ϵ)\¯zjt), it further implies that the average
workload among the jobs in B
¯sj
h (¯zj(t + ϵ)\¯zjt) satisﬁes:
inf
y∈N ∗
h(w(t)) max
k∈K
 Λh,k(t,ϵ,j) −yk

≤δ.
(189)
Because the above inequalities hold for all δ > 0, we conclude that
limsup
ϵ↓0
limsup
j→∞
inf
y≤N ∗
h(w(t))∥Λh(t,ϵ,j) −y∥2 = 0.
(190)
This completes the proof of Lemma 8.10.
Q.E.D.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
51
A.9.
Proof of Proposition 8.11
Proof.
Fix w0 ∈RcK+1
+
such that L(w0) = 1, and a ﬂuid solution w ∈W(w0). Fix t ∈(0,T) to
be a point where all coordinates of w(·), a(·), and d(·) are diﬀerentiable. We have, by the chain rule
of diﬀerentiation,
d
dtL(w(t)) = d
dt
v
u
u
t
cK
X
k=0
wk(t)2
=∥w(t)∥−1/2
2
 cK
X
k=0
wk(t) ˙wk(t)
!
=∥w(t)∥−1/2
2
 
w0(t) ˙w0(t) +
X
k∈K
wk(t) ˙wk(t)
!
.
(191)
We next inspect separately at the two terms in the parentheses in Eq. (191). For the ﬁrst term,
corresponding to the workload in the Preparation stage, we have
w0(t) ˙w0(t) = w0(t)(˙a0(t) −˙d0(t))
(a)
= w0(t)(nP −mqP) = −w0(t)˜c,
(192)
where we deﬁne ˜c
△= mqP −nP > 0, and step (a) follows from the deﬁnition of a ﬂuid solution.
We now analyze the second term, which corresponds to the workloads in the Adaptive stage.
Recall that Nh is the set of vector satisfying Eqs. (25) through (27). Fix c2 > 0. We will deﬁne the
following linear program, which we refer to as LP2:
minimize
m
(193)
s.t.
(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
nh,kπP
h ≤rkm −c2,
∀k ∈K,
(194)
{nh,k}k∈K ∈Nh,
∀h ∈H,
(195)
We will denote by m∗
2 the optimal value of LP2. For the remainder of the proof, we will assume
that
mqA > m∗
2,
(196)
and demonstrate that (1) Eq. (70) holds whenever the above inequality is true, and (2) the value
of m∗
2 is not far from the optimal solution to FLP.
From the deﬁnition of a ﬂuid solution, we know that
˙dk(t) = rkmqA,
if wk(t) > 0,
(197)
and
{˙ak(t)}k∈K ≤(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h N ∗
h(w(t)).
(198)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
52
For concreteness, we can write
{˙ak(t)}k∈K = (1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
n n∗
h,k,
(199)
for some {n∗
h,k}h∈H,k∈K, where {n∗
h,k}k∈K ≤N ∗
h(w(t)) for all h ∈H. We have that
X
k∈K
wk(t) ˙wk(t) =
X
k∈K
wk(t)(˙ak(t) −˙dk(t))
=
X
k∈K
wk(t)
"
(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h n∗
h,k −rkmqA
#
=
X
h∈H
πP
h
"
(1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
k∈K
wk(t)n∗
h,k −
X
k∈K
wk(t)rkmqA
#
,
(200)
where the last step follows from the fact that P
h πP
h = 1. Because mqA > m∗
2, the value mqA must
belong to some feasible solution of LP2. By the ﬁrst constraint of LP2 in Eq. (194), this implies
that there exists {nh,k}h∈H,k∈K, where {nh,k}k∈K ∈Nh for all h ∈H, such that
rkmqA ≥c2 + (1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h nh,k,
∀k ∈K.
(201)
We thus have that
X
k∈K
wk(t)rkmqA ≥
X
k∈K
wk(t)
 c2 + (1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h nh,k

=c2
X
k∈K
wk(t) + (1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h
 X
k∈K
wk(t)nh,k
!
.
(202)
Substituting the above inequality into Eq. (200), we have that
X
k∈K
wk(t) ˙wk(t) ≤−c2
X
k∈K
wk(t) + (1 + ln−1(1/δ))
X
h∈H
πP
h
 X
k∈K
wk(t)n∗
h,k −
X
k∈K
wk(t)nh,k
!
≤−c2
X
k∈K
wk(t),
(203)
where the last inequality follows from the fact that {n∗
h,k}k∈K ≤N ∗
h(w(t)), and hence
X
k∈K
wk(t)n∗
h,k ≤
min
{nk}k∈K
X
k∈K
wk(t)nk.
(204)
Substituting Eqs. (192) and (203) into Eq. (191), we have that
d
dtL(w(t))=∥w(t)∥−1/2
2
 
w0(t) ˙w0(t) +
X
k∈K
wk(t) ˙wk(t)
!
≤−min{˜c,c2}∥w(t)∥−1/2
2
 cK+1
X
k=0
wk(t)
!
(a)
≤−min{˜c,c2}∥w(t)∥−1/2
2
∥w(t)∥2
= −min{˜c,c2}
p
L(w(t))
(205)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
53
where in step (a) we used the elementary inequality: Pn
i=1 xi ≥
pPn
i=1 x2
i , ∀(x1,...,xn) ∈Rn
+.
Recall that all coordinates of w(·),a(·) and d(·) are diﬀerentiable for almost all t ∈(0,T). Eq. (205)
thus implies that L(w(t)) is strictly decreasing whenever w(t) ̸= 0. It follows that if L(w(0)) = 1,
then, for every t ∈(0,T), either L(w(t)) ≤1/4, or L(w(s)) > 1/4 for all s ∈[0,t]. In the latter case,
we have
L(w(t)) ≤1 −min{˜c,c2}
Z t
1
p
L(w(s))ds ≤1 −min{˜c,c2}
2
t.
(206)
Setting the right-hand side of the above equation to 1/4, we conclude that if
ϵ′ = 3
4
and
τ =
3
2min{˜c,c2},
(207)
then
L(w(τ)) ≤1 −ϵ′,
whenever
L(w(0)) = 1.
(208)
Therefore, we have shown that the contraction property of Eq. (70) holds, whenever
mqP > nP, and mqA > m∗
2.
(209)
To complete the proof, it remains to relate the optimal value of LP2, m∗
2, to that of the the optimal
value of FLP. This is accomplished in the following lemma, whose proof is given in Appendix A.12.
Lemma A.7 Let m∗
F and m∗
2 be the optimal values of FLP and LP2, respectively, and c2 be deﬁned
as in LP2. For every ϵ > 0, there exist c′ > 0, such that if c2 < c′, then
m∗
2 ≤

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 + ϵP cHd
dr

(1 + ln−1(1/δ))m∗
F + ϵ.
(210)
The proof of Proposition 8.11 is completed by recalling from Proposition 8.2 that
ϵP ≤2cH/ln(1/δ),
(211)
and by choosing a suﬃciently small ϵ in Lemma A.7.
Q.E.D.
A.10.
Proof of Proposition 9.1
Proof.
We ﬁrst look at the macro-level arrival primitive associated with the Residual stage.
The arrivals to the Residual stage are jobs leaving the Adaptive stage who have failed to meet the
criterion for exiting the system in Eq. (31). If the Preparation and Adaptive stages are stable, the
job arrival process to the Residual stage is generated according to a Markov modulated Poisson
process (MMPP), modulated by a stable countable-state Markov process that corresponds to the
dynamics of Preparation and Adaptive stages, {I(t),{Yi(t)}i∈I(t)}t∈R+, deﬁned in Section 8.2. Using
an elementary application of the Foster-Lyapunov criteria, it is thus not diﬃcult to show that the
Residual stage is stable whenever the following rate condition holds: the average rate of inspections

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
54
from the MMPP should be less than the service rate of the Residual stage. In the remainder of the
proof, we verify that this is indeed the case.
Recall that bHP
i is the ML estimator job i obtains from the inspections in the Preparation stage.
We say that job i is “good”, if bHP
i happens to be equal to the true label, Hi, and “bad”, otherwise.
The next result states that most of the good jobs will be able to depart from the system after being
processed in the Adaptive stage, and hence not enter the Residual stage. Denote by SA
i (h,l) the
value of Si,t(h,l) when job i exits the Adaptive stage, and deﬁne the event
BA = {∃h′ ∈H, s.t. SA
i (h′,l) ≥ln(2cH/δ), ∀l ∈H,l ̸= h′}.
(212)
We have the following lemma, whose proof is given in Appendix A.13.
Lemma A.8 Fix i ∈N. There exists δ0 > 0, independent of π, such that
P

BA  bHP
i = Hi = h

≥1 −cH ln−1(1/δ),
∀h ∈H,
(213)
for all δ ∈(0,δ0).
By Proposition 8.2, we have that at least a (1 −2cH ln−1(1/δ)) fraction of all jobs are good when
exiting the Preparation stage. By Lemma A.8, each one of these good jobs has a probability of at
most cH ln−1(1/δ) for entering the Residual stage. By assuming that all bad jobs eventually enter
the Residual stage, the above reasoning shows that the arrival rate of jobs to the Residual stage,
λR, satisﬁes
λR ≤2cH ln−1(1/δ) + cH ln−1(1/δ) = 3cH ln−1(1/δ).
(214)
In terms of service speed, recall that each job requires nR inspections in the Residual stage, and the
experts visit the Residual stage at the rate of mqR. Hence, by Eq. (214), it suﬃces to have
mqR >3cH ln−1(1/δ)nR
=3cH ln−1(1/δ)ζ0 ln(4cH/δ)
=3cHζ0(1 + ln(4cH)ln−1(1/δ)).
(215)
This proves Proposition 9.1.
Q.E.D.
A.11.
Proof of Proposition 10.1
Proof.
Recall that there are only two ways through which a job could depart from the system:
either from the Adaptive stage, or the Residual stage. Fix i ∈N and h ∈H. Denote by SA
i (h,l) the
value of Si,t(h,l) at the time job i completes all inspections in the Adaptive stage, and by bHR
i the
maximum likelihood estimator of Hi using only the inspections in the Residual stage.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
55
Recall the event BA deﬁned in Eq. (212) in Appendix A.10, i.e., whether job i will go through the
Residual stage, and denote by BA its compliment. We have that:
P( bHi ̸= h
Hi = h) =P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h) + P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h)
=P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h) + P( bHi ̸= h
BA,Hi = h)P(BA Hi = h)
(a)
=P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h) + P( bHR
i ̸= h
BA,Hi = h)P(BA Hi = h)
≤P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h) + P( bHR
i ̸= h
BA,Hi = h),
(216)
where step (a) follows from the deﬁnition of the inspection policy, where a job will be sent to the
Residual stage if and only if the event BA does not occur. The two terms on the right-hand-side of
Eq. (216) correspond to the classiﬁcations made by the Adaptive and Residual stages, respectively.
By noting that the total number of inspections by job i by the time it exits the Adaptive stage is
a stopping time with respect to the past inspections, applying Lemma A.1, with x = ln(2cH/δ), we
have that
P( bHi ̸= h,BA Hi = h) ≤δ/2.
(217)
Now suppose that job i exits the system after having gone through the Residual stage. Recall
that by construction, the Residual stage employs an inspection procedure that is the same as the
Preparation stage, except for having a larger number of inspections per job. Therefore, using an
essentially identical line of arguments to that of Proposition 8.2, and, in particular, to the portion
of the proof leading to Eq. (144), by replacing the quantity lnln(1/δ) with ln(2cH/δ), we can show
that
P( bHR
i ̸= h
BA,Hi = h) ≤δ/2.
(218)
Substituting Eqs. (217) and (218) into Eq. (216) completes the proof of Proposition 10.1.
Q.E.D.
A.12.
Proof of Lemma A.7
Proof.
Let (m∗
F,{n∗
h,k}) be an optimal solution to FLP that satisﬁes the conditions stated in
Lemma 7.3. Deﬁne
φδ = 1 + (ln(2cH) + gδ)ln−1(1/δ),
(219)
and let
˜nh,k = n∗
h,kφδ.
(220)
Recall from the deﬁnition in Eq. (29) that
vδ = 2d−1 ln(1/δ)[1 + (ln(2cH) + gδ)ln−1(1/δ)] = 2d−1 ln(1/δ)φδ,
(221)

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
56
which implies, by Eq. (38) of Lemma 7.3, that P
k∈K ˜nh,k ≤vδ for all h ∈H. We thus conclude that
the variables {˜nh,k} satisfy the second set of constraints of LP2, i.e.,
{˜nh,k} ∈Nh,
∀h ∈H.
(222)
We now derive a suﬃcient condition on ˜m so that ( ˜m,{˜nh,k}) is a feasible solution to LP2. Fixing
k ∈K, we have that
X
h∈H
˜nh,kπP
h =φδ
X
h∈H
n∗
h,kπP
h
(a)
≤φδ
 X
h∈H
n∗
h,kπh + ϵP X
h∈H
n∗
h,k
!
(b)
≤φδ
 X
h∈H
n∗
h,kπh + ϵPcHd−1 ln(1/δ)
!
(c)
≤φδ
 X
h∈H
n∗
h,kπh + ϵPcHd−1dm∗
F
!
(d)
≤φδ
 m∗
Frk + ϵPcHd−1dm∗
F

.
(223)
Step (a) follows from Proposition 8.2, (b) and (c) from Lemma 7.3, and (d) from the constraint
of FLP in Eq. (34). To satisfy the ﬁrst constraint of LP2, it suﬃces to let the right-hand side of
Eq. (223) satisfy
φδ
 m∗
Frk + ϵPcHd−1dm∗
F

≤rkqA ˜m −c2
1 + ln−1(1/δ).
(224)
That is, if
˜mqA ≥m∗
Fφδ

1 + ϵP cHd
dr

(1 + ln−1(1/δ)) + c2
r ,
(225)
then
X
h∈H
˜nh,kπP
h ≤rkqA ˜m −c2,
∀k ∈K,
(226)
which, in light of the fact that {˜nh,k}k∈K ∈Nh for all h ∈H, further implies that ( ˜m,{˜nh,k}) is a
feasible solution of LP2. Therefore, we conclude that, for all c2 > 0,
m∗
2 ≤m∗
Fφδ

1 + ϵP cHd
dr

(1 + ln−1(1/δ)) + c2
r
=m∗
F

1 + ln(2cH) + gδ
ln(1/δ)

1 + ϵP cHd
dr

(1 + ln−1(1/δ)) + c2
r ,
(227)
We complete the proof of Lemma A.7 by letting c′ = ϵr.
Q.E.D.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
57
A.13.
Proof of Lemma A.8
Proof.
The proof follows similar steps as those in the proof of Lemma A.2. Fix h ∈H and
{λi,k}k∈K ∈ZcK
+ . Denote by B the event
B = { bHP
i = Hi = h, {Λi,k}k∈K = {λi,k}k∈K}
(228)
For the remainder of the proof, we will assume that h ∈H and {λi,k}k∈K are such that P(B) > 0.
We will index all inspections received by job i in the Adaptive stage in an arbitrary fashion, and
denote by Kn the type of the expert who performed the nth inspection for job i, and by Zn(·,·,Kn)
the corresponding log-likelihood ratio. Deﬁne Λi = P
k∈K Λi,k. For all l ∈H,l ̸= h, let
M l
n =
n∨Λi
X
s=1
Zs(h,l,Ks) −D(h,l,Ks),
n ∈N,
(229)
and M l
0 = 0. It is not diﬃcult to see that, conditional on the true label of job i being h, the
summands in the above equation have zero mean and are independent. Therefore, one can verify
that {M l
n
B}n∈Z+ is a martingale.
Deﬁne
φδ = 1 + (ln(2cH) + gδ)ln−1(1/δ),
(230)
By the construction of {Λi,k}k∈K (Eq. (30)), we know that
Λi ≤
X
k∈K
nk ≤vδ = 2φδd−1 ln(1/δ).
(231)
By Eq. (25), we know that if
M l
Λi −M l
0 > −gδ + cKd,
(232)
then
SA
i (h,l) > ln(2cH/δ),
(233)
where the term cKd captures the potential discrepency induced by the rounding in Eq. (30). We
have that
P
 SA
i (h,l) ≤ln(2cH/δ)
B

=P
 M l
Λi −M l
0 ≤−(gA
δ −cKd)
B

(a)
≤exp

−(gδ −cKd)2
4z2Λi

(b)
≤exp

−(gδ)2 −2gδcKd
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ)

.
(234)
Step (a) follows from the Azuma-Hoeﬀding’s Inequality (Lemma C.1 in Appendix C), and noting
that |M l
n −M l
n−1| ≤2z for all n ∈N. Step (b) follows from Eq. (231).

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
58
Recall that gδ = 3zd−1/2p
ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ). The exponent in Eq. (234) can be further expanded
as:
−(gδ)2 −2gδcKd
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ)= −9z2d−1 ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ)
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ)
+ 6zd−1/2cKd
p
ln(1/δ)lnln(1/δ)
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ)
= −9lnln(1/δ)
8φδ
+ 3d−3/2cKd
4z
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) .
(235)
As δ ↓0, we have that φδ = 1 + (ln(2cH) + gδ)ln−1(1/δ) →1, and
q
ln ln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ) →0. Therefore, the
above expression yields5
−(gδ)2 −2gδcKd
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ) ∼−9lnln(1/δ)
8
,
as δ →0.
(236)
Substituting Eq. (236) into Eq. (234), we know that there exists δ0 > 0, independent of the prior
distribution, π, and the choice of l and h, such that for all δ ∈(0,δ0),
P
 SA
i (h,l) ≤ln(2cH/δ)
B

≤exp

−(gδ)2 −2gδcKd
8z2d−1φδ ln(1/δ)

=exp
 
−9lnln(1/δ)
8φδ
+ 3d−3/2cKd
4z
s
lnln(1/δ)
ln(1/δ)
!
≤exp(−lnln(1/δ))
=ln−1(1/δ).
(237)
Since the above inequalities hold for all h,l ∈H, l ̸= h, and {λi,k}k∈K, we can apply a union bound
over l and conclude that, for all h ∈H,
P(BA  bHP
i = Hi = h) ≥P

SA
i (h,l) ≥ln(2cH/δ), ∀l ̸= h
 bHP
i = Hi = h

≥1 −cH ln−1(1/δ).
(238)
This completes the proof of Lemma A.8.
Q.E.D.
Appendix B:
Some Properties of L(·)
The following lemma states some basic properties of the Lyapunov function, L(·).
Lemma B.1 The function L(w) = ∥w∥2 admits the following properties: (1) L is continuous on
RcK+1
+
; (2) For all c ∈R+ and w ∈RcK+1
+
, we have L(cw) = cL(w); (3) There exists positive con-
stants, α1,α2 > 0, such that for all w ∈RcK+1
+
,
α1∥w∥∞≤L(w) ≤α2∥w∥∞,
(239)
where ∥· ∥∞is the l∞norm, ∥w∥∞= maxk=0,...,cK+1 |wk|.
5 The notation f(x) ∼g(x) means that limx→0
f(x)
g(x) = 1.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
59
Proof.
The ﬁrst two properties follow directly from the deﬁnition of L(·). For Eq. (239), we note
that for all w ∈RcK+1
+
,
L(w) ≥
p
∥w∥2
∞= ∥w∥∞,
L(w) ≤
p
(cK + 1)∥w∥2
∞=
√cK + 1∥w∥∞.
Hence, Eq. (239) holds for α1 = 1 and α2 = √cK + 1.
Q.E.D.
Appendix C:
The Azuma-Hoeﬀding Inequality
We will make use of the standard Azuma-Hoeﬀding inequality (Section 12.2 of Grimmett and
Stirzaker (2001)), which we state below for completeness.
Lemma C.1 (Azuma-Hoeﬀding Inequality) Let {Mn}n∈Z+ be a martingale, and suppose that
there exists a > 0, such that |Mn −Mn−1| ≤a for all n ∈Z+. Then
P(Mn −M0 ≤−x) ≤exp

−x2
2na2

,
∀x ∈R+.
(240)
Appendix D:
A Heuristic Policy
We discuss in this section a simple heuristic inspection policy, which essentially condenses the three-
stage architecture of Figure 1 into only one that resembles the Adaptive stage. We expect the policy
to be substantially easier to implement than the one presented in Section 6. Nevertheless, we have
not been able to establish its resource eﬃciency rigorously, though we discuss some indication that
it may be resource eﬃcient as well.
For simplicity, we assume that D(h,l,k) > 0 for all k ∈K,h ̸= l, i.e., every expert is able to
distinguish any two job labels to some degree. Denote by bHi,t the ML estimator of job i’s type at
time t, and we assume that the value of bHi,t at the time when job i has just arrived to the system
is set to a value drawn uniformly at random from H. Denote by It the indices of all jobs that are
currently in the system at time t, and denote by Ih,t the subset containing those jobs whose ML
estimator is equal to h:
Ih,t = {i ∈It : bHi,t = h}.
(241)
Deﬁne Wi,t(h,l) as the residual workload associated with job i:
Wi,t(h,l) = (ln(cH/δ) −Si,t(h,l))
+ ,
h,l ∈H,
(242)
and deﬁne the aggregate residual workload associated with job type h:
W t(h,l) =
X
i∈Ih,t
Wi,t(h,l),
h,l ∈H.
(243)
The heuristic policy operates as follows.

Massoulie and Xu: On the Capacity of Information Processing Systems
60
Departure rule. Job i departs from the system as soon as there exists h ∈H, such that
max
l∈H,l̸=hWi,t(h,l) = 0.
(244)
Expert actions. Suppose that an expert of type k becomes available at time t. If there is no job in
the system, she goes on a vacation. Otherwise, she inspects the oldest job from the set Ih∗,t, where
h∗∈arg max
h∈H
X
l∈H,l̸=h
D(h,l,k)W t(h,l),
(245)
with ties broken arbitrarily.
This heuristic policy has a number of nice features. As is evident from the above description, the
policy is much simpler than the one given in Section 6, and it does not require solving a linear
optimization problem as a sub-routine. Also, the departure criterion ensures that the event Gx in
Lemma 5.1 always occurs for every job that leaves the system, so the policy is δ-accuracy whenever
it is stable. There is also some indication that this heuristic policy might be resource eﬃcient. For
a moment, let us suppose that all ML estimators, bHi,t, are correct. In this case, Ih,t is the set
of jobs whose true label is h, and Eq. (245) can be thought of as a max-weight-like procedure,
where D(h,l,k) corresponds to the expected decrease a single inspection can incur on the aggregate
residual workload W t(h,l). Since max-weight scheduling policies (e.g., Tassiulas and Ephremides
(1992)) are known to achieve the maximum stability region in many queueing systems, one may
expect that this max-weight-like property would make our heuristic policy resource eﬃcient as well.
Unfortunately, there appear to be two intrinsic characteristics of the policy that make it diﬃcult
to rigorously establish resource eﬃciency. Firstly, the ML estimators bHi,t can be incorrect, especially
when a job has received only a small number of inspections, and therefore the vector {W t(h,l)}h,l∈H
does not exactly capture the “true” workload of the system. Secondly, even assuming that the ML
estimators are correct, a synchronization issue can prevent a type-k expert’s inspection from actually
contributing an expected D(h,l,k) units of decrease in W t(h,l) for all l ̸= h. This is because, for
some job i, Wi,t(h,l) along some coordinate l could reach zero much earlier than other coordinates
l′ ̸= l, during which period the expected decrease in W t(h,l) from inspecting job i would be zero,
instead of D(h,l,k), due to the capping at zero of Eq. (244). Both of the above issues make it
diﬃcult to bound the drift in a Lyapunov function in the course of proving stability. However, there
is hope that they could be mitigated as the accuracy parameter, δ, tends to 0. In this regime, the
number of inspections needed for each job tends to inﬁnity, and hence most jobs in the system
have already received a large number of inspections, implying that they likely have the correct ML
estimators as well. Similarly, since the distortion of drift only occurs at the “boundary” where the
residual workload of a job is small, it will likely have much less impact as the number of inspections
per job grows.