TITLE: Continuous Patrolling Games
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2346
---

Alpern, Steve, Bui, Thuy, Lidbetter, Thomas & Papadaki, Katerina (2022)
Continuous patrolling games. Operations Research, 70(6), 3076 - 3089.
https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2022.2346
https://researchonline.lse.ac.uk/id/eprint/115254/
Version: Accepted Version
This document is the author’s accepted version of the journal article. There may be
differences between this version and the published version.
Items deposited in LSE Research Online are protected by copyright, with all rights
reserved unless indicated otherwise. They may be downloaded and/or printed for
private study, or other acts as permitted by national copyright laws.
LSE Research Online is the repository for research produced by the London School
of Economics and Political Science. For more information, please refer to our Policies
page or contact lseresearchonline@lse.ac.uk

Submitted to Operations Research
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Continuous Patrolling Games
Steve Alpern
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK, steve.alpern@wbs.ac.uk
Thuy Bui
Rutgers Business School, Newark, NJ 07102, USA, tb680@business.rutgers.edu
Thomas Lidbetter
Rutgers Business School, Newark, NJ 07102, USA, tlidbetter@business.rutgers.edu
Katerina Papadaki
Department of Mathematics, London School of Economics, London WC2A 2AE, UK, k.p.papadaki@lse.ac.uk
We study a patrolling game played on a network Q, considered as a metric space. The Attacker chooses a
point of Q (not necessarily a node) to attack during a chosen time interval of ﬁxed duration. The Patroller
chooses a unit speed path on Q and intercepts the attack (and wins) if she visits the attacked point during
the attack time interval. This zero-sum game models the problem of protecting roads or pipelines from an
adversarial attack. The payoﬀto the maximizing Patroller is the probability that the attack is intercepted.
Our results include the following: (i) a solution to the game for any network Q, as long as the time required
to carry out the attack is suﬃciently short, (ii) a solution to the game for all tree networks that satisfy a
certain condition on their extremities, and (iii) a solution to the game for any attack duration for stars with
one long arc and the remaining arcs equal in length. We present a conjecture on the solution of the game
for arbitrary trees and establish it in certain cases.
Key words : patrolling, zero-sum games, networks
1. Introduction
Patrolling games were introduced at the end of Alpern et al. (2011) to model the operational prob-
lem of how to optimally schedule patrols to intercept a terrorist attack, theft or inﬁltration. That
paper, contrasting with earlier adversarial patrolling (Stackelberg) versions, modeled the problem
1

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
2
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
as a zero-sum game between an Attacker and a Patroller, who wish to respectively maximize and
minimize the probability of a successful attack. The domain on which the game was played out
was taken to be a graph, with attacks restricted to the nodes and taking a given integer number
of periods. A patrol is a walk on the graph, and intercepts the attack if it visits the attacked node
during the attack period. This could model a guard in an art museum who enters a room while a
thief is in the midst of removing a valuable painting from the wall. That paper was able to make
some key observations about their game, giving bounds on the value, but was unable to ﬁnd the
value precisely or give optimal strategies except in some very limited cases. Papadaki et al. (2016)
solved the game for line graphs, but the solution was very complicated even for this apparently
simple graph. In the Conclusion section of the original paper Alpern et al. (2011), an extension of
the problem to continuous space and time was suggested. The purpose of this paper is to carry out
this suggestion.
We allow attacks that have a prescribed duration α to occur at any point of a continuous network
Q. A unit speed patrol on Q is said to intercept the attack (and win for the Patroller) if it arrives
at the attacked point at some time during the attack. The value of the game is the probability of
interception, with best play on both sides. We ﬁnd that optimal play for the Attacker typically
involves mixing pure attacks that take place at diﬀerent times.
After this type of continuous game was ﬁrst proposed in 2011, it has been solved for some special
networks. The circle network (or any Eulerian network) is easy to solve: a periodic traversal of
the Eulerian tour, starting at a random point, is optimal for the Patroller; attacking starting at
a ﬁxed time at a uniformly random location is optimal for the Attacker (see Alpern et al. (2016)
and Garrec (2019)). The line segment network was solved in Alpern et al. (2016). In Garrec (2019)
a solution for some values of α is given for the network with two nodes connected by three unit
length arcs, and a complete formulation of the general game is given, including a proof of the
existence of the value. The present paper extends to some extent all three of these prior results
to general classes of networks: Eulerian networks to networks without leaf arcs; the line segment

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
network to trees; the three-arc network to networks with large girth - for small attack times. The
Area Editor has observed that “in real-life the attacker has no incentive to hang out at the attack
site - he would disappear as fast as he can following the attack. Therefore, small α is reasonable
for many real-life situations.”
Our main results and chapter organization are as follows. Section 3 presents several (mixed)
strategies for the players that can be used or adapted to obtain solutions of the game for various
classes of networks in later sections. We note that Eulerian networks have no leaves, and Section 4
generalizes the solution of the former to networks without leaves. In particular, as long as the
attack time is suﬃciently short, we show that the attack strategy that chooses a point uniformly
at random is still optimal; an optimal strategy for the Patroller is to follow a double cover tour
of the network which never traverses an arc consecutively in opposite directions (as described in
Theorem 4). We also give a new algorithm for constructing such a tour in Theorem 3. In Section 5
we allow the network to have leaves, and modify the optimal strategies of the previous section to
generate optimal strategies for arbitrary networks, as long as the attack time is suﬃciently short
(see Theorem 6).
Section 6 considers trees and in particular those that satisfy a condition we call the Leaf Con-
dition. We give a precise deﬁnition of the condition, which requires some delicacy (Deﬁnition 8).
In fact, any tree satisﬁes the Leaf Condition as long as the attack time is suﬃciently short. Star
networks (trees with only leaf arcs) also satisfy the Leaf Condition for suﬃciently large attack
times, and the only stars that do not satisfy the Leaf Condition are those that have an arc that
is longer than half the total length of the network. In Theorem 7 we solve the game for all trees
in the case that the Leaf Condition holds, giving a simple expression for the value of the game
in terms of the length of the network, the attack time and another parameter. In Subsection 6.4
Conjecture 1 states that this expression is always equal to the value of the game on trees. We
establish the conjecture for some stars that do not satisfy the Leaf Condition.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
4
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
2. Literature Review
In addition to the papers discussed in the Introduction, which were the most relevant to continuous
patrolling, there is a more extensive literature on adversarial patrolling. The problem of patrolling
a perimeter has been analyzed by Zoroa et al. (2012) (where the attack location can move to
adjacent locations) and Lin (2019), the latter in a continuous time context. Extensions of Alpern
et al. (2016) where the costs of successful attacks are time and node dependent have been studied
by Lin et al. (2013) (for random attack times), Lin et al. (2014) (with imperfect detection) and
Yolmeh and Baykal-G¨ursoy (2019) (which includes an application to an urban rail network).
Stackelberg approaches, with the Patroller as ﬁrst mover, have been pioneered in an artiﬁcial
intelligence context by Basilico et al. (2012) (which includes an algorithm for large cases) and
Basilico et al. (2017) (where the optimal strategy in certain cases is for the Patroller to stay in
place until the sensor reveals an attack an unknown location).
More applied approaches to patrolling are of practical importance. Applications to scheduling
randomized security checks and canine patrols at Los Angeles Airport have been developed and
deployed in Pita et al. (2008). The United States Coast Guard also uses a game-theoretic system
to schedule patrols in the Port of Boston (An et al. 2013). Recently, a game theoretic approach to
schedule patrols to guard against poachers has been explored in Fang et al. (2016) (where the novel
algorithm PAWS was introduced) and Xu et al. (2019) (where the success of deploying PAWS in
the ﬁeld is described). Patrolling to detect radiation and consequently nuclear threats was modeled
in the novel paper of Hochbaum et al. (2014).
The possibility that the Attacker could know when the Patroller is nearby (perhaps at the same
node), raised in Alpern et al. (2011), has recently been studied in Alpern and Katsikas (2019),
Alpern et al. (2021) and Lin (2019) in diﬀerent contexts. In the former this knowledge helped the
Attacker, in the latter, it did not. Multiple patrollers have been considered in the robotics and
computer science literatures, where an important paper with a similar network structure to ours
is Czyzowicz et al. (2017). A connection between patrols and inspection games is made in Baston
and Bostock (1991) and between patrols and hide-seek games in Garrec (2019). Restricting the
Patroller to periodic paths creates diﬃculties analyzed in Alpern et al. (2018).

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
3. Formal Deﬁnitions for Network and Game
In this section we deﬁne the continuous patrolling game and present deﬁnitions related to the
connected network Q on which it is played. For Q, standard graph theoretic deﬁnitions must be
modiﬁed for a network which is considered as a metric space and a measure space, not simply a
combinatorial object.
To deﬁne Q, we begin with a graph G with edges and vertices, with the addition of a length
λ(e) assigned to each edge e. We can then identify an edge e with an open interval of length λ(e),
endowed with Lebesgue measure and Euclidean distance d, and consider λ as a measure on Q,
called length. The total length of Q is denoted by µ = λ(Q). The topology on these intervals gives
a topology on their union Q. A path in Q is a continuous function from a closed interval to Q.
We take the metric d(x,y) on Q as the minimum length of a path between x and y. A point x
of Q is called a regular point if it has a neighborhood homeomorphic to an open interval. The
remaining non-regular points are called nodes. The degree of a point y is deﬁned as the number
of connected components of a small neighborhood of y after y has been removed from it. Such a
neighborhood is called a punctured neighborhood in the topology literature. A point of degree 2 is
always by deﬁnition regular, and hence not a node. We say that two nodes of Q are adjacent if
there is a path between them consisting only of regular points. Such a path is called an arc. A node
of degree 1 is called a leaf node, and its incident arc is called a leaf arc. To ensure that every leaf
arc has a single leaf node in its closure, we exclude the line segment network from consideration.
In any case the continuous patrolling game has been solved for the line segment in Alpern et al.
(2016).
A circuit in Q is a closed path (that is, with the same startpoint and endpoint) consisting of
distinct adjacent arcs. A tour of Q is a closed path visiting all points of Q, and a tour of minimum
length is called a Chinese Postman Tour (CPT). The length of this path is denoted ¯µ. It was shown
by Edmonds and Johnson (1973) that a CPT can be found in polynomial time, with respect to the
number of nodes. A closed path which is a circuit and a tour is called an Eulerian tour. As is well

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
6
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
known, a connected network has an Eulerian tour if and only if it is Eulerian, deﬁned as having
nodes all of even degree. If we double every arc of a network Q, the resulting network is Eulerian
with length 2µ, so Q has a tour of length 2µ and hence ¯µ ≤2µ.
The continuous patrolling game is played on Q as follows. The Attacker chooses a point x in Q
to attack, and a closed time interval J of given length α during which to attack it. Since α is ﬁxed,
the attack interval J = [τ,τ + α] is determined by its starting time τ. The game and its value are
determined by the pair (Q,α). The Patroller chooses a path S (t), where t ≥0, which we call a
patrol, satisfying
d(S (t),S (t′)) ≤|t −t′|, for all t,t′ ≥0.
(1)
For simplicity, we shall call a path satisfying the 1−Lipshitz condition (1) a unit speed path. We
don’t specify an upper bound on the starting time of the attack, but in every case we have studied
there is an optimal mixed attack strategy in which all its (pure strategy) attacks are over by
time 4µ. A patrol is said to intercept an attack if it visits the attacked point while it is being
attacked. The game is very simply deﬁned: the maximizing Patroller wins (payoﬀP = 1) if her
patrol intercepts the attack. Otherwise, the Attacker wins (payoﬀP = 0 to the Patroller). The
payoﬀs to the Attacker are reversed, so the game has constant sum 1. In other words, if the patrol is
S and the attack is at point x during the interval J = [τ,τ + α], then the payoﬀP to the maximizing
Patroller is given by
P (S,(x,J)) =





1 if x ∈S (J),
0 otherwise.
For mixed strategies, the expected payoﬀcan be interpreted as the probability that the attack is
intercepted. The value of the game, denoted V , is the interception probability, with best play on
both sides.
Garrec (2019) used the fact that P is lower semicontinuous to establish the existence of a value V
for this inﬁnite game. We note that if α = 0 then the Attacker can win almost surely by attacking
uniformly on Q (according to λ) at a ﬁxed time; if α ≥¯µ, the Patroller can ensure a win by adopting

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
a Chinese Postman Tour, starting anywhere at time 0 and repeating the tour with period ¯µ. So to
avoid the trivial cases where one of the player can always win, we assume 0 < α < ¯µ.
We follow Garrec (2019) in not imposing a ﬁnite time horizon. However, if we require that the
attack ends by some time T > α, this is only a restriction on the Attacker’s strategy set. Hence,
all Patroller estimates (lower bounds on the value) would remain valid. Attacker estimates (upper
bounds on the value) also remain valid for suﬃciently large T because all the optimal Attacker
strategies presented in this paper end by a stated ﬁnite time. For example, the uniform attack
strategy, discussed in the next subsection, ends by time M +α, where M can be chosen arbitrarily.
Throughout the paper the complement Q −Y of a set Y is denoted by Y c.
3.1. The Uniform and the Independent Attack Strategies
Some networks, as we shall see in later sections, require Attacker strategies speciﬁcally suited to
their structure, such as attacks on leaf nodes when the network is a tree. But there are also some
general strategies that are available on any network. Here we deﬁne two of these and present the
general bounds on the value that they give.
Definition 1 (Uniform attack strategy). A uniform attack strategy is a mixture of pure
attacks that have a common attack time interval J = [M,M +α], where M can be chosen arbitrarily
(for example M = 0). The attacked point is chosen uniformly at random. That is, the probability
that the attacked point lies in a set Y is given by λ(Y )/µ.
We restate a lemma from Alpern et al. (2016) for completeness (the proof is in the Online
Appendix).
Lemma 1. Against any patrol S, a uniform attack strategy is intercepted with probability not more
than α/µ. Consequently V ≤α/µ for any network.
We now deﬁne independence for sets and strategies.
Definition 2 (Independent set). A subset I of Q is called independent if the distance
between any two of its points is at least α. For any subset Y of Q, the set W ≡W (Y ) is the subset
of Q consisting of all points at distance at most α/2 from Y .

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
8
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Definition 3 (Independent attack strategy). Given an independent set I of cardinality l and
the set W ≡W(I), the independent attack strategy is as follows for p =
lα
λ(W c)+lα.
1. With probability p attack at an element of I chosen equiprobably at a start time chosen
uniformly at random in J = [0,α].
2. With probability 1 −p attack uniformly on W c at start time α/2.
The independent attack strategy randomizes over both time and space, unlike the strategy of the
same name deﬁned in Alpern et al. (2011) for the discrete patrolling game, which randomizes only
over space. The following result gives an upper bound on the strategy’s interception probability.
Theorem 1. Suppose I is an independent subset of Q of cardinality l. Then
V ≤
α
λ(W c) + lα,
which the Attacker can ensure by adopting the independent attack strategy. If λ(W c) = 0 we have
V ≤1/l. Furthermore, if I is the set of leaf nodes, and leaf arcs have lengths exceeding α/2, then
V ≤
α
µ + lα/2.
Proof.
Let S denote any patrol and suppose the independent attack strategy is adopted. If
S remains in W during J, it intercepts the attack with probability at most p/l, where l is the
cardinality of I. Similarly, since S has unit speed, if it remains in W c during time J, it intercepts
an attack with probability at most (1−p)(α/λ(W c)). The chosen value of p is the one that makes
these probabilities both equal to α/(λ(W c) + lα).
Finally, suppose the patrol S starts in W c at time 0, reaches a point x ∈I at some time t,
α ≤t ≤2α, early enough to intercept some attacks on I and late enough to intercept some attacks
on W c. Since the latest such a patrol can leave W c is at time t −α/2, it can cover a set of length
at most (t −α/2) −(α/2) = t −α in W c after the attacks at time α/2, intercepting a fraction
(t −α)/λ(W c) of the attacks there. In addition, the patrol can intercept the attacks at x starting
between t −α and α, so a fraction (2α −t)/α of the attacks at x, or (2α −t)/lα of the attacks on

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
I. Thus the maximum probability that a patrol arriving at I at time t can intercept an attack is
given by
(1 −p) t −α
λ(W c) + p2α −t
lα
=
α
λ(W c) + lα.
By time symmetry, the same bound holds if the patrol starts at a point of I and ends up in W c.
If λ(W c) = 0 we have V ≤1/l trivially.
To prove the last assertion note that if I is the set of leaf nodes, and leaf arcs have lengths
exceeding α/2, then leaf nodes form an independent set I and λ(W) = lα/2.
□
3.2. A General Strategy Available to the Patroller
Some patrol strategies come from ﬁnding closed paths on the network with speciﬁc properties, and
then have the Patroller go around them periodically starting at a random point. Normally the
closed path will be a tour, but we give a more general deﬁnition in case it is not.
Definition 4 (Randomized periodic extension). If S : [0,L] →Q is a closed unit speed path,
we can extend it to various patrols S∆: [0,∞) →Q of period L by the deﬁnition
S∆(t) = S ( (t + ∆) mod L ), for all t ≥0.
Thus S∆is a periodic patrol that starts at the point S (∆) at time 0. The randomized periodic
extension ˜S of S is deﬁned as the random mixture of the pure patrols S∆, with ∆chosen uniformly
in the interval (or circle) [0,L]. In the special case that S is a Chinese Postman Tour, with L = ¯µ,
we call ˜S a Chinese Postman Tour strategy.
3.3. k−covering Tours and Identifying Points of Q
If a network Q has an Eulerian tour, its randomized periodic extension makes an eﬀective patrolling
strategy, because it visits all regular points equally often (once), so the Attacker is indiﬀerent as to
where to attack. If there is no Eulerian tour (the general case), we can still use this idea, if there is
a tour which visits all regular points equally often. In Theorem 3 and Lemma 6, we will show that
there is indeed such a tour which visits all regular points twice (a 2−cover), with some additional
properties. This idea is formalized in the following.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
10
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Theorem 2. Suppose S : [0,L] →Q is a closed unit speed tour that visits every point of Q at k
times which are separated by at least α (mod L). Suppose ˜S is the randomized periodic extension
of S (from Deﬁnition 4). Then we have
(i) ˜S intercepts any attack with probability at least kα/L.
(ii) If L = kµ, then the randomized periodic extension ˜S (for the Patroller) and a uniform attack
strategy (for the Attacker) are optimal and the value of the game is given by α/µ.
Proof.
For part (i), suppose the attack takes place at a point x in Q starting at some time
τ. Let ti, i = 1,...,k be times, separated by at least α, such that S (ti) = x. The attack will be
intercepted by S∆if ∆is in the set Y = ∪i [ti −τ −α,ti −τ] (modulo L), since in this case the
Patroller will visit x = S (ti) at some time in [τ,τ + α]. The separation assumption ensures that
these intervals are disjoint, and since they all have length α, the length (Lebesgue measure) of Y
is given by |Y | = kα. By the deﬁnition of ˜S, the probability that ∆∈Y is equal to |Y |/L = kα/L,
as claimed in (i), so we have V ≥kα/L = kα/kµ = α/µ under the assumption of part (ii). By
Lemma 1, we also have that V ≤α/µ, so the two inequalities give V = α/µ, with ˜S and the uniform
attack strategy optimal.
□
As suggested above in the introductory remarks of this subsection, taking k = 1 in Theorem 2
gives another proof of the following elementary result of Alpern et al. (2016) and Garrec (2019).
Corollary 1. If Q is Eulerian, with Eulerian tour S, then for α ≤µ we have V = α/µ. (V = 1
if α ≥µ.) In this case the randomized periodic extension ˜S and the uniform attack strategy are
optimal for the Patroller and Attacker, respectively. Furthermore, for a Chinese Postman Tour S
of any network Q, taking k = 1 and L = ¯µ gives V ≥α/¯µ.
It is useful to note for applications to patrolling by m robots, that if in Theorem 2 we require
that S visits every point at k times separated by time intervals mα, then m Patrollers can intercept
any attack with probability at least mkα/L (or 1, if mkα/L ≥1). To see this conclusion, pick ∆
as above and let the path of the i’th Patroller (robot) be deﬁned by Si (t) = S (∆+ i(L/m) + t).
The arrival times at any point of Q are then separated by at least α. This reasoning shows that in

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
our later lower bounds for V , these can be multiplied by the number of Patrollers, with an upper
bound of 1.
We conclude this section with an observation on the eﬀect of identifying points of Q on the value.
Alpern et al. (2011) considered the eﬀect of identifying two nodes of a graph. Here, we identify
two points of the network Q, using the well known quotient topology. In Figure 1 we identify the
arc midpoints C and D of the network Q to produce a new network Q′.
Figure 1
Identifying points C, D of Q to obtain Q′.
We may ﬁrst look at two cases which have already been solved, the line segment Qline = [0,1]
and the circle Qcircle = [0,1]
mod 1 (which is obtained from the line segment by identifying the
endpoints), with say α = 1/2. From Alpern et al. (2016), we have V (Qline) = α/(µ + α) = 1/3.
However as the circle is Eulerian, we have V (Qcircle) = α/µ = 1/2, which is larger. It is easy to
show that identifying points cannot decrease the value. Of course if we further identify points on
the circle, we get new points of degree 4, so the resulting Eulerian network retains the value of 1/2.
Lemma 2. Suppose Q′,d′ is the metric space obtained from Q,d by replacing the metric d with a
smaller metric d′, that is, with 0 ≤d′ (x,y) ≤d(x,y) for all x,y ∈Q = Q′. Then V (Q′,d′) ≥V (Q,d).
Furthermore, if Q′ is obtained from Q by decreasing the length of an arc or simply identifying two
points x and y, the same result holds.
The proof of Lemma 2 is given in the Online Appendix. An application of it is given at the end
of Section 4.
4. Networks Without Leaves
To extend Corollary 1 to general networks, we ﬁrst note that Eulerian networks have no leaf arcs,
so we attempt to ﬁnd such a tour S satisfying the hypothesis of Theorem 2 for networks without

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
12
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
leaf arcs. It turns out that taking k = 2 in Theorem 2 is high enough. We can ﬁnd such a tour
(see Theorem 4) if α is suﬃciently small with respect to the girth g of Q, deﬁned for networks as
the minimum length of a circuit in Q, and if Q has no circuits then g = ∞. (For networks with
unit length arcs, our deﬁnition of girth coincides with the usual integer deﬁnition of the girth of a
graph.) Our ﬁrst result is the following.
Theorem 3. For any network Q there is a tour S2 which covers every arc twice and for which no
arc is traversed consecutively in opposite directions, except for leaf arcs.
Theorem 3 is not new; it was proved by Sabidussi (1977). See also Klavzar and Rus (2013) and
Eggleton and Skilton (1984). We originally proved Theorem 3 independently and subsequently
found it in the literature. Our proof, based on the new result, Lemma 3, is elementary.
The way we will prove Theorem 3 is to double every arc of Q to create an network ˆQ. Then ˆQ is
Eulerian and has an Eulerian tour. We note that in Euler’s Theorem (ﬁnding an Eulerian tour in
graphs of even degree), we can control to some extent the construction of the tour. The following
reﬁnement of Euler’s Theorem (Lemma 3) is based on some simple modiﬁcations of the traditional
proof and shows that we can control the pairing of entered and exited passages of the tour at every
node. Formally, a passage at a node x is a pair (x,a), where a is an arc incident to x. So a node of
degree d has d passages and every arc is part of two passages.
Lemma 3. Suppose Q is a connected Eulerian network such that at every node the passages are
identiﬁed in pairs (they are “paired”). Then there is an Eulerian tour S of Q satisfying
S never enters and leaves a node via paired passages.
(2)
The proof of Lemma 3 can be found in the Online Appendix.
As mentioned at the beginning of Section 3 there are no nodes of degree 2. Thus, the minimum
node degree in our Eulerian network is 4.
Now we are ready to prove Theorem 3.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
Proof of Theorem 3. Let ˆQ be the Eulerian network obtained from Q by doubling every arc.
(This action has the eﬀect of replacing leaf arcs with loops of double the length.) At every node of
ˆQ we pair passages that correspond to the same passage of Q. Now apply Lemma 3 to ˆQ to obtain
an Eulerian circuit ˆS of ˆQ satisfying condition (2). The result is S2, a double cover of Q (a tour of
Q where every arc is traversed twice), in which consecutive arcs are distinct, except for leaf arcs.
For loops, an arc may be repeated consecutively, but always in the same direction both times. □
The proof of Lemma 3 gives rise to an algorithm for constructing an Eulerian tour of ˆQ satisfying
condition (2), and hence a tour of Q of the form described in the statement of Theorem 3 (named
S2). Indeed, by following the rules listed in the proof of Lemma 3, we obtain a circuit C in ˆQ satis-
fying (2); by recursively applying the rules to the connected components of ˆQ −C and appending
these circuits to C at appropriate points, we can obtain an Eulerian tour of ˆQ satisfying (2).
We illustrate the creation of the ∗-circuit described above for the network K4 depicted in Figure 2.
Doubling each arc, we give the extra arc the same label as the original arc but with a prime.
Applying the rules of the proof of Lemma 3, starting at the bottom left node, we obtain a circuit:
a,b,c,d,e,c′,a′,f,d′. Removing this circuit leaves the network consisting of arcs b′,e′ and f ′, which
is already a circuit. Adding this circuit at the ﬁrst possible opportunity, we obtain the Eulerian
tour a,b′,e′,f ′,b,c,d,e,c′,a′,f,d′.
𝑏
𝑑
𝑐
𝑎
𝑑
𝑒
𝑓
Figure 2
The network K4.
Theorem 4. Suppose Q is a network without leaf arcs. Then for α ≤g, where g is the girth, we
have the following:
1. The value of the game is V = α/µ.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
14
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
2. For the Attacker, any uniform attack strategy is optimal.
3. For the Patroller, the randomized periodic extension ˜S2 is optimal, for any tour S2 given by
Theorem 3.
Proof.
Let S2 be a tour of Q given by Theorem 3. Note that it has length L = 2µ. Since there
are no leaf arcs, any two consecutive arcs of S2 are distinct. Suppose some point x of Q is reached
by S2 at consecutive times t and s with t < s. Let Z denote the restriction of S2 to the interval [t,s].
Then Z is a circuit of length s −t and hence s −t ≥g, by the deﬁnition of girth. Hence V = α/µ,
by Theorem 2(ii) with k = 2 and since α ≤g.
□
For the network K4 depicted in Figure 2, assuming all arcs have length 1, the girth g is 3. So for
α ≤3, the uniform attack strategy is optimal and the Patroller strategy S2 is optimal, where S2 is
the tour a,b′,e′,f ′,b,c,d,e,c′,a′,f,d′.
As a further example, consider Q to be a network with two nodes A and B connected by three
arcs of lengths a ≤b ≤c. Then g = a + b and µ = a + b + c, so we have by Theorem 4 that the
value is V (α) = α/(a + b + c) for α ≤a + b. This network, with a = b = c = 1 (and hence g = 2),
was studied by Garrec (2019), who found (among other results) that V (α) = α/3 for α ≤2 and
V (α) ≤f(α) ≡1 −(1/3)(2 −α/2)2 for α ∈[2,10/3]. Since f(α) < α/3 for α ∈(2,10/3] (f(α) = α/3
for a = 2 and f ′(α) = (4 −α)/6 < 1/3 for α > 2), the Patroller cannot obtain an interception
probability of α/3 for α in this interval, so the bound α ≤g = 2 in Theorem 4 is tight.
The condition α ≤g speciﬁed in Theorem 4 is a suﬃcient but not necessary condition. Consider
a network Q5 with two nodes connected by ﬁve arcs labeled as 1,2,3,4,5, with arc i having length
i. The girth is given by g = g (Q5) = 1 + 2 = 3. However, suppose we obtain a double cover (with
k = 2) S of Q described by the sequence [1,2′,3,4′,5,1′,2,3′,4,5′], where unprimed arcs go from,
say, node A to node B and primed arcs go from node B to node A. The shortest return time to a
regular point is for a point x near node B on the arc of length 5. After leaving x, going to nearby
B, the patrol traverses arcs of lengths 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10 before going back to x from B. Note that
S returns to A after gaps of 3,7,6,5 and 9, so at two time points separated by 14 (at the start

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
and after the gap of 6). Also B is visited twice separated by a gap of 14. So for the network Q5
we have V = α/µ for α ≤10 rather than just for α ≤3. This observation leads to combinatorial
questions about the maximum shortest circuit in a k-cover of a network Q. As noted above based
on Garrec’s analysis of the three arc network, in certain cases V = α/µ fails for all α > g.
Now let Q be a network with two nodes connected by n arcs. If n is even, then Q is Eulerian
and thus, by Corollary 1, V = α/µ for all α. If n is odd then our example Q5 generalizes easily to
the following.
Theorem 5. Suppose Q is a network with two nodes connected by an odd number of arcs. Then
V = α/µ for α ≤µ −D, where D is the length of the longest arc.
Proof.
Label the arcs between the two nodes A and B as a1,...,an, in order of increasing length
b1 ≤b2 ≤··· ≤bn where bj is the length of arc aj and bn = D. We note that since the girth is
given by g = b1 + b2, Theorem 4 says that V = α/µ for α ≤g = b1 + b2. We have to establish the
stronger result that V = α/µ for α ≤b1 + b2 + ··· + bn−1 = µ −D. Following the construction of
S for Q5 given above, we deﬁne a double tour S of Q. Let j denote the traversal of arc aj from
A to B and j′ denote the traversal of arc aj from B to A. Let S be deﬁned by the arc sequence

1,2′,3,4′,...,(n −2),(n −1)
′ ,n,1′,2,...,n −1,n′
. Returns to any regular point x of Q occur after
traversing n −1 of the arcs once. So the shortest return occurs when the arc not traversed is the
longest one, namely arc an of length bn = D. So the shortest return time under S to any regular
point is given by b1 + b2 + ··· + bn−1 = µ −D. So the double tour S reaches every regular point x
twice at times separated by at least time µ −D. So if α ≤µ −D it reaches every regular point x
twice at times separated by at least time α. Since the length of S is given by L = 2µ, by Theorem 2,
the value of the game is equal to α/µ.
We conclude this section with an application of our earlier result on identifying points.
Example 1. Consider the two networks Q and Q′ drawn in Figure 1, with α = 3. We would like
to show that V (Q′) = α/µ = 3/6 = 1/2. We know from Lemma 2 that V (Q′) ≤α/µ = 1/2. So we
only need 1/2 as a lower bound on V (Q′). However we cannot apply Theorem 4 because it is not

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
16
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
true that α is less than or equal to the girth of Q′, which is 2. However we know either from Garrec
(2019) or from Theorem 4 (which applies because 3 = α < g = 4) that V (Q) = α/µ = 1/2. So by
viewing Q′ as coming from Q by identifying points C and D, Lemma 2 gives V (Q′) ≥V (Q) = 1/2.
5. Brief Attacks on Arbitrary Networks
We now extend Theorem 4 to networks with leaves. We begin with a modiﬁed Patroller strategy
based on the tour S2 of Theorem 3.
Definition 5. Suppose S2 is a tour given by Theorem 3. We denote by Sα
2 the tour that follows
the same trajectory as S2 but stops for time α whenever it reaches a leaf node.
Lemma 4. Suppose Q is a network with l ≥0 leaf nodes and girth g. Then
V ≥
α
µ + lα/2, for α ≤g.
Proof.
Tour Sα
2 takes total time 2µ+lα. Note that every point of Q is visited by Sα
2 at two times
diﬀering by at least α. So by Theorem 2 part (i) with k = 2, L = 2µ+lα, we have V ≥2α/(2µ + lα).
(We observe that instead of stopping for time α, the tour Sα
2 could do anything in this time interval,
such as going away from the node a distance α/2 and returning.)
□
Definition 6 (Generalized girth). We deﬁne the generalized girth g∗of a network Q by
considering a leaf arc of length L to be a circuit of length 2L. So g∗is the smaller between (1) the
shortest circuit length of Q and (2) twice the length of the shortest leaf arc.
In particular g∗≤g, with equality if there are no leaf arcs or if all leaf arcs have length greater
than g/2. Note that if α ≤g∗we know in particular that all leaf arcs have length at least α/2 and
hence Theorem 1 applies. Thus we have the following Attacker estimate (upper bound on V ).
Lemma 5. Suppose Q is a network with l ≥0 leaf nodes and generalized girth g∗. Then by adopt-
ing the independent attack strategy on the set I of leaf nodes, the Attacker can ensure that the
interception probability is less than
α
µ+lα/2 for α ≤g∗. Hence,
V ≤
α
µ + lα/2, for α ≤g∗.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
Proof.
As noted above, the assumption on α ensures that all leaf arcs have length at least α/2,
so the result follows from Theorem 1.
□
Since g∗≤g, Lemmas 4 and 5 apply when α ≤g∗and hence we have the following extension of
Theorem 4 to networks with leaf arcs.
Theorem 6. If Q is a network with l ≥0 leaf nodes and generalized girth g∗, then
V =
α
µ + lα/2, for α ≤g∗.
For the Patroller, an optimal strategy is Sα
2 as deﬁned above. For the Attacker, an optimal strategy
is the independent attack strategy, taking I to be the independent set of leaf nodes.
Since g∗is always positive, Theorem 6 gives the solution of the game for some positive values of
α on any network.
It is useful for later comparisons to specialize this result to trees.
Corollary 2. If Q is a tree with l leaf arcs, then
(i) V ≥
α
µ+lα/2,
(ii) with equality if all leaf arcs have length at least α/2.
Proof.
To establish (ii), note that trees have no circuits, so the generalized girth g∗is twice the
length of its smallest leaf arc, so by assumption, α ≤g∗. The result now follows from Theorem 6.
For (i), consider the patrol Sα
2 . Note that between any two visits by Sα
2 to a point of Q, a leaf node
is visited. Hence the return times exceed the time α that Sα
2 stops at that node, and the result
follows from Theorem 2(i) with k = 2 and L = 2µ + lα.
□
For example, consider the tree Q depicted in Figure 3. The number of leaf arcs is l = 5, the
generalized girth is g∗= 2 and total length is µ = 9, so by Theorem 6, the value of the game is
α/(9 + 5α/2) for α ≤2. We will later solve the game for α ≤4, using Theorem 7.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
18
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Figure 3
The tree Q.
6. Solving the Game for Trees
In Corollary 2 we gave some preliminary results for trees. Lemma 4 gave a lower bound on the
value of the game based on the Patroller strategy Sα
2 . Furthermore, for α ≤g∗, where g∗is the
generalized girth, we showed in Theorem 6 that the independent attack strategy ensures that this
lower bound is tight. Note that for a tree, g∗is twice the length of the shortest leaf arc. In this
section, we extend these results and give optimal Patroller and Attacker strategies for some values
of α which are greater than g∗. We start by deﬁning the extremity set E, a subset of Q that is
essential in describing optimal Patroller and Attacker strategies.
6.1. The Extremity Set E
The relationship between the network Q and the duration α of the attack interval determines the
type of optimal player strategies. In this section we deﬁne the extremity set E that helps us explore
this relationship for trees.
If B is a set of points then we denote by ¯B the topological closure of B. If Q is a tree network,
then its minimum tour time is 2µ, as every arc must be traversed twice. If x is a regular point of
tree network Q, then Q −{x} has two connected components Q1 = Q1(x) and Q2 = Q2(x), whose
lengths satisfy λ(Q1) + λ(Q2) = λ(Q) = µ. We introduce a subset E of Q called the extremity set.
Definition 7 (The extremity set E). Suppose Q is a tree. The extremity set E ≡E(Q,α) is
deﬁned as the set of all regular points x ∈Q such that
min
i=1,2λ(Qi(x)) < α/2.
(3)

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
Note that mini=1,2 λ(Qi) ≤µ/2 and if additionally µ < α then (3) holds for all regular points,
which implies that ¯E = Q. The extremity set E consists of regular points whose minimum return
time during a CPT is less than the attack duration α. It can be partitioned into maximal connected
sets that we call components of E and we denote by Ej.
Example 2. We illustrate the extremity set E on the tree network of Figure 3 that has µ = 9.
Figure 4 shows how E changes for increasing values of α on this network. As α increases the
components grow starting from points near the ﬁve leaf nodes of the tree. Initially there are ﬁve
components (cases α = 1,2,3,4); but eventually points near non-leaf nodes become members of E
and the number of components increase to seven (cases α = 5,6,7,8). Note that in case α = 8 the
closure ¯E of E is equal to the whole network. The results from the previous sections (Theorem 6,
Corollary 2) solve the game for cases α ≤g∗= 2, but in this section we extend the results to cover
all cases of α ≤4.
Figure 4
The extremity set E(Q,α), shown in thick (red) lines, for the tree Q of Figure 3 and α = 1,...,8.
Example 3. Figure 5 depicts a star network. The extremity set E is depicted by red thick lines for
attack time α, if the lengths of AD and AF are each greater than α/2 and those of AB and AC
are each less than or equal to α/2. Note that the nodes indicated by the small disks are not part
of E. Here, E decomposes into four components: (A,B), (A,C), (D,G), (F,H). We claim that
λ(DG) = λ(FH) = α/2; this is because on leaf arc AD (similarly for AF) if λ(DG) < α/2 there
would be a point X on the right of G whose distance from D would be < α/2, implying λ(DX) < α/2

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
20
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
and thus contradicting X /∈E. Similarly, if λ(DG) > α/2 there would be a point X on the left of
G where λ(DX) > α/2 contradicting X ∈E. Thus, components Ej that are strict subsets of a leaf
arc and whose closure contains the leaf node will have length α/2. However, components Ej whose
closure is the entire leaf arc (like AB and AC) must have length ≤α/2; if they had length > α/2
then there would be point X on the component AB near node A where λ(BX) > α/2 contradicting
X ∈E.
Figure 5
A tree, with its extremity set E in thick red.
6.2. The E-patrolling Strategy SE for Trees
We will see that for some trees, the uniform CPT strategy is still optimal for the Patroller, but
its optimality depends on the size of the attack duration, α. As mentioned earlier, for a tree a
CPT is simply any depth-ﬁrst search which returns to its start point after completing its search, so
that ¯µ = 2µ; every point of the tree except the leaf nodes is visited at least twice by a CPT. This
means the leaf nodes and regular points near them are left “less protected” by a uniform CPT than
the other points, and for suﬃciently small values of α, there will be points in the tree whose two
closest visit times (modulo ¯µ) are at least time α apart, meaning that they are, in a sense “twice
as protected” as the leaf nodes. (In all that follows, arithmetic on time will be performed modulo
the length of the tour in question).
This observation motivates the introduction of a new Patroller strategy SE for trees that we call
the E-patrolling strategy. We construct it in such a way that each point is visited at least twice
at times that diﬀer by at least α, and then we use Theorem 2, part (i) to obtain a lower bound on
the value. To describe the strategy, we use the extremity set E ≡E(Q,α) that we deﬁned earlier;
in particular, we use the closure ¯E of E and its components ¯E1,..., ¯Ek, each of which is a subtree

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
of Q. We have λ( ¯E) = λ(E) but by using the components of ¯E rather than the components of E,
we include the nodes and thereby unite adjacent components of E into a single component of ¯E.
For example, in Figure 5 there are four components of E but only three components of ¯E, since in
¯E the lines AB and AC join to form a single component BAC.
Let Q be a tree with ¯E ̸= Q. We ﬁrst construct a CPT S with the additional property that
every component ¯Ej is searched in a single CPT of ¯Ej, which we call Cj; note that some CPTs
of Q might search diﬀerent subsets of ¯Ej during non-consecutive time intervals - we exclude this
possibility by construction.
To obtain a CPT of Q with this property, we begin at any regular point not in ¯E and go in either
direction. When arriving at any node, we leave by a passage not already traversed, if there is such
a passage. (This is the usual depth-ﬁrst construction and ensures we obtain a CPT.) Furthermore,
if the node belongs to some component ¯Ej and there are untraversed passages staying in that
component, we take one of these. For example, in Figure 5 if we start somewhere on GA going right,
and tour the leaf arc to B from A, we must then take the passage to C (staying in component BAC)
rather than the other untraversed passage out of A going to F. This rule ensures that the CPT
say ABAFACADA (in which the component BAC of ¯E is not traversed in a single CPT of BAC)
will not be constructed, but rather one like [ABACA]FADA, where the bracketed expression is a
CPT of the component BAC.
Then we make two types of additions at every component. If λ
  ¯Ej
≥α/2, we follow the CPT
Cj of ¯Ej in S by another identical one, before continuing with S. Note that this local CPT takes
time ≥α, so the time between the ﬁrst and second CPT of ¯Ej reaching any (regular) point is at
least α.
If λ
  ¯Ej
< α/2 we wait until S comes back to ¯Ej after the ﬁrst occurrence of Cj in S, and then
insert a second Cj. Let [t1,t2] be the time interval during which S tours ¯Ej so that S(t1) = S(t2)
and t2 −t1 = 2λ( ¯Ej). We have α > t2 −t1. In this case, we cannot simply tour ¯Ej twice in succession,
because some points in ¯Ej will not be visited at two times that are at least time α apart. Let

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
22
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
x = S(t1) = S(t2), and we claim that x is a (non-leaf) node of the network. For suppose not, so
that x is a regular point, and let x′ /∈E be on the same arc with ε := d(x,x′) < α/2 −λ( ¯Ej). Then
the length of S ((t1 −ε,t2 + ε)), which is λ( ¯Ej)+ε, is less than α/2. The set S ((t1 −ε,t2 + ε)) is a
component of Q −x′ and by the deﬁnition of E, since the smaller component of Q −x′ has length
less than α/2, we have x′ ∈E, a contradiction. So x is a non-leaf node, and thus Q−x has at least
three components. If any component A of Q−x has length less than α/2, then its closure ¯A, which
contains x, must be a subset of ¯E, and hence of ¯
Ej (since x ∈¯
Ej). Hence, all components of Q−x
that are disjoint from ¯
Ej must have length at least α/2. So the next time after t2 that S arrives at
x is t3 ≥t2 + α, and the next time after t3 that S arrives at x is at least t3 + α. Then S is updated
by adding another tour of Cj at time t3.
Observe that each additional local CPT of ¯Ej takes time 2λ
  ¯Ej
, so the total length of the
resulting tour SE is 2µ+2
P
j λ
  ¯Ej
= 2
 µ + λ
  ¯E

and by construction it reaches every point
of Q at two times separated by at least α (modulo the length of the tour). Note that if ¯E = Q, we
simply take SE = S. The optimal periodic strategy is thus SE. For the network of Figure 5, taking
S as ABACADAFA we could have SE = ABACAGD [GDG] [ABACA] HF [HFH] A, where the
brackets indicate the three inserted local CPT’s of the components of ¯E. Note that two of these are
inserted right after their ﬁrst occurrence, but the third one [ABACA] is inserted nonconsecutively.
Our construction would not work directly on the CPT ABAFACADA.
Thus we have established the following result by explicit construction.
Lemma 6. Suppose Q is a tree. Then there is a tour SE, called an E-patrolling strategy, of length
2(µ + λ(E)) such that every point x of Q is visited at least twice at times that diﬀer by at least α.
We can obtain a lower bound on the value of the game obtained by using an E-patrolling strategy.
Lemma 7. Suppose Q is a tree. Any E-patrolling strategy intercepts any attack with probability at
least v∗≡α/(µ + λ(E)).
Proof.
Follows from Lemma 6 and Theorem 2 part (i) with k = 2, S = SE, and L = 2(µ + λ(E)).
□

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
We conjecture the following on trees:
Conjecture 1 If Q is a tree network, then for any α the E-patrolling strategy is optimal and the
value of the game is V = v∗≡α/(µ + λ(E)).
We later conﬁrm the conjecture in some special cases.
Note that when α ≤g∗we have λ(E) = lα/2, and the result of Lemma 7 becomes the same as
the result of Corollary 2. In that case, the patrolling strategy Sα
2 gives the same lower bound as
an E-patrolling strategy.
6.3. The E-attack Strategy
In the previous section we showed that on a tree, any E-patrolling strategy intercepts any attack
with probability at least v∗. Here, we deﬁne the E-attack strategy, whose attacks are intercepted
with probability at most v∗on some trees. The condition that allows this strategy to be deﬁned
and to be optimal is given in Deﬁnition 8. It is useful to note that while for patrolling strategies
we looked at the components of the closure ¯E of E, for the attack strategy given here we look at
the components of E itself.
Definition 8 (Leaf Condition). Suppose Q is a tree. We say that (Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf
Condition if the extremity set E consists of all points on every leaf arc within distance α/2 of its
leaf node.
For example, in Figure 4 the cases that satisfy the Leaf Condition are the ﬁrst four (α = 1,2,3,4),
where E consist of ﬁve components; all of these ﬁve components are subsets of leaf arcs and they
are within α/2 from the leaf node. Note that the Leaf Condition implies that every component
Ej of E corresponds to a leaf node; this is easy to check in Figure 4. Cases α = 5,6,7,8 have
seven components; ﬁve of these components are subsets of leaf arcs but two of them are subsets of
non-leaf arcs and thus (Q,α) does not satisfy the Leaf Condition. (Recall that the extremity set
does not contain nodes, thus the nodes separate the components.)

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
24
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Definition 9 (E-attack strategy). Suppose (Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf Condition, where Q is a
tree. Let xj denote the leaf node contained in the closure of the component Ej of E, and let
ej = λ(Ej) and let M = maxj λ(Ej) be the maximum length of a component of E. We deﬁne the
E-attack strategy as follows:
1. With probability λ(Ec)/(µ + λ(E)), attack a uniformly random point of Ec at time M.
2. With probability 2ej/(µ + λ(E)), attack at leaf node xj at a start time chosen uniformly in
the interval [M −ej,M + ej].
Note that the Leaf Condition implies that P
j ej = λ(E), therefore the sum of the probabilities
from 1. and 2. above sum to 1. Also, unlike the uniform attack strategy, the E-attack strategy is
not synchronous. That is, the attack does not start at a ﬁxed, deterministic time.
Example 4. We revisit Figure 5, where the leaf arcs have lengths 2,1,6,6 and α = 6. We illustrate
the E-attack strategy on this star network in Figure 6. Here µ = 15; the extremity set E is shown
in thick red lines. E consists of four components that are subsets of leaf arcs and whose points
are within α/2 from the leaf node, thus the Leaf Condition is satisﬁed. Also, note that λ(E) = 9
and µ + λ(E) = 24. The E-attack strategy then attacks as follows: with equal probabilities 6/24 it
attacks at nodes D and F with a starting time chosen uniformly on [0,6]; with probabilities 4/24,
2/24 it attacks leaf nodes B, C with a starting time chosen uniformly on [1,5], [2,4] respectively;
with probability 6/24 it attacks uniformly on set Ec at time M = 3.
Figure 6
The E-attack strategy on an asymmetric star with arcs lengths 2,1,6,6 with α = 6. The set E is shown
in thick red lines.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
We next prove that for trees Q, the E-attack strategy is optimal if (Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf
Condition.
Lemma 8. Suppose Q is a tree and (Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf Condition. Then the E-attack strategy
is intercepted by any patrol with probability at most v∗= α/(µ + λ(E)).
The proof of Lemma 8 is in the Online Appendix. If we combine the results of Lemma 7 and
Lemma 8 on patrolling and attack strategies for trees, we obtain the following exact result for the
value of the game.
Theorem 7. Suppose Q is a tree and (Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf Condition. Then any E-patrolling
strategy is optimal, the E-attack strategy is optimal, and the value of the game is V = v∗.
Example 5. We revisit the network Q from Figure 6 with α = 6 and µ = 15. We ﬁrst consider
patrolling strategies. The Sα
2 patrolling strategy is ADDABBACCAFFA, where repeating a node
means it stays there for duration α; this tour has length 2µ + 4(6) = 54. From Corollary 2 we
have V ≥
α
µ+lα/2 = 6/27. An E-patrolling strategy is ADGDABACABACAFHFA with length
2µ + 2λ(E) = 48; from Lemma 7 we have V ≥v∗=
α
µ+λ(E) = 6/24. As we can see, an E-patrolling
strategy, which is deﬁned only for trees oﬀers an improvement over the Sα
2 patrolling strategy, which
is a more general strategy.
Now, we consider attacker strategies. Let I be the set of leaf nodes. The sets E and W ≡W(I)
are shown in Figure 7 with solid thick red and dashed thick green lines respectively. Note that
(Q,α) satisﬁes the Leaf Condition. The E-attack strategy is demonstrated in Figure 6 and it gives
a lower bound, v∗=
α
µ+λ(E) = 6/24, from Theorem 7, which is optimal. The bound given by Theo-
rem 1
α
λ(W c)+lα =
α
µ+lα/2 = 6/27 does not hold in this case because I is not an independent set or,
equivalently, leaf arcs do not have lengths exceeding α/2.
Figure 7
Star with arc lengths 6,6,2,1 and α = 6. The solid thick red line is the set E and the thick dashed green
line is the set W ≡W(I), where I is the set of leaf nodes; note that here I is not an independent set.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
26
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
A star is a network consisting entirely of leaf arcs. We call a star balanced if no arc comprises
more than half of its total length; otherwise we say that it is skewed. It is easy to check that
balanced stars satisfy the Leaf Condition. All symmetric stars (whose arcs are all the same length)
are balanced. An example of a skewed star is a star with n arcs of length 1 and one arc of length
x > n, as shown in Figure 8; the long arc has length x, which is more than half of µ = n + x.
It is also easy to see that if Q is a star (which may be balanced or skewed) whose longest arc
has length at most α/2, then ¯E = Q and hence Q satisﬁes the Leaf Condition. So Theorem 7 gives
the following.
Corollary 3. Suppose Q is a star. Then the E-attack strategy and any E-patrolling strategy are
optimal and the value of the game is V = v∗= α/(µ + λ(E)) if either
(i) Q is balanced or
(ii) α is at least twice the length of the longest arc of Q.
Note that if Q is the line segment network, then by adding an artiﬁcial node in the center, we
can apply Corollary 3, part (i), recovering the result for the value of this game, given previously
in Alpern et al. (2016) (though the optimal strategies given here are diﬀerent).
6.4. Stars Not Satisfying the Leaf Condition
In Lemma 7 we showed that the E-patrolling strategy intercepts any attack with probability at
least v∗= α/(µ + λ(E)) and that (Lemma 8) for trees satisfying the Leaf Condition, the E-attack
strategy avoids interception with probability at least v∗. Thus for trees we have V = v∗if the Leaf
Condition is satisﬁed, but what happens when it is not satisﬁed? In this subsection we present a
class of trees Q for which the Leaf Condition fails for some values of α but nevertheless V = v∗for
all values of α. We do this by specifying particular attack strategies which are optimal on these
trees.
We consider the class of skewed stars with n arcs of length 1 and one arc of length x > n, as
shown in Figure 8. We refer to these skewed stars as symmetric skewed stars. The degree 1 nodes

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
incident to the arcs of length 1 are denoted a1,...,an, the node of degree n + 1 is denoted a0 and
the degree 1 node at the end of the arc of length x is denoted b. It is easy to see that symmetric
skewed stars satisfy the Leaf Condition only for α ≤2n and α ≥2x. In what follows we introduce
attack strategies for these stars that guarantee v∗for the attacker for 2n ≤α ≤2x, and thus show
that Conjecture 1 holds for symmetric skewed stars for all values of α. Later, in Subsection 6.5 we
give an attack strategy on a non-star tree that also guarantees the value v∗for the attacker and
show that Conjecture 1 holds for this example.
u
a0
v
b
a1
an
Figure 8
A symmetric skewed star. The extremity set E consists of the n + 2 thick (red) lines. The black line is
the set Ec.
We deﬁne an attack strategy that we will show is optimal for symmetric skewed stars for 2n ≤
α ≤2x. We note that for the a symmetric skewed star with 2n ≤α ≤2x it is easy to check that
λ(E) = α if 2n ≤α ≤µ = x + n and λ(E) = µ (equivalently, λ(Ec) = 0) if α ≥µ. We denote the left
and right boundary points of Ec with E by u and v respectively; since 2n ≤α ≤2x, both of these
points are on the long arc or on its boundary.
We note that the Leaf Condition for this star holds for α = 2n but not for 2n < α ≤2x, thus the
E-attack strategy is not deﬁned for the latter set of values. Thus, we deﬁne a new attack strategy.
For α = 2n either strategy can be used.
Definition 10 (Symmetric-skewed attack). The symmetric-skewed attack strategy is deﬁned
as follows:

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
28
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Left attacks: With probability (2λ(E) −α)/(µ + λ(E)), attack equiprobably at nodes ai, for
i = 1,...,n, starting uniformly at times in [n −1,α + n −1] if 2n ≤α ≤x + n and at times in
[α −x −1,x + 2(n −1) + 1] if x + n ≤α ≤2x.
Middle attacks: With probability λ(Ec)/(µ + λ(E)), attack at a uniformly random point of Ec,
starting equiprobably at times α/2 + 2j for j = 0,1,...,n −1.
Right attacks: With probability α/(µ+λ(E)), attack node b, starting at a time in [0,α+2(n−1)]
chosen as follows: conditional on the attack taking place here, the starting time is given by the
following probability cumulative function. For z = 1,...,n −1,
f(y) =



















z(y−z+1)
nα
if 2(z −1) ≤y ≤2z,
n−1
α + y−2(n−1)
α
if 2(n −1) ≤y ≤α,
α−(n−1)
α
+ z(z−1)
nα
+ (y−α)(n−z)
nα
if α + 2(z −1) ≤y ≤α + 2z.
Note that when α ≥µ, we have λ(Ec) = 0 so there are no middle attacks.
Theorem 8. Suppose Q is a symmetric skewed star. For any α the E-patrolling is optimal and the
value of the game is V = v∗= α/(µ + λ(E)). If x > n and 2n ≤α ≤2x then the symmetric-skewed
attack strategy is optimal, otherwise the E-attack strategy is optimal.
The proof of Theorem 8 can be found in the Online Appendix. Theorem 8 provides a counterex-
ample to a conjecture in Alpern et al. (2016). The conjecture was that for trees, if α is at least
the diameter of the network, the value of the game is α/¯µ = α/(2µ). For a symmetric skewed star,
the diameter is x + 1, and by Theorem 8, for x + 1 ≤α < 2x, the value is α/(µ + λ(E)). This is
not equal to α/(2µ), since λ(E) < µ in that range of α, disproving the conjecture in Alpern et al.
(2016).
6.5. A non-star tree with ¯E = Q satisfying Conjecture 1.
We now consider the tree depicted in Figure 9 with unit length arcs and α = 6. This gives ¯E = Q
and thus λ(E) = µ. Here µ = 6 and thus v∗= α/2µ = 1/2.
We propose the following Attacker strategy for this speciﬁc tree with α = 6.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
Figure 9
A tree with µ = 6.
 At each leaf node 1 and 2 attack with probability 6/24 at a start time chosen uniformly in the
interval [0,6] (total attack probability 12/24).
 At leaf node 6 attack with attack start time uniformly: in the interval [0,2] with probability
2/24, in the interval [2,4] with probability 4/24, in the interval [4,6] with probability 2/24 (total
attack probability 8/24).
 At leaf node 7 attack takes place with probability 4/24 at a start time chosen uniformly in
the interval [1,5] (total attack probability 4/24).
It is easy to verify that the probability of interception guaranteed by this strategy is v∗= 1/2,
thus showing that the conjecture holds for this example; the proof is along the same lines as that
of Theorem 8.
7. Conclusions
This paper models the problem of patrolling a pipeline or road system against attacks which can
be made anywhere, not just at a discrete set of “targets”. We do this by analyzing the continuous
patrolling game on arbitrary metric networks Q,d, where d is the shortest path metric. The Attacker
picks a point of Q to attack (not necessarily a node) during a chosen time interval of given length
α. The Patroller chooses a unit speed path in the network and wins the game if the path crosses the
attacked point during the attack; otherwise the Attacker wins. Mixed strategies are required for
optimal play in this game, where the payoﬀto the maximizing Attacker is the probability that the
attack is intercepted. Prior work of Alpern et al. (2016) and Garrec (2019) has solved the game for
Eulerian networks, the line (or interval) network and a network consisting of two nodes connected
by three arcs of certain lengths.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
30
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
In this paper we show that for any network with total length µ and l ≥0 leaf arcs, the value V of
the game (probability that the attack is intercepted) is given by V = α/(µ + lα/2) when α is less
than the minimum circuit length and also less than twice the length of any leaf arc. So the game
is completely solved on any network for suﬃciently small positive α. If there are no leaf arcs, the
optimal patrol strategy reduces to a periodic cycle on the network which covers every arc exactly
twice. (We give a new proof that such a cycle always exists.) Such a path is an eﬃcient way of
patrolling a network.
Of course many networks, for example museum corridors, have cul-de-sacs, which make them
hard to patrol. Our general result, stated above, solves this problem for short attack durations α,
but we also have results for larger durations. For networks which have a tree structure, we identify
a useful technical property which implies that the value of the game is given by V = v∗, where
v∗= α/(µ + Λ) and Λ is the total length of certain points near the leaf nodes of the network. We
conjecture that in fact V = v∗for all trees. We show that our technical property (and hence V = v∗)
holds for stars where no leaf arc has more than half the total length µ of the star. Finally, we show
that for stars with a single arbitrarily long arc and the rest equal length short arcs, our conjecture
V = v∗holds. Star networks are important and often occur at airports where there is a central
hub. The related problem of the “uniformed patroller” studied by Alpern and Katsikas (2019) and
Alpern et al. (2021), where the presence of the Patroller at the node chosen for eventual attack can
be detected by the Attacker, is studied in a spatial context that can be viewed as a star network.
The knowledge of our results would be useful in designing networks which are easier to patrol,
as well as showing how to optimally patrol them. Even when the network is given, one might add
additional links between some leaf nodes for the Patroller to use. A useful extension to this problem
would be to make certain points of Q more valuable than others, so that successful attacks at such
points are more costly to the Patroller and so would need to be patrolled more intensively.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CMMI-
1935826.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
References
Alpern S, Morton A, Papadaki, K (2011) Patrolling games. Oper. Res. 59(5):1246–1257.
Alpern S, Lidbetter T, Morton A, Papadaki K (2016) Patrolling a Pipeline. In International Conference on
Decision and Game Theory for Security 2016, 129–138, Springer International Publishing.
Alpern S, Lidbetter T, Papadaki K (2018) Optimizing Periodic Patrols against Short Attacks on the Line
and Other Networks. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 273(3):1065–1073.
Alpern S, Katsikas S (2019) The Uniformed Patroller Game. arXiv:1908.01859.
Alpern S, Chleboun P, Katsikas S, Lin KY (2021) Adversarial Patrolling in a Uniform. Oper. Res. (in press).
An B, Ord´o˜nez F, Tambe M, Shieh E, Yang R, Baldwin C, DiRenzo J III, Moretti K, Maule B, Meyer G
(2013) A deployed quantal response-based patrol planning system for the U.S. Coast Guard. Interfaces
43(5):400–420.
Basilico N, Gatti N, Amigoni F (2012) Patrolling security games: Deﬁnition and algorithms for solving large
instances with single patroller and single intruder. Artif. Intell. 184:78–123.
Basilico N, De Nittis G, Gatti N (2017) Adversarial patrolling with spatially uncertain alarm signals. Artif.
Intell. 246:220–257.
Baston VJ, Bostock FA (1991) A generalized inspection game. Nav. Res. Log. 38:171–182.
Czyzowicz J, Gasieniec L, Kosowski A, Kranakis E, Krizanc D, Taleb N (2017) When Patrolmen
Become Corrupted: Monitoring a Graph Using Faulty Mobile Robots. Algorithmica 79:925–940.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00453-016-0233-9
Edmonds J, Johnson EL (1973) Matching, Euler tours and the Chinese postman. Math. Program. 5(1):88–
124.
Eggleton RB, Skilton DK (1984) Double tracings of graphs. Ars Combin. A 17:307–323.
Fang F, Nguyen TH, Pickles R, Lam WY, Clements GR, An B, Singh A, Tambe M, Lemieux A (2016)
Deploying PAWS: Field optimization of the protection assistant for wildlife security. In Twenty-Eighth
IAAI Conference.
Garrec T (2019) Continuous patrolling and hiding games. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 277(1):42–51.

Alpern, Lidbetter and Papadaki: Continuous Patrolling Games
32
Article submitted to Operations Research; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Glicksberg IL (1952) A further generalization of the Kakutani ﬁxed point theorem, with application to Nash
equilibrium points. P. Am. Math. Soc. 3(1):170–174.
Hochbaum DS, Lyu C, Ord´o˜nez F (2014) Security routing games with multivehicle Chinese postman problem.
Networks 64(3):181–191.
Klavzar S, Rus J (2013) Stable traces as a model for self-assembly of polypeptide nanoscale polyhedrons.
MATCH Commun. Math. Comput. Chem 70:317–330.
Lin KY, Atkinson MP, Chung TH, Glazebrook KD (2013) A graph patrol problem with random attack
times. Oper. Res. 61(3):94–710.
Lin KY, Atkinson MP, Glazebrook KD (2014) Optimal patrol to uncover threats in time when detection is
imperfect. Nav. Res. Log. 61(8):557–576.
Lin KY (2021) Optimal patrol on a perimeter. Oper. Res. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2117.
Papadaki K, Alpern S, Lidbetter T, Morton A (2016) Patrolling a border. Oper. Res. 64(6):1256–1269.
Pita J, Jain M, Marecki J. Ord´o˜nez F, Portway C, Tambe M, Western C, Paruchuri P, Kraus S (2008)
Deployed ARMOR protection: The application of a game theoretic model for security at the Los
Angeles international airport. Proc. 7th Internat. Joint Conf. on Autonomous agents multiagent systems
(International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Southland, SC), 125–132.
Sabidussi G (1977) Tracing graphs without backtracking. Universit´e Catholique de Louvain. Centre for
Operations Research and Econometrics [CORE].
Xu L, Gholami S, McCarthy S, Dilkina B, Plumptre A, Tambe M, Singh R, Nsubuga M, Mabonga J,
Driciru M, Wanyama F, Rwetsiba A, Okello T, Enyel E (2019) Stay ahead of poachers: illegal wildlife
poaching prediction and patrol planning under uncertainty with ﬁeld test evaluations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.06669.
Yolmeh A, Baykal-G¨ursoy M (2019) Patrolling Games on General Graphs with Time-Dependent Node Values.
Mil. Oper. Res. 24(2):17–30.
Zoroa N, Fern´andez-S´aez M, Zoroa P (2012) Patrolling a perimeter. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 222(3):571–582.