TITLE: Technical Note—Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
JOURNAL: Operations_Research
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2020.0687
---

Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of
Reusable Resources
Yiding Feng
Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics, Hong Kong University of Science & Technology (HKUST), ydfeng@ust.hk
Rad Niazadeh
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL, rad.niazadeh@chicagobooth.edu
Amin Saberi
Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, saberi@stanford.edu
Motivated by the applications of rental services in e-commerce, we consider revenue maximization in
online assortment of reusable resources for a stream of arriving consumers with different types. We design
competitive online algorithms with respect to the optimum online policy in the Bayesian setting, in which
types are drawn independently from known heterogeneous distributions over time. In the regime where the
minimum of initial inventories cmin is large, our main result is a near-optimal 1 −min

1
2,
p
log(cmin)/cmin

competitive algorithm for the general case of reusable resources. Our algorithm relies on an expected LP
benchmark for the problem, solves this LP, and simulates the solution through an independent randomized
rounding. The main challenge is obtaining point-wise inventory feasibility in a computationally efficient
fashion from these simulation-based algorithms. To this end, we use several technical ingredients to design
discarding policies – one for each resource. These policies handle the trade-off between the inventory feasibility
under reusability and the revenue loss of each of the resources. However, discarding a unit of a resource
changes the future consumption of other resources. To handle this new challenge, we also introduce post-
processing assortment procedures that help with designing and analyzing our discarding policies as they
run in parallel, which might be of independent interest. As a side result, by leveraging techniques from the
literature on prophet inequality, we further show an improved near-optimal 1 −1/√cmin + 3 competitive
algorithm for the special case of non-reusable resources. We finally evaluate the performance of our algorithms
using the numerical simulations on the synthetic data.
1. Introduction
Assortment planning refers to the decision of a revenue-maximizing firm as to which subset of
products to display to its consumers. In classic retail applications, the focus is mostly on sale;
however, with the advent of online e-commerce platforms, several applications have emerged where
the focus is on renting out reusable resources. A reusable resource – also referred to as a rental
product – leaves the stock for some time duration after being assigned to a consumer, and can be
reassigned to a new consumer once it is back. Examples are virtual machines in cloud computing
platforms such as AWS, houses in vacation rental online marketplaces such as Airbnb, and local
1
arXiv:2512.06997v1 [cs.DS] 7 Dec 2025

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
2
professional services in online labor platforms such as Thumbtack. In order to extract more revenue,
a (personalized) assortment policy can decide to display a different subset of these resources once a
new consumer interacts with the platform; the task of such a policy is to manage the sequence of
assortments in long-run given the inventory restrictions.
Motivated by the above applications, we study the online assortment of reusable resources, in which
a platform sequentially makes irrevocable assortment decisions for a stream of arriving consumers.
Each consumer has a type that determines her choice probabilities given each possible assortment –
referred to as the consumer’s choice model. The platform collects a one-time personalized payment
each time a consumer rents a product. Different products have different rental fees that are deter-
mined by the consumer’s type. To model the uncertainty about the duration of a rental, we consider
a stochastic model where the rental durations are drawn independently each time a product is rented.
The type of the arriving consumer also determines her rental duration distributions for different
products. To model the platform’s prior information about its future consumers – which is usually
formed based on the past consumers’ data in an online platform – we take a Bayesian approach. We
assume the types are drawn independently over time from known heterogeneous distributions.
Once a new consumer arrives, the platform observes her realized type from the known type distri-
bution, displays a new subset of products, and allows the consumer to select a product stochastically
from this subset based on her choice model. The goal is to design an online assortment algorithm
in order to maximize the expected total collected rental fees (also known as the revenue) during
the decision making horizon. Importantly, we consider the setting where each product has an initial
inventory and the algorithm should always assort an available subset of products. Availabilities are
determined by the current inventory levels of the products – quantities that decrease as a unit of the
product is rented and increase as it is returned to the stock.
Given the sequence of distributions for the entire decision making horizon, a revenue benchmark
in our problem is an upper-bound on the expected revenue of any feasible online algorithm as the
platform, where the expectation is over the randomness in the algorithm, the type sequence, and
the consumers’ choices. We measure the performance of our online algorithms using the notion of
competitive ratio, i.e., the worst-case ratio between the expected revenue of the online algorithm and
the targeted revenue benchmark.
As is common in the literature and practice of assortment optimization, we assume general con-
sumer choice models that are weak substitute, i.e., assorting a new product only weakly decreases
the choice probability of another assorted product (see Assumption 1). With no further assumptions,
even the one-shot assortment optimization can be computationally hard. To resolve this issue, we
assume having oracle access to a blackbox algorithm that can solve the one-shot assortment opti-
mization (see Assumption 3). Again, this is a common assumption in the literature to get around

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
3
the computational issue associated with the one-shot problem when general consumer choice models
are considered (Golrezaei et al. 2014, Rusmevichientong et al. 2020). In the oracle-access computa-
tional model, we aim to design polynomial-time competitive online algorithms with respect to an
appropriate revenue benchmark for our problem.
In this setting, the question of finding the optimum online policy that maximizes the expected total
revenue is purely computational, and an exponential-size dynamic programming (DP) can formulate
the optimum online. While no formal computational hardness is known for computing the optimum
online in our problem, it is conjectured to be computationally hard, even in the oracle-access model.1
Therefore, it is natural to consider the expected revenue of the optimum online policy as a revenue
benchmark, and study whether it is amenable to polynomial-time competitive online algorithms.
More specifically, we ask the following question in this paper:
How close a polynomial time online algorithm can be to the optimum online policy in terms
of expected revenue? In particular, can we obtain constant or near-optimal competitive online
algorithms with respect to the optimum online policy (when initial inventories are large)?
A significant progress towards providing a compelling answer to the above question is the result of
Rusmevichientong et al. (2020), which establishes an approximate dynamic programming approach
for the exponential-size optimum online DP. They show that a greedy algorithm that uses a linear
approximation of the optimal revenue-to-go function obtains at least 1
2 of the expected revenue of the
optimum online. They further study the setting when rental durations are infinite (i.e., the resources
are not reusable) and rental fees are type-independent. In this setting, they show how to perform a
rollout on a simple static policy to obtain 1 −min

1
2,
1
3√cmin

fraction of the expected revenue of the
optimum online policy, where cmin is the minimum initial inventory across different products.2 This
last result is essentially a near-optimal competitive algorithm when the initial inventories are large
and the resources are non-reusable. Note that the large initial inventory regime is relevant in many
applications of assortment optimization and it is the main focus of our paper as well.
1.1. Our Contributions
The main contribution of our paper is the following result.
(Main Result) For the general case of Bayesian online assortment of reusable resources, we
propose a polynomial-time online algorithm that obtains a near-optimal competitive ratio of
1 −min
  1
2,ε∗(cmin)

, where ε∗(x) = O
p
log(x)/x

.
1 For example, see Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis (1987) for PSPACE-hardness of finding the optimum policy in partially
observable Markov decision processes, and related discussions in Rusmevichientong et al. (2020), Anari et al. (2019).
2 If rental fees are type-dependent, Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) show the same policy obtains 1 −min

1
2,
R
3√cmin

competitive ratio guarantee, where R is the ratio between maximum and minimum rentals fees across different types.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
4
The above competitive ratio guarantee holds even when the rental fees, consumer choices, and rental
duration distributions are type-dependent and vary arbitrarily across different types.
To obtain the above result, our work diverges from Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) by considering
a different revenue benchmark. In particular, we consider a linear programming relaxation of the
optimum online policy, refereed to as the Bayesian expected LP. To define this benchmark, suppose
a feasible online policy knows the exact realizations of future types, but does not know the realiza-
tions of consumer choices and rental durations. The optimum such policy, known as the clairvoyant
optimum online, clearly provides a revenue benchmark. Now consider a relaxation of this policy by
only requiring the inventory feasibility constraints of reusable resources to hold in expectation over
the randomness in types, consumer choices, and rental durations. Given the sequence of type distri-
butions, this relaxation is encoded by an LP with exponential number of variables and polynomial
number of time-varying packing constraints to ensure the inventory feasibility of reusable resources
in-expectation. See Section 2.2 for details.
It turns out that we can simply solve the Bayesian expected LP in polynomial-time by solving
its dual program using the ellipsoid method – given access to the offline assortment oracle. Given
the LP solution, a simple but powerful technique in the Bayesian online optimization is to use a
simulation-based rounding algorithm to mimic the optimal solution of this LP (for examples of this
approach, refer to Alaei et al. 2012, Devanur et al. 2012, Ma et al. 2018, Gallego et al. 2016, Wang
et al. 2018, Dickerson et al. 2018, Baek and Ma 2019). After observing the type of the arriving
consumer, this algorithm independently samples an assortment from a distribution over subsets of
products that comes from the LP solution, ignoring the inventory constraints. This algorithm has
no loss in terms of the expected revenue compared to the LP solution; however, it only respects the
inventory constraints of each product in expectation – and not necessarily under every sample path
of the existing randomness.
Our main technical contribution is providing techniques to transform the simulation-based algo-
rithm into a point-wise feasible online algorithm in polynomial-time, with constant or negligible
multiplicative loss in the expected revenue. To this end, we run a separate procedure over time –
one for each product – together with the simulation-based policy. After an assortment is sampled
at each time, each procedure decides whether or not to discard the corresponding product if it is in
the sampled subset to maintain the inventory feasibility of this product. This specific architecture
of sampling according to the LP solution and then using product-specific discarding rules have been
explored in the past, e.g., see Alaei et al. (2012), Gallego et al. (2016), Wang et al. (2018), Dickerson
et al. (2018), Baek and Ma (2019).3 Similarly, we aim to design polynomial-time online discarding
3 See specifically the “Primal Routing Algorithm” in Section 7 of Gallego et al. (2016) and the “Separation Algorithm”
in Section 4.2 of Wang et al. (2018).

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
5
policies (and other necessary algorithmic constructs) that handle the trade-off between maintaining
the inventory feasibility and the discarding revenue loss for each product. The main new challenges
specific to our problem is that (i) products are reusable, (ii) products are weak-substitute — and
hence discarding a product increases the choice probability of other products, and (iii) discarding
can be potentially randomized — which combined with reusability creates complicated correlation
structures among selection indicator random variables across time and makes it challenging to argue
about point-wise feasibility of policies. In what follows, we sketch our main technical contributions
and how they overcome these challenges.
(I) General rental duration distributions/ near-optimal discarding (Section 3.2): The main idea
behind our near-optimal discarding procedure is discarding each available sampled product indepen-
dently at random with a small probability. This is a simple yet reasonable approach (cf. Hajiaghayi
et al. 2007) as the simulation-based algorithm respects the inventory constraints of each product
in expectation. By independent randomized discarding with probability γ > 0, we leave some slack
in the inventory feasibility constraint by ensuring that the expected value of the number of units
of the product under rental is at most (1 −γ) times its initial inventory amount at any time. If
this quantity as a sum of independent rental indicator random variables concentrates around its
expectation, we will then avoid violation of the inventory constraint with high probability when
γ = O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

. Moreover, it only loses γ fraction of the expected revenue form this prod-
uct, as desired.
However, the above simple approach does not work as described, because (i) the resources are
reusable and the inventories are limited, hence the rental indicator random variable of a product at
some time τ < t can be correlated with the rental indicator random variable of the same product
at time t if the rental duration of time τ is at least t −τ and the last unit of the product is rented
at τ; (ii) once a discarding procedure drops a product from the sampled assortment, there will
be less cannibalization of other products – as the consumer choices are weak substitute. This in
turn increases the probability of other products being chosen by the arriving consumer, and hence
increases the expected number of units of different products under rental in future for the resulting
algorithm – compared to what is expected from the simulation-based algorithm.
We fix the above issues by proposing a post-processing step after the independent randomized
discarding, which we refer to as sub-assortment sampling. In a nutshell, the goal of the sub-assortment
sampling is to find a distribution over available subsets, so that the products which are not discarded
will be rented with exactly the same probability as in the optimal solution of the Bayesian expected
LP. It is not even clear a priori whether such a distribution exists; nevertheless, we show it does and
provide a polynomial-time construction to sample from this distribution. Using the properties of the
sub-assortment sampling, we propose a coupling trick to show our desired concentration despite the

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
6
fact that the rental indicator random variables are correlated across time. Note that the task of sub-
assortment sampling is quite general, and it might be of independent interests in other applications.4
(II) General rental duration distributions/ 1
2-competitive discarding (Section 3.3): As an alterna-
tive discarding policy for the general case of reusable resources, consider an exponential-size DP that
keeps track of the state of each unit of the product (i.e., when each unit returns to the inventory)
and solves the discarding task optimally. We introduce an approximate version of this DP, which we
also refer to as optimistic DP, that can be solved in polynomial-time. The goal is to maximize the
per-unit revenue-to-go of the product when the inventory is automatically replenished by an exoge-
nous process every time we make a discarding decision, so that the entire inventory of the product
is always available on-hand. This new DP is inventory independent and thus is polynomial-size. We
then consider a discarding algorithm that makes the same decisions as the optimistic DP. The result
is a non-adaptive thresholding discarding rule, that is, an available product is only discarded if its
rental fee is below a certain threshold. These thresholds are computed upfront and only depend on
the product, time, and the realized type.
The main intuition behind why the above discarding algorithm is a reasonable approximation is
as follows. We can show the expected revenue-to-go of this algorithm is a concave function of the
inventory level – i.e., the higher the inventory level, the lower the per-unit expected revenue-to-go.
As a result, when there is no replenishment in reality, it obtains at least the same expected per-
unit revenue-to-go as the DP with replenishment. We then analyze the worst-case ratio between the
value of this inventory independent DP and the per-unit revenue of the expected LP using a “factor
revealing linear program” and its dual. This approach establishes a lower-bound of 1
2 for this ratio.
It is worth noting that similar proof techniques based on dual-fitting have been used in the literature
for other problems with non-reusable resources (e.g., see Zhang and Adelman 2009, Adelman 2007,
Alaei et al. 2012, Gallego et al. 2016, Wang et al. 2018). Our work extends the existing analysis to
prove performance guarantees for LP-based discarding policies when resources are reusable.
We highlight that our DP for designing the above approximate discarding policy given the expected
LP solution shares similar but not completely identical recursive structures with the approximate
dynamic programming approach in Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) for directly approximating the
optimum online policy; in fact, in contrast to their approach, the Bellman update equation of our DP
uses the the solution of the expected LP (the optimal assortment sampling probabilities). Therefore,
while both DPs provide the same approximation factor of
1
2, ours is with respect to the stronger
benchmark of expected LP, versus theirs that is with respect to the optimum online policy. This subtle
4 We would like to highlight that after appearance of an online version of our paper, through a personal communica-
tion with authors of Goyal et al. (2020a), we were informed that this paper (which was not available online at the
time) independently and concurrently discovered a procedure similar to our sub-assortment sampling for settings with
adversarial arrival and reusable resources.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
7
difference turns out to be the key in combining the performance guarantees of our two algorithms
in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3, in order to obtain a simple hybrid algorithm that achieves the
theoretical “best of both worlds” competitive ratio guarantee with respect to the stronger expected
LP benchmark (and as we observe later, improved performance in numerical simulations).
(III) Hybrid simulation-based algorithm (Section 3.4): Having access to the above simulation-
based algorithms with different discarding rules, we aim to define a hybrid algorithm that enjoys
the competitive ratios of both small and large inventory regimes. To this end, we make an upfront
decision on which discarding policy to use for each product. In particular, we use the value function of
the optimistic DP for each product separately to calculate the ratio Ri between the expected revenue-
to-go of following the optimistic DP for this product and the contribution of this product to the
expected-LP’s objective. We then compare this ratio with 1−ε∗(ci) (see (1) for definition of function
ε∗(·)) to partition the products into large inventory (i.e., when Ri + ε∗(ci) < 1) and small inventory
(i.e., when Ri + ε∗(ci) > 1). For each large inventory product, we run the randomized discarding
policy in Section 3.2, and for each small inventory product we run the optimistic DP discarding policy
in Section 3.3. We also use the sub-assortment sampling procedure for post-processing to correct
the resulting increase in choice probabilities of non-discarded products due to weak-substitution. By
using the facts that (i) the competitive ratio analyses of both algorithms decouple across products,
(ii) both analyses compare the expected revenue obtained from each product with the contribution
of that product to the expected-LP’s objective, and that (iii) sub-assortment sampling corrects the
choice probabilities of non-discarded products, we show the resulting hybrid policy combines the two
competitive ratios.5 While this hybrid algorithm attains the best of both worlds competitive ratio of
1 −min
  1
2,ε∗(cmin)

, it is also likely to outperform both policies in practical scenarios; the results of
our numerical simulations in Section EC.8 empirically support this claim. We also present a second
hybrid algorithm using the method of conditional expectations. See Section 3.4 for more details.
We also complement our results by considering the special case of non-reusable resources. By lever-
aging techniques from the literature on prophet inequality and extending them to the Bayesian assort-
ment optimization problem, we provide a near-optimal improved competitive ratio of

1 −
1
√cmin+3

with respect to the expected LP in this setting. See Section EC.3 and Section EC.7 for more details.
(iii) Numerical simulations (Section EC.8): We finally provide numerical justification for the
revenue performance of our proposed policies. Adapting the setups of the numerical experiments
in Golrezaei et al. (2014), Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) to our setting, we compare the revenue
of our proposed policies — i.e., the hybrid algorithm and the simulation with optimal discarding
under infinite rental durations — with other policies in the literature. In our numerical simulations,
5 It is worth noting that the
1
2-competitive approximate DP algorithm of Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) cannot be
combined using this approach with our near-optimal discarding policy, as this approximate DP algorithm competes
with the optimum online policy and not the expected-LP.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
8
we consider various scenarios with both general rental duration distributions and infinite rental
durations. In all of these scenarios, our policies noticeably outperform the other policies in terms of
the expected revenue.
2. Preliminaries
We first formalize our problem, the model, and all the required assumptions in Section 2.1. We then
briefly explain various aspects of our expected LP benchmark in Section 2.2.
2.1. Model and Problem Definition
The platform offers n different rental products, indexed by [n] = {1,2,...,n}. Each rental product
i has an initial inventory of ci ∈Z+. Consumers who are interested to rent these products arrive
sequentially at times t = 1,2,...,T. Consumer t has type zt ∈Zt, where Zt denotes the (discrete)
space of possible types at time t. We assume types are drawn independently from known probability
distributions Ft : Zt →[0,1] at times t = 1,...,T.
Upon the arrival of consumer t, her type zt is revealed to the platform. Given this type and the
history up to time t, the platform offers an assortment of available products St ∈S from its inventory,
where S ⊆2[n] is the collection of all feasible assortments that can be offered ignoring the inventory
availability. Given the assortment St, the consumer chooses a rental product it ∈St, pays a rental
fee to the platform, and keeps the product for a stochastic rental duration dt ∈Z+.
We consider the setting where the consumer choice behavior, rental fees of different products, and
rental duration distributions of different products depend on the type zt at each time t. Formally, a
consumer type z is defined as a tuple ⟨ϕz,rz,Gz⟩, so that:
• The choice of a consumer with type z is modeled by a general choice model function ϕz :
S × [n] →[0,1], where ϕz(S,i) is the probability that consumer with type z chooses product i
to rent when assortment set S ∈S is offered.
• For a consumer with type z, rz = (rz
1,rz
2,...,rz
n) ∈Rn, where rz
i denotes the rental fee of product
i. Moreover, Gz = (Gz
1,Gz
2,...,Gz
n), where Gz
i denotes the c.d.f. of rental duration of product i
for type z. We use gz
i : [T] →[0,1] to denote the p.d.f. of rental duration of product i for type z.
Moreover, let ¯Gz
i (·) ≜1 −Gz
i (·).
Note that we assume rental durations are independent across time, that is, if at time t a consumer of
type z chooses a product i, a fresh sample dt ∼Gz
i is realized as the rental duration of this product.
We further impose the following assumptions on our choice models and feasible assortments, which
are common in previous literature (cf. Golrezaei et al. 2014, Rusmevichientong et al. 2014)
Assumption 1 (Weak substitutability). For all t ∈[T],z ∈Zt and i ∈[n], ϕz(∅,i) = 0. Moreover,
for all S ∈S and j ∈[n]/{i}, ϕz(S,i) ≥ϕz(S ∪{j},i).

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
9
Assumption 2 (Downward-closed feasibility). If S ∈S and S′ ⊆S then S′ ∈S, i.e., a feasible
assortment will remain feasible after removing any subset of its offered products.
Remark 1. In online hospitality services such as Airbnb, users report the duration of their stay
to the platform before platform shows them a listing. In such a variation, the platform makes the
assortment decision by using the exact realizations of current rental times for the arriving type.
Indeed, this is a special case of our model where the rental time distributions are point mass.
Given type distributions {Ft}T
t=1, the goal is to design online algorithms – playing the role of the
platform – that maximize the expected revenue granted from rental fees; here, the expectation is over
randomness of the algorithm (if randomized) and the environment, i.e., types, consumer choices, and
rental durations. A revenue benchmark for this problem is defined to be any upper-bound on the
expected revenue obtained by any feasible online algorithm (which might or might not be achievable
by a feasible online algorithm). Fixing a revenue benchmark, we evaluate the performance of any
online algorithm by its competitive ratio against this benchmark. Informally speaking, competitive
ratio is the worst-case ratio between the expected total revenue of the online algorithm and the
benchmark, where the worst-case is over all possible type distributions.
Definition 1 (Competitive Ratio). An online algorithm A is α-competitive against a given rev-
enue benchmark if
inf
T ≥1
inf
{Ft}T
t=1
RevA[{Ft}T
t=1]
OPT[{Ft}T
t=1] ≥α ,
where RevA[·] is the expected revenue of algorithm A and OPT[·] is the given revenue benchmark.
For a general consumer choice model, the exact or even approximate offline assortment optimiza-
tion can be computationally hard (K¨ok et al. 2008). In order to avoid this obstacle when designing
polynomial time online algorithms for general consumer choice models, we assume having access
to an algorithm that solves the offline assortment problem. For simplicity, we assume the solver is
exact throughout the paper, but all of our results still hold with a multiplicative degrade of β in the
competitive ratios if the solver is a β-approximation algorithm for some 0 < β < 1.
Assumption 3 (Offline oracle). For all t ∈[T],z ∈Zt, and ˆR ∈Rn
+, we have oracle access to an
algorithm that finds a subset ˆS ∈S such that:
ˆS ∈arg max
S∈S
Xn
i=1
ˆRiϕz(S,i)

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
10
2.2. Bayesian Expected LP Benchmark
A key ingredient in all of our algorithms is the Bayesian expected LP benchmark – a concept com-
monly used in previous literature on online allocations, mechanism design, and assortment opti-
mization to remedy issues of the above benchmarks (e.g., see Chawla et al. 2010, Alaei 2014, Ma
et al. 2018, Gallego et al. 2016, Wang et al. 2018, Anari et al. 2019). This benchmark, denoted by
Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], uses linear programming to capture the optimum algorithm that only requires
to satisfy the inventory constraints in expectation, where expectation is taken over randomness in
rental durations and consumer types given type distributions {Ft}T
t=1:
max
y≥0
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S
Xn
i=1 Ft(zt)rzt
i ϕzt(S,i)yS,t,zt
s.t.
Xt
τ=1
X
zτ ∈Zτ
X
S∈S Fτ(zτ) ¯Gzτ
i (t −τ)ϕzτ (S,i)yS,τ,zτ ≤ci
i ∈[n], t ∈[T]
X
S∈S yS,t,zt ≤1
t ∈[T], zt ∈Zt
(Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1])
Here, variables {yS,t,zt}t∈[T ],S∈S,zt∈Zt correspond to probabilities that assortment S is offered to con-
sumer t given type zt is realized, and first constraint shows inventory feasibility in expectation.
A few explanations are in order. First, the optimal objective value of this LP is an upper-
bound on the expected revenue of the clairvoyant optimum online benchmark, and hence the
weaker non-clairvoyant optimum online (Proposition 1; see Section EC.4 for the proof). Second,
Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] can be solved efficiently using an oracle for the offline assortment (Proposi-
tion 2; see Section EC.4 for the proof). We use this computational block as a pre-processing step in
all of our algorithms.6
Proposition 1. For any type distributions {Ft}T
t=1, the expected total revenue of the clairvoyant
optimum online benchmark is upper-bounded by Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1].
Proposition 2. Given an algorithm for offline assortment (Assumption 3), an optimal assignment
{y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] can be computed efficiently in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|). Moreover,
{y∗
S,t,zt} has no more than Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) non-zero entries.
In Section EC.2, we compare the Bayesian expected LP benchmark with other benchmarks con-
sidered in the literature.
6 In fact, one needs to run the ellipsoid method for the dual of this LP using the offline assortment solver as the
separation oracle in order to find the optimal solution. In practice, to obtain a faster algorithm, one can use cutting
plane methods such as Vaidya (1996) or even faster almost-linear-time cutting plane methods such as Lee et al. (2015)
that use the separation oracle more efficiently.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
11
3. Near-optimal Algorithm for General Rental Durations
In this section, we present our main result – a near-optimal online simulation-based algorithm with
competitive ratio at least max
  1
2,1 −ε∗(cmin)

against Bayesian expected LP benchmark, where
ε∗(x) ≜min
γ∈[0,1] 1 −(1 −γ)

1 −exp

−γ2x
2 −γ

(1)
Let γ∗(cmin) be the optimal assignment of γ in Equation (1). It is not hard to verify that ε∗(cmin) =
O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

and is achieved at γ∗(cmin) = O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

. We first sketch our approach
in Section 3.1. We then introduce a simulation-based algorithm with competitive ratio 1−ε∗(cmin) in
Section 3.2, and a different simulation-based algorithm to guarantee a competitive ratio of at least 1
2
(even for small cmin) in Section 3.3. We finally present two simple hybrid algorithms that can obtain
the best of two competitive ratios in Section 3.4.
3.1. High-level Sketch of Our Approach
Let {y∗
S,t,zt} be the optimal assignment of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]. As ∅∈S, without loss of generality
we can only consider optimal assignments where:
X
S∈S y∗
S,t,zt = 1
∀t ∈[T], zt ∈Zt
All of our simulation-based online algorithms in this paper follow four steps:
- At time t = 0 (before starting):
(i) Pre-processing: Compute an optimal assignment {y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] by
invoking the offline oracle described in Assumption 3. Also, compute any other offline
parameters that are occasionally needed by the algorithm.
- At each time t = 1,2,...,T:
(ii) Simulation: Upon realizing consumer type zt at time t, an outer procedure suggests ˆS ∈S
to be assorted by sampling ˆS from the distribution {y∗
S,t,zt}S∈S over S.
(iii) Discarding: For each product i ∈ˆS, a separate inner discarding procedure decides whether
to remove this product from the final assortment, given the history up to time t and
realized type zt. If no units of product i is available on-hand, it is discarded automatically
to guarantee inventory feasibility. Otherwise, the inner procedure of product i decides to
discard or not. Let ¯S ⊆ˆS be the set of undiscarded products.
(iv) Post-processing: Given zt, ˆS and ¯S, pick a probability distribution Fzt, ˆS, ¯S over all subsets
of ¯S. Then sample an assortment ˜S ∼Fzt, ˆS, ¯S and offer it to the consumer.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
12
In the above four-step layout, step (ii) is a loss-less randomized rounding for the optimal solution
of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]; however the resulting assortment only guarantees inventory feasibility of
each product in expectation. The role of step (iii) and step (iv) is to identify a (randomized) subset
of this feasible in-expectation assortment, to not only guarantee inventory feasibility in each sample
path, but to also guarantee that the expected loss due to discarded products is small.
3.2.
Large Initial Inventory: Towards Competitive Ratio 1 −ε∗(cmin)
The main idea behind the algorithm of this subsection is discarding each product independently at
random with probability γ = O(
p
log(cmin)/cmin) in step (iii) at each time t. Intuitively speaking,
this discarding tries to leave enough probability for not violating any of the inventory constraints at
each time t. To see this, if discarding a product does not change the choice probability of another
assorted product, the expected number of unavailable units of each product i at each time t is at
most (1 −γ)ci – due to the feasibility in-expectation of sampled sets in step (ii). Now consider the
rental indicator random variables of product i, i.e., random variables indicating whether this product
is rented at each time or not. If these random variables are mutually independent across time, then
we can use simple concentration bounds for the sum of independent random variables to prove our
claim.
There are two major issues with the above approach:
(I) Under weak substitutability (Assumption 1), discarding product i weakly increases the choice
probability of another assorted product j ̸= i. Therefore, the probability of an available unit of
product j being rented at each time τ < t becomes larger than expected, which in turn increases
the expected number of unavailable units of this product at time t if we only simulate the
expected LP’s optimal solution and discard each product independently with probability γ.
(II) As resources are reusable and inventories are limited, the rental indicator random variable of
product i at time τ < t is possibly positively correlated with the rental indicator random variable
of the same product at time t; in fact, first indicator forces the second indicator to be zero when
the realized rental duration dτ at time t is no smaller than t −τ, last unit of the product is
rented at time τ, and no units of the product return during [τ + 1,t].
We address the first issue in Section 3.2.1 by changing the algorithm, and address the second issue
in Section 3.2.2 by modifying the analysis.
3.2.1. Sub-assortment Sampling
To fix the first issue, we propose the sub-assortment sam-
pling procedure – a post-processing procedure to be used in step (iv). This procedure ensures that
products which were not discarded in step (ii) are rented by the arriving consumer with exactly
the same probability as in the optimal solution of the expected LP benchmark. More formally, the
sub-assortment sampling induces a distribution Fzt, ˆS, ¯S over subsets of ¯S at each time t, so that
∀i ∈¯S :
E ˜S∼Fzt, ˆ
S, ¯
S
h
ϕzt( ˜S,i)
i
= ϕzt( ˆS,i) .
(2)

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
13
It is not clear a priori whether such a distribution Fzt, ˆS, ¯S exists, yet alone can be sampled from in
polynomial time (polynomial in number of products n); nevertheless, for any general choice model
satisfying weak substitutability (Assumption 1) and downward-closed feasibility (Assumption 2), we
show such a distribution Fzt, ˆS, ¯S exists and we introduce Procedure 1 that recursively samples a set
from Fzt, ˆS, ¯S in polynomial time.7
Procedure 1: Sub-assortment Sampling
Input: choice model ϕ, assortment S = {1,2,...,m}, target probabilities {pi}i∈S
1 Let σ : [m] →[m] be a permutation such that 1 ≥
pσ(1)
ϕ(S,σ(1)) ≥
pσ(2)
ϕ(S,σ(2)) ≥··· ≥
pσ(m)
ϕ(S,σ(m)) ≥0
/* Define
pσ(j)
ϕ(S,σ(j)) = 1 if ϕ(S,σ(j)) = 0 or S = ∅. */
2 if
pσ(m)
ϕ(S,σ(m)) = 1 then
3
return ˜S ←S
4 else
5
Let q0 = 1 −
pσ(1)
ϕ(S,σ(1)), qm =
pσ(m)
ϕ(S,σ(m)), and qj =
pσ(j)
ϕ(S,σ(j)) −
pσ(j+1)
ϕ(S,σ(j+1)) for j = 1,...,m −1
/* Note that Pm
j=0 qj = 1 */
6
Sample j∗∼{qj}m
j=0
7
if j∗= 0 then
8
return ∅
9
if j∗= m then
10
return S
11
Let S′ ←{σ−1(j)}j∗
j=1
12
return ˜S ←Sub-assortment Sampling(ϕ,S′,{ϕ(S,i)}i∈S′)
Proposition 3. For any weak substitutable and downward-closed feasible choice model ϕ, any
assortment S ∈S, and any target probabilities {pi}i∈S such that pi ≤ϕ(S,i) for all i ∈S, Proce-
dure 1 outputs a randomized assortment ˜S that satisfies (i) ˜S ⊆S; (ii) E ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i)
i
= pi for all i ∈S.
Moreover, it runs in time Poly(n).
Remark 2. To guarantee Equation (2) given any (zt, ˆS, ¯S) at step (iv), we invoke Proposition 3 by
setting ϕ ←ϕzt, S ←¯S, and pi ←ϕzt( ˆS,i) for all i ∈¯S. Note that pi = ϕzt( ˆS,i) ≤ϕzt( ¯S,i) for all i ∈¯S,
simply because of weak substitutability and the fact that ¯S ⊆ˆS.
Proof of Proposition 3. Without loss of generality, we assume σ is the identity permutation, i.e.,
σ(i) = i for i ∈[m]. To show the polynomial running time, observe that (a) the running time in each
7 It is noteworthy that Goyal et al. (2020a) independently and concurrently discovered an idea similar to our sub-
assortment sampling for settings with adversarial arrival and reusable resources.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
14
recursion is Poly(n); and (b) the number of iterations of this recursive algorithm is at most n, since
|S| ≤n at the beginning and the size of the S′ that is the input of the next recursive call shrinks by
1 at each iteration, i.e., |S′| ≤|S| −1.
Property (i) holds by construction. We show property (ii) by induction on m = |S|, i.e., size of
assortment S. In this induction, we use another simple property (iii) that ϕ(S,i)
Pm
j=i qj

= pi for
all i ∈S, which immediately hold by construction.
Base Case (m = 1). In this case Procedure 1 randomly outputs ∅or S. By property (iii), the induction
statement holds.
Inductive
step
(m > 1).
Fix
an
arbitrary
product
i ∈S.
Notice
that
by
construction
E ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i) | j∗< i
i
= 0, and E ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i) | j∗= m
i
= ϕ(S,i). For any realized value j∗= i,...,m −1,
and its corresponding S′ = {1,...,j∗}, we can use the induction hypothesis for the assortment S′
with probabilities p′
i = ϕ(S,i) for each i ∈S′. This is true simply because |S′| ≤m −1 and that
ϕ(S,i) ≤ϕ(S′,i) for each i ∈S′ as the choice model ϕ is weak substitute. By invoking the induction
hypothesis when we use S′ in the next recursive call, we have E ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i) | j∗= j
i
= ϕ(S,i) for all
j = i,...,m −1. Thus, invoking property (iii),
E ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i)
i
=
m
X
j=0
qjE ˜S
h
ϕ( ˜S,i) | j∗= j
i
=
 m
X
j=i
qj
!
ϕ(S,i) = pi
which completes the inductive step and finishes the proof.
□
3.2.2. The Algorithm and Analysis
Now we present our first simulation-based algorithm
(Algorithm 2) with its competitive ratio guarantee (Theorem 1). We defer the formal proof of The-
orem 1 to Section EC.5.
Theorem 1. By setting γ = γ∗(cmin), the competitive ratio of Algorithm 2 against the Bayesian
expected LP benchmark Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] is at least 1−ε∗(cmin) = 1−O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

. More-
over, it runs in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) given oracle access to an offline algorithm for assortment
optimization (Assumption 3).
Before presenting the proof sketch of Theorem 1, we first discuss how to use a simple concentration
argument to obtain a competitive ratio upper bound of 1 −O
p
log(cminnT)/cmin

for a slightly
modified version of Algorithm 2. The simple concentration argument works as follows: consider a
modified version of Algorithm 2 where the random discarding step is fully correlated. Namely, instead
of flipping an independent coin for each product i ∈¯St, we flip a single coin, and set ¯St as all available
products in ˆSt with probability γ, and empty set otherwise. Consider this modified Algorithm 2 until
the first time that one of the sampled products is not available. Note that before such a bad event
happens, all allocations are independent over consumers, and the sub-assortment sampling step is
trivial (i.e., return ˜St = ¯St deterministically). We can bound the probability of this bad event at

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
15
Algorithm 2: Simulation-based Algorithm with Random Discarding
Input: discarding probability γ ∈[0,1]
1 Pre-processing: Compute the optimal assignment {y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] by invoking
the offline assortment oracle (Assumption 3)
2 for t = 1 to T do
/* consumer t with type zt ∼Ft arrives */
3
Simulation: Upon realizing consumer type zt, sample ˆSt ∼{y∗
S,t,zt}S∈S
4
Discarding: Initialize ¯St ←ˆSt
5
for each product i ∈ˆSt do
6
Flip an independent coin and remove i from ¯St with probability γ
7
if there is no available unit of product i then
8
Remove i from ¯St
9
Post-processing: Let ˜St ←Sub-assortment Sampling

ϕzt, ¯St,{ϕ( ˆSt,i)}i∈¯St

/* Send a query call to Procedure 1 with appropriate input arguments */
10
Offer assortment ˜St to consumer t
each time and for each product by an exponentially small probability in cmin due to the Chernoff
bound. Applying union bound for every time t ∈[T] and every i ∈[n], and using the fact that when
such a bad event happens we have no control over the revenue, the resulting competitive ratio can
be upper-bounded by 1 −O
p
log(cminnT)/cmin

. Note that this competitive ratio has an extra
p
log(nT) dependence, and thus is strictly worse than the competitive ratio 1 −ε∗(cmin) stated in
Theorem 1, which is independent of the number of products n and the number of consumers T.
To prove Theorem 1 with the competitive ratio 1 −ε∗(cmin) that is independent of the number of
products n and the number of consumers T, we use a careful coupling argument in our analysis of
Algorithm 2 that couples the rental indicator random variables of our algorithm with an alternative
hypothetical algorithm. This hypothetical algorithm ignores inventory constraints of all the products
and only simulates the expected LP’s optimal solution combined with independent discarding of each
product with probability γ. This algorithm generates an independent sequence of rental indicator
random variables, allowing us to use simple concentration bounds. Importantly, this coupling trick
is only possible because of the guarantee of the sub-assortment sampling procedure in Equation (2)
(see the formal proof in Section EC.5).
Remark 3. Our analysis in this section mainly focuses on the asymptotic regime where cmin is large;
however, we can still plot the competitive ratio 1 −ε∗(cmin) of Algorithm 2 for small values of cmin
by numerically evaluating ε∗(cmin) using Equation (1). See the black solid curve in Figure 1.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
16
1
50
100
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
cmin
competitive ratio
Figure 1
Competitive ratio of simulation-based algorithms: Black solid curve corresponds to Algorithm 2; blue
dashed curve corresponds to the hybrid between Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3 (see Section 3.4).
3.3.
Small Initial Inventory: Towards Competitive Ratio 1
2
In this subsection, we propose our second simulation-based algorithm. The main difference between
this algorithm and Algorithm 2 is in the discarding step: if no units of product i is available on-
hand, it is discarded automatically to guarantee inventory feasibility; otherwise, it is only selected in
the final assortment if rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t, where P zt
i,t are non-adaptive thresholds computed by the algorithm
up-front (will be discussed later). The aim of this discarding procedure is to to guarantee that only
available products with high enough rental fees are assorted.
Technically speaking, for each product i one can consider a separate DP to optimally make dis-
carding decisions. This DP will maximize per-unit revenue-to-go of assorted units of product i over
the finite time horizon [1 : T], given the randomized suggestion of step (ii) (recall Section 3.1). The
drawback is the need for a high-dimensional state variable that keeps track of the on-hand product
inventories, as well the inventory of units of the product that are in use (and will return to inventory
at different times). A major ingredient of our algorithm is to replace this high-dimensional DP with
a simple one that is inventory independent, and uses an optimistic upper-bound of ci on the actual
inventory in the Bellman equation for updating optimal per-unit revenue-to-go of product i.
3.3.1. Dynamic Programming for Per-unit Revenue-to-go with Replenishment.
In
the rest of this subsection, let XS,t,zt ≜y∗
S,t,ztFt(zt) for every S,t and zt. Suppose at each time t, a
new independent consumer type zt ∼Ft is realized. Let ˆS ∼XS,t,zt denote the randomized subset
sampled in step (ii)(simulation step). Fix a product i ∈[n], with initial inventory of ci units. Now,
consider a hypothetical scenario where an exogenous process replenishes the inventory at each time
to guarantee we always have ci units of the product on-hand, no matter how many units are currently
under rental. In this new problem, the goal is to design an online policy to discard or accept units of

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
17
the reusable product once suggested in step (ii), in order to maximize the per-unit revenue-to-go of
renting this product. We can formulate this problem using a simple dynamic programming, where
Vi,t is the optimal per-unit revenue-to-go of product i during time interval [t : T]. Compared to the
original high-dimensional DP for solving the optimum discarding, this DP is optimistic in that it
“imagines” the deficiency in inventory is replenished every period.
As a convention, let Vi,T +1 = 0. To write the Bellman update equation of the optimistic DP at
time t using backward induction, suppose type zt is realized and ˆS = S (which happens w.p. XS,t,zt).
If optimal policy decides to discard product i, then per-unit revenue-to-go will be Vi,t+1. If optimal
policy decides to not discard i, then with probability (1 −ϕzt(S,i)) the per-unit revenue-to-go will
still be Vi,t+1.8 However, with probability ϕzt(S,i) consumer rents one of the ci units (remember that
inventory will always be full), and therefore generates a total revenue-to-go of (ci −1)Vi,t+1 (i.e., due
to contribution of units not rented at time t; these units will transfer to the inventory at time t + 1)
plus rzt
i + Vi,t+d upon realization of rental time d ∼Gzt
i (i.e., due to contribution of the rented unit).
To summarize, we will have the following Bellman update equation:
Vi,t =
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
× max

Vi,t+1 , (1 −ϕzt(S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt(S,i)
 1
ci
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) + ci −1
ci
Vi,t+1

(3)
Note the update rule of the above dynamic programming can be simplified by rearranging the
terms; Interestingly, the rule will be independent of ci and ϕzt(S,i) as they cancel out:
h
At time t with type zt, i ∈ˆS will be accepted
i
⇐⇒rzt
i ≥Vi,t+1 −
X
d gzt
i (d)Vi,t+d
(4)
Remark 4. Later in Section EC.3 and EC.7, we will replace this simple DP with a slightly modified
one that has inventory dependent state, but is still low dimensional when rental times are infinite.
This allows us to obtain (an almost) optimal competitive ratio for this special case.
3.3.2. The Algorithm and Analysis
We now present our second simulation-based algorithm
(Algorithm 3), with its competitive ratio guarantee (Theorem 2). 9
Theorem 2. The competitive ratio of Algorithm 3 against offline Bayesian expected LP benchmark,
i.e., Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], is at least 1/2. Moreover, it runs in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) given
oracle access to an offline algorithm for assortment optimization (Assumption 3).
8 In this hypothetical scenario, we assume that the probability that the consumer select product i equals ϕzt(S,i)
regardless of whether another product i′ is discarded from S.
9 The competitive ratio in Theorem 2 is optimal even if rental times are infinite. Consider the following example: there is
a single non-reusable product with a single unit. There are two time periods T = 2. Consumer 1 has a deterministic type
that deterministically purchases this item with fee 1. With probability ϵ, consumer 2 has a type that deterministically
purchases this item with fee 1/ϵ. Otherwise (i.e., with probability 1−ϵ), consumer 2 has a type that purchases nothing.
In this example, the expected revenue of the Bayesian Expected LP benchmark as well as the clairvoyant policy is 2−ϵ,
while the expected revenue of any online policy is at most 1.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
18
Algorithm 3: Simulation-based Algorithm with Non-adaptive Per-unit Revenue Thresholds
1 Pre-processing:
• Compute the optimal assignment {y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] by invoking the offline
assortment oracle (Assumption 3)
• Set XS,t,zt ≜y∗
S,t,ztFt(zt) for every S,t and zt where optimal assignment has a non-zero entry
• Solve the dynamic programming with Bellman update described in eq. (3) and boundary
condition Vi,T +1 = 0 for every product i to obtain {Vi,t}i∈[n],t∈[T ]
• Let P zt
i,t ≜Vi,t+1 −
X
d gzt
i (d)Vi,t+d, for all i ∈[n],t ∈[T],zt ∈Zt.
for t = 1 to T do
/* consumer t with type zt ∼Ft arrives */
2
Simulation: Upon realizing consumer type zt, sample ˆSt ∼{y∗
S,t,zt}S∈S
3
Discarding: Initialize ¯St ←ˆSt
4
for each product i ∈ˆSt do
5
if rzt
i < P zt
i,t or there is no available unit of product i then
6
Remove i from ¯St
/* Per-unit revenue thresholds {P zt
i,t} are computed once, i.e., are non-adaptive */
7
Post-processing: Let ˜St ←Sub-assortment Sampling

ϕzt, ¯St,{ϕ( ˆSt,i)}i∈¯St

/* Send a query call to Procedure 1 with appropriate input arguments */
8
Offer assortment ˜St to consumer t
Proof sketch of Theorem 2. The running time is proved by Proposition 2, and the fact that the
simple DP in Section 3.3.1 can be solved in polynomial time. The analysis of the competitive ratio
can be decoupled across products. For each fixed product i, we do the analysis in two parts, each
sketched below (see the full details in Section EC.6):
• Part (i) – Section EC.6.1: we first compare Algorithm 3 with the simple optimistic dynamic
programming described in Section 3.3.1 and show the total expected revenue of Algorithm 3
due to rentals of product i is at least ciVi,1. We prove this claim using induction, and the fact
that showing a subset ˜St of sampled assortment ˆSt can only increase the revenue-to-go of the
discarding policy that follows the thresholds of the optimistic DP (as in the algorithm).
• Part (ii) – Section EC.6.2: We then compare this simple dynamic programming with expected
LP benchmark and show for each product i, ciVi,1 is at least 1/2 of the contribution of product i
to the optimal objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] (Part (ii)). In order to prove this part,
we use the connection between the optimistic DP of Section 3.3.1 and a related factor-revealing
LP that characterizes the competitive ratio of the optimistic DP. This connections leads us to

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
19
apply duality arguments to find a lower-bound on the ratio of ciVi,1 and the contribution of
product i to the optimal objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1].
3.4. Hybrid between Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3
Best of both worlds discarding. In both Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3, we have discarding policies
(one for each of the products) that run independently form each other. Also, both competitive ratio
analyses essentially decouple across different products, as we analyze the revenue performances of
these discarding policies for each product separately. Moreover, in both analyses, we compare the
expected revenue of each product i with the contribution of that product in the expected-LP.
Considering all of the above design and analysis aspects of our two algorithms, we can propose a
hybrid algorithm where we decide on the choice of the discarding policy for each product i based on its
initial inventory ci upfront. Once we finalize these choices, we run the (possibly different) discarding
algorithms in parallel and separately for different products during the discarding step of our final
hybrid algorithm. In order to achieve the best of both worlds revenue performance guarantees of
small and large inventory regimes, we partition the set of products into those with large initial
inventory and those with small initial inventory (will be formally defined later) at the beginning.
Given this partition, we assign a “randomized discarding” policy (as described in in Algorithm 2)
to make discarding decisions of product i across times t ∈[T] if ci is large, and we use a “discarding
with per-unit revenue thresholds” (as described in in Algorithm 3) if ci is small.
To distinguish between large and small ci, we first solve the dynamic programming of the optimistic
DP discarding policy in Section 3.3 for each product i ∈[n], by using its Bellman update equation
(described in Equation (3)). We then use the value function Vi,1 of the optimistic DP for product i to
label this product as either large or small inventory. In particular, define Ri to be the ratio between
between the expected revenue-to-go of the optimistic DP for product i and the contribution of this
product to the expected-LP’s objective, i.e.,
Ri ≜
ciVi,1
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)rzt
i
Note that Ri ∈[0.5,1] from Theorem 2. Also note that ε∗(c) is continuous and monotone increasing
in c, ε∗(0) = 1, and ε∗(+∞) = 0 — see Equation (1) for the definition ε∗(·). We next compare the
ratio Ri with 1−ε∗(ci). In fact, if Ri +ε∗(ci) < 1, we then except the competitive ratio of randomized
discarding to be no smaller than that of the optimistic DP, and hence we label the product as “large
inventory”. Otherwise, we expect the optimistic DP to beat the randomized discarding in terms of
the competitive ratio, and hence we label the product as “small invenotry”. Finally, we perform
the sub-assortment sampling as a post-processing step in order to correct the choice probabilities of
non-discarded products (which might have been increased due to weak-substitution and that other

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
20
products are either discarded or not even selected in the assortment as they were not available at
the first place). We denote the resulting algorithm by Sim+Hybrid(i).
Theorem 3. The competitive ratio of Sim+Hybrid(i) against offline Bayesian expected LP bench-
mark, i.e., Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], is at least 1 −min
  1
2,ε∗(cmin)

(see Figure 1).
Proof sketch. As it can be seen by following the lines of both the proof of Theorem 1 in Sec-
tion 3.2.2 and the proof of Theorem 2 in Section EC.6, the arguments for the revenue performance of
the corresponding discarding policies for each product i (and also the resulting competitive ratio) is
independent of how discarding of another product i′ is handled, and therefore the competitive ratio
guarantees of the randomized discarding and the optimistic DP from these theorems still hold for
the hybrid algorithm. For brevity, we do not repeat these proofs. We conclude that the proposed
hybrid algorithm has a competitive ratio of at least max
  1
2,1 −ε∗(cmin)

.
□
Monte-Carlo simulation to help. In principle, given the sequence of type distributions {Ft}T
t=1,
one can simulate both Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3 and estimate their expected future revenues
using Monte-Carlo simulation, starting at any time t ∈[T] (given any history up to time t). Now, a
simple hybrid algorithm can switch to the algorithm with the higher expected revenue and runs this
algorithm for the next time step given the current history of rental products. By repeatedly applying
this method at each time t given the history up to this time – a techniques known as the method
of conditional expectation – we end up with an alternative hybrid algorithm that essentially is the
Be-The-Leader policy among the two policies at each time, meaning that its expected future revenue
at each time is at least the expected future revenue of each of the two policies (which can be proved
using induction). Hence, this hybrid algorithm clearly obtains the best of both worlds competitive
ratio of 1 −min
  1
2,ε∗(cmin)

similar to our previous hybrid algorithm. Such a policy can also choose
to switch at a lower frequency; but no matter what frequency it picks, it is expected to outperform
both policies in expectation, both in theory and practice. We use this alternative hybrid algorithm,
which is denoted by Sim+Hybrid(ii), in our numerical simulations in Section EC.8 as well.
Theorem 4. The competitive ratio of Sim+Hybrid(ii) against offline Bayesian expected LP bench-
mark, i.e., Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], is at least 1 −min
  1
2,ε∗(cmin)

(see Figure 1).
Proof sketch. Consider the following backward induction. The induction hypothesis is that given
current state J (i.e., the number of available units of each product in the inventory, as well as the
return time of each allocated unit of every product), and time period t, the expected revenue from
time t to time T in Hybrid-Sim(ii) is weakly higher than Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3. Base case
t = T is straightforward. Suppose the induction hypothesis is correct for t + 1,...,T. Consider the
inductive step for time t and current state J. Suppose Monte-Carlo simulation suggests that given
state J, Algorithm 2 achieves higher expected revenue from time t to time T, and its induced new

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
21
state is J′ (the analysis for the other case is similar). In this case, we know that the expected revenue
in Hybrid-Sim(ii) from time t to time T can be decomposed into the following two terms: (i) the
expected revenue in Hybrid-Sim(ii) at time t, and (ii) the expected revenue in Hybrid-Sim(ii)
from time t+1 to time T under state J′. By construction, term (i) equals to the expected revenue in
Algorithm 2 at time t. By our induction hypothesis for time t + 1 with state J′, term (ii) is weakly
higher than the expected revenue in Algorithm 2 from time t + 1 to time T given state J′. Hence,
the expected revenue in Hybrid-Sim(ii) from time t to time T given state J is weakly higher than
Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3 as well, which concludes the backward induction.
□
Remark 5. We would like to highlight that while both Sim+Hybrid(i) and Sim+Hybrid(ii) attain
the theoretical best of both worlds competitive ratio that was mentioned earlier, and as we see in
our numerical simulations in Section EC.8 they both outperforms other existing policies in practical
scenarios of our problem, they differ in terms of computational requirements. In fact, Sim+Hybrid(i)
can easily make upfront decisions for the choice of discarding policy of each product i, with almost no
extra computation compared to Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3; nevertheless, Sim+Hybrid(ii) needs
to run Monte-Carlo simulation several times (depending on the switching frequency) by sampling
from future types, which makes it less practically appealing.
4. Conclusion
We studied designing near-optimal algorithms for the online assortment of reusable resources in
the Bayesian setting. We proposed an algorithmic framework based on four modular steps: (i) solv-
ing the expected LP, (ii) simulating the solution, (iii) running a separate discarding procedure
for each product to maintain point-wise inventory feasibility (while only losing a negligible frac-
tion of the revenue of each product), and (iv) performing a post-processing step to adjust choice
probabilities of non-discarded items. Using this framework, we designed an algorithm that is 1 −
min

1
2,O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

under the general rental duration distributions, and an improved near-
optimal algorithm with competitive ratio 1−1/
p
(cmin + 3) under infinite rental durations. Not only
our algorithms outperform the existing algorithms in the literature theoretically, we further verified
their revenue performance advantages through numerical simulations.
As a road-map for future, it is interesting to study what other practical aspects of a real-world
assortment problem beyond reusable resources can be modeled, and to what extent mathematical
programming techniques can be used to design competitive algorithms there. On the technical side,
the most immediate open problem stemming from our work is finding the optimal competitive ratio
for the case of general rental duration distributions. In particular, can one shave the logarithmic
factor in our competitive ratio and obtain a 1 −O(1/√cmin) competitive algorithm, similar to the
best known competitive ratio in the non-reusable case? As a different yet more ambitious future

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
22
direction, it would be interesting to study classes of stochastic online optimization similar to the
Bayesian online assortment further, in order to discover the computational hardness of computing or
approximating the optimum online policy, i.e., the DP policy. An interesting discovery here would be
obtaining improved approximations against the optimum online benchmark versus the expected LP
benchmark through polynomial-time policies, `a la Anari et al. (2019), or proving its impossibility.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thanks the anonymous associate editor and the referees for their comments and
feedback throughout the revision process. Rad Niazadeh’s research is partially supported by an
Asness Junior Faculty Fellowship from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
References
Daniel Adelman. Dynamic bid prices in revenue management. Operations Research, 55(4):647–661, 2007.
Saeed Alaei. Bayesian combinatorial auctions: Expanding single buyer mechanisms to many buyers. SIAM
Journal on Computing, 43(2):930–972, 2014.
Saeed Alaei, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, and Vahid Liaghat. Online prophet-inequality matching with appli-
cations to ad allocation. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages
18–35. ACM, 2012.
Nima Anari, Rad Niazadeh, Amin Saberi, and Ali Shameli. Nearly optimal pricing algorithms for production
constrained and laminar bayesian selection. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics
and Computation, pages 91–92. ACM, 2019.
Ali Aouad, Vivek Farias, Retsef Levi, and Danny Segev. The approximability of assortment optimization under
ranking preferences. Operations Research, 66(6):1661–1669, 2018.
Ali Aouad, Vivek Farias, and Retsef Levi. Assortment optimization under consider-then-choose choice models.
Management Science, 2020.
Jackie Baek and Will Ma. Bifurcating constraints to improve approximation ratios for network revenue man-
agement with reusable resources. Available at SSRN 3482457, 2019.
Siddhartha Banerjee and Daniel Freund. Uniform loss algorithms for online stochastic decision-making with
applications to bin packing. In Abstracts of the 2020 SIGMETRICS/Performance Joint International
Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, pages 1–2, 2020.
Fernando Bernstein, A G¨urhan K¨ok, and Lei Xie. Dynamic assortment customization with limited inventories.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 17(4):538–553, 2015.
Brian Brubach, Nathaniel Grammel, Will Ma, and Aravind Srinivasan. Improved guarantees for offline stochas-
tic matching via new ordered contention resolution schemes. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34, 2021.
Carri W Chan and Vivek F Farias. Stochastic depletion problems: Effective myopic policies for a class of
dynamic optimization problems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 34(2):333–350, 2009.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
23
Shuchi Chawla, Jason D Hartline, David L Malec, and Balasubramanian Sivan. Multi-parameter mechanism
design and sequential posted pricing. In Proceedings of the forty-second ACM symposium on Theory of
computing, pages 311–320, 2010.
Shuchi Chawla, Nikhil R Devanur, Alexander E Holroyd, Anna R Karlin, James B Martin, and Balasubra-
manian Sivan. Stability of service under time-of-use pricing. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM
SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 184–197, 2017.
Xi Chen, Will Ma, David Simchi-Levi, and Linwei Xin. Assortment planning for recommendations at checkout
under inventory constraints. Available at SSRN 2853093, 2016.
Yiwei Chen, Retsef Levi, and Cong Shi. Revenue management of reusable resources with advanced reservations.
Production and Operations Management, 26(5):836–859, 2017.
Herman Chernoff et al. A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum of
observations. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(4):493–507, 1952.
Nikhil R Devanur, Balasubramanian Sivan, and Yossi Azar. Asymptotically optimal algorithm for stochastic
adwords. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, pages 388–404, 2012.
John Dickerson, Karthik Sankararaman, Aravind Srinivasan, and Pan Xu. Allocation problems in ride-sharing
platforms: Online matching with offline reusable resources. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Paul D¨uetting, Michal Feldman, Thomas Kesselheim, and Brendan Lucier. Prophet inequalities made easy:
Stochastic optimization by pricing non-stochastic inputs. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on, pages 540–551. IEEE, 2017.
Vivek F Farias, Srikanth Jagabathula, and Devavrat Shah. A nonparametric approach to modeling choice with
limited data. Management science, 59(2):305–322, 2013.
Moran Feldman, Ola Svensson, and Rico Zenklusen. Online contention resolution schemes. In Proceedings of
the twenty-seventh annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 1014–1033. Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2016.
Yiding Feng, Rad Niazadeh, and Amin Saberi. Linear programming based online policies for real-time assort-
ment of reusable resources. Available at SSRN 3421227, 2019.
Yiding Feng, Rad Niazadeh, and Amin Saberi. Online assortment of reusable resources with exogenous replen-
ishment. Available at SSRN 3795056, 2021.
Guillermo Gallego, Garud Iyengar, Robert Phillips, and Abhay Dubey.
Managing flexible products on a
network. Available at SSRN 3567371, 2004.
Guillermo Gallego, Anran Li, Van-Anh Truong, and Xinshang Wang. Online personalized resource allocation
with customer choice. Working Paper, 2016.
Vishal Gaur and Doroth´ee Honhon. Assortment planning and inventory decisions under a locational choice
model. Management Science, 52(10):1528–1543, 2006.
Negin Golrezaei, Hamid Nazerzadeh, and Paat Rusmevichientong.
Real-time optimization of personalized
assortments. Management Science, 60(6):1532–1551, 2014.
Xiao-Yue Gong, Vineet Goyal, Garud N Iyengar, David Simchi-Levi, Rajan Udwani, and Shuangyu Wang.
Online assortment optimization with reusable resources. Management Science, 2021.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
24
Vineet Goyal, Retsef Levi, and Danny Segev. Near-optimal algorithms for the assortment planning problem
under dynamic substitution and stochastic demand. Operations Research, 64(1):219–235, 2016.
Vineet Goyal, Garud Iyengar, and Rajan Udwani. Online allocation of reusable resources via algorithms guided
by fluid approximations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03983, 2020a.
Vineet Goyal, Garud Iyengar, and Rajan Udwani. Online allocation of reusable resources: Achieving optimal
competitive ratio. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02430, 2020b.
Martin Gr¨otschel, L´aszl´o Lov´asz, and Alexander Schrijver.
The ellipsoid method and its consequences in
combinatorial optimization. Combinatorica, 1(2):169–197, 1981.
Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Robert Kleinberg, and Tuomas Sandholm. Automated online mechanism design
and prophet inequalities. In AAAI, volume 7, pages 58–65, 2007.
Teck-Hua Ho and Christopher S Tang. Product variety management: research advances, volume 10. Springer
Science & Business Media, 1998.
Doroth´ee Honhon, Vishal Gaur, and Sridhar Seshadri. Assortment planning and inventory decisions under
stockout-based substitution. Operations research, 58(5):1364–1379, 2010.
John A Howard and Jagdish N Sheth. The theory of buyer behavior. New York, 63, 1969.
Robert Kleinberg and Seth Matthew Weinberg. Matroid prophet inequalities. In Proceedings of the forty-fourth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 123–136. ACM, 2012.
A G¨urhan K¨ok, Marshall L Fisher, and Ramnath Vaidyanathan. Assortment planning: Review of literature
and industry practice. In Retail supply chain management, pages 99–153. Springer, 2008.
Ulrich Krengel and Louis Sucheston. On semiamarts, amarts, and processes with finite value. Probability on
Banach spaces, 4:197–266, 1978.
Kelvin Lancaster. The economics of product variety: A survey. Marketing science, 9(3):189–206, 1990.
Euiwoong Lee and Sahil Singla. Optimal online contention resolution schemes via ex-ante prophet inequalities.
In 26th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer
Informatik, 2018.
Yin Tat Lee, Aaron Sidford, and Sam Chiu-wai Wong. A faster cutting plane method and its implications
for combinatorial and convex optimization. In 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, pages 1049–1065. IEEE, 2015.
Retsef Levi and Ana Radovanovi´c. Provably near-optimal lp-based policies for revenue management in systems
with reusable resources. Operations Research, 58(2):503–507, 2010.
Qian Liu and Garrett van Ryzin. On the choice-based linear programming model for network revenue man-
agement. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 10(2):288–310, 2008.
Brendan Lucier. An economic view of prophet inequalities. ACM SIGecom Exchanges, 16(1):24–47, 2017.
Will Ma and David Simchi-Levi. Algorithms for online matching, assortment, and pricing with tight weight-
dependent competitive ratios. Operations Research, 2020.
Will Ma, David Simchi-Levi, and Jinglong Zhao. Dynamic pricing under a static calendar. Available at SSRN
3251015, 2018.
Vahideh Manshadi and Scott Rodilitz. Online policies for efficient volunteer crowdsourcing. Management
Science, 2022.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
25
Aranyak Mehta, Amin Saberi, Umesh Vazirani, and Vijay Vazirani. Adwords and generalized on-line matching.
In 46th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’05), pages 264–273. IEEE,
2005.
Rad Niazadeh, Amin Saberi, and Ali Shameli. Prophet inequalities vs. approximating optimum online. In
International Conference on Web and Internet Economics, pages 356–374. Springer, 2018.
Zachary Owen and David Simchi-Levi. Price and assortment optimization for reusable resources. Available at
SSRN 3070625, 2018.
Christos H Papadimitriou and John N Tsitsiklis. The complexity of markov decision processes. Mathematics
of operations research, 12(3):441–450, 1987.
Paat Rusmevichientong, David Shmoys, Chaoxu Tong, and Huseyin Topaloglu. Assortment optimization under
the multinomial logit model with random choice parameters. Production and Operations Management,
23(11):2023–2039, 2014.
Paat Rusmevichientong, Mika Sumida, and Huseyin Topaloglu. Dynamic assortment optimization for reusable
products with random usage durations. Management Science, 66(7):2820–2844, 2020.
Ester Samuel-Cahn et al. Comparison of threshold stop rules and maximum for independent nonnegative
random variables. the Annals of Probability, 12(4):1213–1216, 1984.
Jennie Si, Andrew G Barto, Warren B Powell, and Don Wunsch.
Handbook of learning and approximate
dynamic programming, volume 2. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
Stephen A Smith and Narendra Agrawal. Management of multi-item retail inventory systems with demand
substitution. Operations Research, 48(1):50–64, 2000.
Kalyan Talluri and Garrett van Ryzin. Revenue management under a general discrete choice model of consumer
behavior. Management Science, 50(1):15–33, 2004.
Huseyin Topaloglu. Joint stocking and product offer decisions under the multinomial logit model. Production
and Operations Management, 22(5):1182–1199, 2013.
Pravin M Vaidya. A new algorithm for minimizing convex functions over convex sets. Mathematical program-
ming, 73(3):291–341, 1996.
Garrett van Ryzin and Siddharth Mahajan. On the relationship between inventory costs and variety benefits
in retail assortments. Management Science, 45(11):1496–1509, 1999.
Alberto Vera and Siddhartha Banerjee. The bayesian prophet: A low-regret framework for online decision
making. Management Science, 67(3):1368–1391, 2021.
Xinshang Wang, Van-Anh Truong, and David Bank. Online advance admission scheduling for services with
customer preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10412, 2018.
Dan Zhang and Daniel Adelman. An approximate dynamic programming approach to network revenue man-
agement with customer choice. Transportation Science, 43(3):381–394, 2009.

Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
26
This page is intentionally blank. Proper e-companion title
page, with INFORMS branding and exact metadata of the
main paper, will be produced by the INFORMS office when
the issue is being assembled.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec1
EC.1. Further Related Work
Assortment planning for revenue management has an extensively growing literature over the recent
decades. We refer the reader to related surveys and books (cf. K¨ok et al. 2008, Lancaster 1990, Ho
and Tang 1998) for a comprehensive study. van Ryzin and Mahajan (1999) study the static model
which captures the trade-offs between inventory costs and product variety under the multinomial
logit consumer choice model. Later work have considered assortment under various consumer choice
models, e.g., demand substitution model (Smith and Agrawal 2000), multinomial logit models (Talluri
and van Ryzin 2004, Gallego et al. 2004, Liu and van Ryzin 2008, Topaloglu 2013), the Lancaster
choice model (Gaur and Honhon 2006), ranked-list preference (Honhon et al. 2010, Goyal et al. 2016,
Aouad et al. 2018), consider-then-choose choice models (Aouad et al. 2020), and non-parametric
(data-driven) choice models (Farias et al. 2013).
Online assortment has been studied more recently, both under the prior-free/adversarial and
the Bayesian settings. For non-reusable products, Bernstein et al. (2015) study a model with two
products, i.i.d. consumer types and Poisson arrivals. Chan and Farias (2009) study a model with
non-stationary consumer types and show 1
2 performance guarantee with respect to the clairvoyant
optimum online benchmark. Golrezaei et al. (2014) introduce “inventory balancing” algorithms –
inspired by the seminal work of Mehta et al. (2005) for online ad allocation – and analyze their
performance guarantee in the prior-free setting using a primal-dual approach. This analysis is later
improved and generalized by Ma and Simchi-Levi (2020). Chen et al. (2016) consider another variant,
in which assortments are offered as add-ons with discounted price. The idea of discarding to ensure
point-wise inventory feasibility is also used in this paper, and they face a similar challenge due to
product substitution. To overcome this challenge, the authors introduce a sampling procedure with
error for their specific goal. In contrast, our sub-assortment sampling does not incur any errors and
can be used for more general purposes.
For online assortment of reusable products, Levi and Radovanovi´c (2010) study a model that
assumes independent demands across products, without any choice behavior for the customers with
infinite selling horizon. A follow up work from Owen and Simchi-Levi (2018) extend this work
to incorporate customer choice behavior and a finite selling horizon. Chen et al. (2017) study a
model with multiple units of a single reusable product. They consider stochastic usage durations and
advance reservations, and obtain data-dependent performance guarantees that are asymptotically
optimal when the product inventory and the customer arrival rate scale up linearly at the same rate.
Finally, Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) study the Bayesian setting and Gong et al. (2021), Feng
et al. (2019, 2021), Goyal et al. (2020b) study the prior-free/adversarial setting where both rental
fees and rental duration distributions are type-independent and identical across time.

ec2
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
In the Bayesian setting, our problem resembles some aspects of the “prophet inequality” prob-
lem. This problem is originated from the seminal work of Krengel and Sucheston (1978) in the 70’s,
and has since been studied quite extensively. Combinatorial generalizations of this problem are also
studied in the literature. Examples are prophet inequalities for matroids (Samuel-Cahn et al. 1984,
Hajiaghayi et al. 2007, Kleinberg and Weinberg 2012), matchings (Alaei et al. 2012), and combinato-
rial auctions (D¨uetting et al. 2017). In these generalizations, the natural dynamic programming for
computing the optimum online policy are exponential-size (Niazadeh et al. 2018, Anari et al. 2019),
similar to our problem. See Lucier (2017), for a comprehensive survey.
Some of our techniques resemble those used for the prophet inequality matching (Alaei et al. 2012),
the Magician’s problem and online contention resolution schemes (Alaei 2014, Brubach et al. 2021,
Feldman et al. 2016), the pricing with static calendar problem (Ma et al. 2018), online bipartite
matching with reusable offline nodes (Dickerson et al. 2018), and the volunteer crowdsourcing prob-
lem (Manshadi and Rodilitz 2022). The closest to us is the work of (Baek and Ma 2019) for the
network revenue management problem with reusable resource, in which the authors have indepen-
dently and concurrently discovered policies similar to our algorithm for the small inventory regime.
Other expected LP benchmarks have been used in the literature under the name of “ex-ante
relaxation” for various stochastic online optimization and mechanism design problems. For example,
see Alaei et al. (2012), D¨uetting et al. (2017), Lee and Singla (2018), Vera and Banerjee (2021), Ma
et al. (2018), Anari et al. (2019). The factor-revealing technique we use to analyze our DP-based
thresholding discarding rule resemble the LP-method of Adelman (2007), the dual-fitting methods
in Alaei (2014), Wang et al. (2018), and also other LP-based methods for approximate dynamic
programming (see Si et al. (2004) for a comprehensive study).
Some of our techniques resemble those used for the prophet inequality matching (Alaei et al.
2012), the Magician’s problem (Alaei 2014), the pricing with static calendar problem (Ma et al.
2018) (which also studies static assortment policies without reusable resources), and the volunteer
crowdsourcing problem (Manshadi and Rodilitz 2022). Similar to our Bayesian expected LP, other
expected LP benchmarks have been used in the literature under the name of “ex-ante relaxation” for
various stochastic online optimization and mechanism design problems. For example, see Alaei et al.
(2012), Devanur et al. (2012), Feldman et al. (2016), D¨uetting et al. (2017), Chawla et al. (2017),
Lee and Singla (2018), Vera and Banerjee (2021), Ma et al. (2018), Anari et al. (2019), Dickerson
et al. (2018).
Another interesting line of work related to us is the work of Vera and Banerjee (2021) and Banerjee
and Freund (2020). The goal here is to obtain improved (additive or regret-based) approximations for
various stochastic online optimization problems with packing constraints. These papers diverges from
ours by taking a different technical approach and considering a different regime (i.e., when inventories
increase with horizon); nevertheless, carrying over their techniques to the reusable resources problem
stands as an interesting future research direction.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec3
EC.2. Comparison Between Different Benchmarks
Consider the following hierarchy of revenue benchmarks, based on the given information on future
uncertainty and required computational power:
1. Optimum offline: the expected revenue of the optimum offline algorithm that has full informa-
tion about the realized type sequence {zt}T
t=1, exact realizations of rental durations for each
type zt and product i, and exact realizations of consumer choices for each possible assortment.
2. Clairvoyant optimum online: the expected revenue of the optimum online algorithm that has full
information about the realized type sequence {zt}T
t=1, but does not know the exact realizations
of rental durations, nor the consumer choices.
3. Non-clairvoyant optimum online: the expected revenue of the optimum online algorithm that
only knows the sequence of type distributions {Ft}T
t=1.
Figure EC.1
Comparing different revenue benchmarks
Figure EC.1 compares these benchmarks in terms of their expected revenue. No constant compet-
itive online algorithm exists against optimum offline, even when resources are not reusable; see
Appendix EC.2.1. (Non-clairvoyant) Optimum online is a weaker benchmark and requires solving an
exponential-size dynamic programming (Rusmevichientong et al. 2020). Clairvoyant optimum online
– introduced by Golrezaei et al. (2014) for non-reusable products and extended to reusable products
by Gong et al. (2021) – is a middle ground benchmark in terms of expected revenue; moreover, it
has to solve an exponential-size dynamic programming to compute its assortment decisions given
the extra information {zt}T
t=1 (which is not provided to a normal online algorithm).

ec4
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
EC.2.1. Unbounded Competitiveness of Optimum Offline
In this subsection, we construct a simple instance which shows the Bayesian expected LP
Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] is at most a O(1/T)-approximation to the optimum offline. Combining with
Proposition 1, it implies that no online algorithm can achieve a (T-independent) bounded competitive
ratio against optimum offline.
Theorem EC.1. The
Bayesian
expected
LP
Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]
is
at
most
a
O(1/T)-
approximation to the optimum offline.
Corollary EC.1. No online algorithm can achieve a (T-independent) bounded competitive ratio
against optimum offline.
Proof of Theorem EC.1. Consider the following instance where there is a single product and a
single consumer type. For this product, its initial inventory is one, reward is one. Once this product
is allocated, the realized rental duration is one (i.e., becoming available in the next time period)
with probability 1/2, and infinite otherwise. At every time period t ∈[T], a consumer with this single
consumer type arrives the platform with probability one. Consumers select this product (if assorted)
with probability one.
First, we claim that the expected revenue of the optimum offline is at least T/2. Note that the
optimum offline observe the realization of rental duration of the product at each time period before
assorting, and thus it can assort the product whenever the realized rental duration at that time
period is one. Since the expected number of such time period is T/2, the expected revenue of optimum
offline is at least T/2.
Next, we consider the Bayesian expected LP Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] and its dual program on this
instance:
max
T
X
t=1
yt
s.t.
min
T
X
t=1
θt
s.t.
t
X
τ=1
1
2 yτ ≤1
t ∈[T] .
T
X
τ=t
1
2 θτ ≥1
t ∈[T] .
Consider the following feasible dual solution with objective value 2 in the dual program:
θt = 0, ∀t ∈[T −1],
θT = 2.
Invoking the weak duality between the above primal-dual linear programs finishes the proof.
□
EC.3. Discussions and Subsidiary Results
EC.3.1. Static vs. dynamic substitution and sub-assortment sampling.
In this section, we discuss the connection between the sub-assortment sampling and the assortment
optimization for both static substitution and dynamic substitution studied in the literature (cf.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec5
Ma et al. 2018). We first introduce the definitions of static substitution and dynamic substitution,
then discuss their connection with the sub-assortment sampling in the offline (single-shot) assort-
ment problem, and finally we extend the discussion to the online (multi-period) assortment problem
considered in this paper.
In our model, the platform can only form assortments of available products. An alternative mod-
eling assumption is that the platform can form assortments regardless of availability of the products.
In this alternative model, we distinguish two setups on how consumers make their decision based on
the displayed assortment and availability of the products.
• Static substitution: Given assortment S and availability status of all the products, a consumer
with choice model ϕ chooses item i with probability ϕ(S,i), and the sale is only final if the
selected product i is available.
• Dynamic substitution: Given assortment S and availability status of all the products, a consumer
with choice model ϕ chooses item i with probability ϕ( ˆS,i) where assortment ˆS ⊆S contains
all available products in S. By definition, the consumer never chooses an unavailable product.
Notably, in the offline (single-shot) assortment problem, the sub-assortment sampling builds the
following connection between the static substitution and dynamic substitution.
Proposition EC.1. For any weak substitutable and downward-closed feasible choice model ϕ, any
assortment S ∈S, and any possible availability of products, there exists an randomized assortment ˜S
such that for every product i ∈[n], the probability that product i is allocated under assortment S in
the static substitution equals to the expected probability (over the randomness of ˜S) that product i is
allocated under assortment ˜S in the dynamic substitution.
Proof. Invoking Proposition 3 by setting ϕ ←ϕ, S ←S and pi ←ϕ(S,i) for all i ∈S finishes the
proof.
□
In the online (multi-period) assortment problem, our simulation-based algorithms first samples
assortment ˆSt based on the optimal assignment of the Bayesian expected LP Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]
and then constructs assortment ¯St by removing unavailable products as well as products that the
discarding procedure suggests to discard. We adapt the definition of static substitution as follows.
• Static substitution with cancellation: Given assortment S, a consumer with choice model ϕ
chooses product i with probability ϕ(S,i). After observing the realized choice of the consumer,
the platform can take back this product i immediately with no cost for the purpose of discarding
or due to the unavailability.
Under static substitution with cancellation, we can simplify our simulation-based algorithms (Algo-
rithm 2 and Algorithm 3) and preserve the same competitive ratio guarantee (Theorem 1 and
Theorem 2) by modifying the post-processing step as follows: offer assortment ˆSt to consumer t,
and take back product i selected by consumer t if i ̸∈¯St. The competitive ratio guarantee for the

ec6
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
aforementioned modified Algorithm 3 follows exactly the same argument as before. To see why the
competitive ratio is preserved for the aforementioned modified Algorithm 2, note that the similar
argument as the one in Theorem 1 for Algorithm 2 still holds. In particular, we can consider a
hypothetical scenario where we run the modified Algorithm 2 without inventory constraint and the
normal run of the modified Algorithm 2; Interestingly, under static substitution with cancellation,
the coupling between two scenarios this time becomes trivial, and then the concentration argument
for the hypothetical scenario concludes the argument.
On the other hand, the online (multi-period) assortment problem with dynamic substitution is
essentially the exact problem considered in the main text. In this sense, the sub-assortment sampling
and the coupling argument in the proof of Theorem 1 can be interpreted as a reduction from the
online assortment problem with dynamic substitution to the online assortment problem with static
substititution (with cancellation).
EC.3.2. Improved competitive ratio for non-reusable case.
As a side result and mainly for the purpose of our numerical simulations, we consider the special
case of Bayesian online assortment for non-reusable resources in Section EC.7, which was studied
in Rusmevichientong et al. (2020). We follow our simulation-based approach, and then similar to
Section 3.3.1 we use a dynamic programming that captures the expected revenue-to-go of the optimal
discarding policy for this product, when the product receives (probabilistic) suggestions from the
simulation-based outer algorithm for being placed in the assortment.10 The main difference this time
is that we can actually compute and run the exact optimum discarding DP. To see this, fix a product
i ∈[n]. Notice that in the case of infinite rental durations, the current inventory level plays the role
of the state (which is a monotone decreasing quantity, as units of the product never return to the
inventory); thus the DP has polynomial-size state space and in principle can be computed efficiently,
i.e., in polynomial time.
It turns out that solving this DP is intimately related to the “magician problem”, introduced and
studied in Alaei (2014), which itself is an special case of online contention resolution schemes for a
simple uniform matroid environment (Feldman et al. 2016). By leveraging the techniques introduced
in this paper and extending them to the Bayesian online assortment optimization problem, we show
that a discarding algorithm that follows the optimum DP loses no more than
1
√cmin+3 fraction of
the expected LP’s revenue (which is the same near-optimal approximation factor as in the magician
problem).
Specifically, let EI
i,t denote the expected revenue-to-go of product i during [t,T] from the optimal
discarding policy, when I is the remaining inventory at time t. Similar to the discussion about the
10 This dynamic programming is a generalization of the dynamic programming for prophet inequality matching in Alaei
et al. (2012).

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec7
per-unit revenue thresholds in Section 3.3.1, suppose assortment ˆS ∼XS,t,zt is sampled at time t.
If the DP discarding policy discards the product i from the sampled assortment ˆS, the expected
revenue-to-go becomes EI
i,t+1; otherwise, with probability ϕzt( ˆS,i)11 the consumer selects product i
and the expected revenue-to-go becomes EI−1
i,t+1 + rzt
i . With the remaining probability, product i is
not selected and the expected revenue-to-go is EI
i,t+1. Hence, we can calculate EI
i,t using dynamic
programming (i.e., backward induction), with the following Bellman equation:
EI
i,t =
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt max{EI
i,t+1,ϕzt(S,i)(rzt
i + EI−1
i,t+1) + (1 −ϕzt(S,i))EI
i,t+1},
(EC.1)
After rearranging the terms, it is easy to observe that DP decisions are made by an inventory-
dependent revenue thresholding rule (that is independent of {ϕzt(S,i)}, as these terms cancel out):
h
At time t with type zt and inventory Ii, i ∈ˆS will be accepted
i
⇐⇒rzt
i ≥EIi
i,t+1 −EIi−1
i,t+1
We are now ready to present our refined simulation-based policy with a new discarding rule. This
rule uses the above inventory-dependent thresholds, where these thresholds are computed upfront,
but they depend on the product, time, and the current remaining inventory level of the product. See
Algorithm 4 for details.
Theorem EC.2. Let cmin = mini∈[n] ci be the smallest inventory. The competitive ratio of Algo-
rithm 4 against offline Bayesian expected LP benchmark, i.e., Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] is at least

1 −
1
√cmin+3

. Moreover, it runs in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) given oracle access to an offline algo-
rithm for assortment optimization (Assumption 3).
The proof follows a similar structure as in proof of Theorem 2. See Section EC.7 for details.
EC.4. Omitted Proofs in Section 2
Proposition 1. For any type distributions {Ft}T
t=1, the expected total revenue of the clairvoyant
optimum online benchmark is upper-bounded by Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1].
Proof. Let IS,t(z) ∈{0,1} be the indicator that clairvoyant optimum online benchmark offers
set S at time t for a given type sequence z = {zt}T
t=1. As clairvoyant optimum online benchmark is
inventory feasible for any sample path of rental durations d = {dt}T
t=1, for all i ∈[n], t ∈[T] we have:
Xt
τ=1
X
S∈S 1{dτ ≥t −τ}ϕzτ (S,i)IS,t(z) ≤ci
Now, note that random variable dτ is independent from random variable IS,τ(z), as clairvoyant
optimum online benchmark does not get to see dτ when assorts a set at time τ. Therefore, set-
ting yS,t,zt = E

IS,t(z)
zt

results in a feasible assignment in the corresponding linear program
11 Similiar to Section 3.3.1, here we consider a hypothetical scenario where the probability that the consumer select
product i equals ϕzt( ˆS,i) regardless whether another product i′ is discarded from ˆS.

ec8
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
Algorithm 4: Simulation-based Algorithm with Inventory-dependent Revenue Thresholds
1 Pre-processing:
• Compute the optimal assignment {y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] by invoking the offline
assortment oracle (Assumption 3)
• Set XS,t,zt ≜y∗
S,t,ztFt(zt) for every S,t and zt where optimal assignment has a non-zero entry
• Solve the dynamic programming with Bellman update described in Equation (EC.1) and
boundary condition EI
i,T +1 = E0
i,t = 0 for every product i and I ∈[ci] to obtain {EI
i,t}I∈[ci]
i∈[n],t∈[T ]
• Let QI
i,t ≜EI
i,t+1 −EI−1
i,t+1, for all i ∈[n],t ∈[T],I ∈[ci].
for t = 1 to T do
/* consumer t with type zt ∼Ft arrives */
2
Simulation: Upon realizing consumer type zt, sample ˆSt ∼{y∗
S,t,zt}S∈S
3
Discarding: Initialize ¯St ←ˆSt
4
for each product i ∈ˆSt do
5
Let Ii,t be the currently available units of product i for product i.
6
if rzt
i < Q
Ii,t
i,t or there is no available unit of product i then
7
Remove i from ¯St
/* Inventory-dependent revenue thresholds {QI
i,t} are computed once upfront */
8
Post-processing: Let ˜St ←Sub-assortment Sampling

ϕzt, ¯St,{ϕ( ˆSt,i)}i∈¯St

/* Send a query call to Procedure 1 with appropriate input arguments */
9
Offer assortment ˜St to consumer t
Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] for any sequence of type distributions {Ft}T
t=1; to see this, take expectation of
the LHS of the above inequality over rental durations first, and then over z considering that types
are independent. Moreover, the objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] under this assignment will
be equal to the expected revenue of the clairvoyant optimum online benchmark, which finishes the
proof.
□
Proposition 2. Given an algorithm for offline assortment (Assumption 3), an optimal assignment
{y∗
S,t,zt} of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] can be computed efficiently in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|). Moreover,
{y∗
S,t,zt} has no more than Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) non-zero entries.
Before proving the above proposition, we first state a technical lemma regarding the ellipsoid
algorithm and sketch its proof (see Gr¨otschel et al. 1981, for a detailed proof).
Lemma EC.1. Suppose a primal linear program is bounded and feasible. Moreover, suppose its dual
has a separation oracle with running time at most τ. Then primal admits an optimal solution that

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec9
has Poly(τ,m) non-zero entries and can be computed in Poly(τ,m) time, where m is the number of
dual variables (primal constraints).
Proof sketch of Lemma EC.1. Because primal LP is feasible and bounded, dual is also feasible
and bounded. Now consider running ellipsoid algorithm with the separation oracle to solve the dual.
Ellipsoid can solve the dual in Poly(τ,m) time. Now by looking at the run of ellipsoid and considering
only dual constraints that ellipsoid returns as violated, we can find Poly(τ,m) many constraints
in the dual such that the dual value does not change if we throw away the remaining constraints.
Note that constraints in the dual correspond to variables in the primal. So, we can throw away all
the variables in the primal except the ones corresponding to the constraints in the dual that the
separation oracles asks us to keep, and the LP value does not change. Now we have a compact LP
in the primal, which we can again solve to get the succinct primal solution with Poly(τ,m) non-zero
entries and in time Poly(τ,m).
□
Proof of Proposition 2. Given Lemma EC.1, we are ready to show that expected LP can be
solved efficiently by the offline oracle. Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] has exponentially many variables and
(nT +T) constraints. Hence its dual has only (nT +T) variables and exponentially many constraints.
Here is the dual LP, with dual variable θi,t and λt:
min
θ,λ≥0
XT
t=1
Xn
i=1 ciθi,t +
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt λt,zt
s.t.
λt,zt +
Xn
i=1
XT
τ=t Ft(zt) ¯Gzt
i (τ −t)ϕzt(S,i)θi,τ ≥
Xn
i=1 rzt
i Ft(zt)ϕzt(S,i)
S ∈S, t ∈[T],zt ∈Zt
Now, fix t ∈[T],zt ∈Zt, and consider the group of dual constraints corresponding to t and zt. In
order to obtain a separation oracle for this group of constraints, given λt,zt and {θi,τ} one needs to
find a set ˆS ∈arg max
S∈S
Xn
i=1
ˆRiϕzt(S,i), where
ˆRi ≜Ft(zt)

rzt
i −
XT
τ=t
¯Gzt
i (τ −t)θi,τ

Then if λt,zt ≥
Xn
i=1
ˆRiϕzt( ˆS,i) these constraints are satisfied and if not the constraint corresponding
to t,zt, ˆS is a separating hyperplane. Note that because of downward-closeness of S, i.e., Assump-
tion 2, and weak-substitutability of ϕzt(S,i), i.e., Assumption 1, we can discard products for which
ˆRi < 0, and hence without loss of generality assume ˆRi ≥0. Therefore, thanks to Assumption 3, one
can find such a subset ˆS with one call to the oracle. By a polynomial time search over all possi-
ble t and zt, dual will have a separation oracle with running time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T|Zt|). Invoking
Lemma EC.1 finishes the proof.
□

ec10
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
EC.5. Omitted Technical Details of Section 3.2 (Large Inventory)
In this section, we provide the detailed analysis of the competitive ratio of Algorithm 2, stated in
Theorem 1.
In Section 3.2, we highlighted the one major issue due to the possibly positive correlation among
allocations of the same product across time. To work around this issue, we use a careful coupling
argument in our analysis of Algorithm 2 that couples the rental indicator random variables of our
algorithm with an alternative hypothetical algorithm. This hypothetical algorithm ignores inventory
constraints of all the products and only simulates the expected LP’s optimal solution combined with
independent discarding of each product with probability γ. This algorithm generates an indepen-
dent sequence of rental indicator random variables, allowing us to use simple concentration bounds.
Importantly, this coupling trick is only possible because of the guarantee of the sub-assortment
sampling procedure in Equation (2), which will be clear later in the proof.
Before the proof of Theorem 1, we recall the multiplicative form of Chernoff concentration
bound (Chernoff et al. 1952) that is used in the proof.
Lemma EC.2 (Multiplicative Chernoff Bound). Suppose X1,X2,...,Xt are independent ran-
dom variables taking values in {0,1}. Let X denote their sum and let µ = E[X] denote the sum’s
expected value. Then for any δ > 0,
Pr[X > (1 + δ)µ] ≤exp

−δ2µ
2 + δ

Proof of Theorem 1. Running time is easily proved by Proposition 2 and Proposition 3. For the
proof of competitive ratio, we first claim that for any time period t and product i, the probability
that there exists an available unit of product i is at least 1 −exp

−γ2cmin
2−γ

. To show this claim,
define the following indicator random variables and their corresponding events:
Ii,t : event that a unit of product i is allocated at time t ;
I(1)
i,t : event that product i is in assortment ˆSt ;
I(2)
i,t : event that product i is not removed from assortment ¯St in line 6 of Algorithm 2 ;
I(3)
i,t : event that a unit of product i is available in the inventory at the beginning of time t ;
I(4)
i,t : event that product i is in assortment ˜St and selected by consumer t ;
Ii,τ,t : event that rental duration of product i at time τ is at least t −τ .
Notice that by definition, Ii,t = I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t · I(4)
i,t . Now, our claim is equivalent to
Pr
"X
τ<t
Ii,τ · Ii,τ,t ≥ci
#
≤exp

−γ2cmin
2 −γ

,
(EC.2)

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec11
for any time t and product i. To show inequality (EC.2), one concern is that {Ii,t} are not independent
across t. To resolve this issue, consider a hypothetical scenario where we run Algorithm 2 without
inventory constraints, and define random variables
n
z†
t, ˆS†
t ,I†
i,t,I(1)†
i,t ,I(2)†
i,t ,I(3)†
i,t ,I(4)†
i,t ,I†
i,τ,t
o
i,t,τ exactly
in the same way as in a normal run of Algorithm 2 with inventory constraints. Note that by definition,
(i) I(3)†
i,t
is deterministically equal to 1; (ii) I†
i,t = I(1)†
i,t · I(2)†
i,t · I(3)†
i,t · I(4)†
i,t = I(1)†
i,t · I(2)†
i,t · I(4)†
i,t ; and (iii)
{I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t}τ are mutually independent across τ.
We now use a coupling between this hypothetical scenario and the normal run of Algorithm 2 with
inventory constraints, in which P
τ<t I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t ≥P
τ<t Ii,τ · Ii,τ,t for all i,t. Clearly, we can define
the coupling such that z†
t ←zt, ˆS†
t ←ˆSt (and therefore I(1)†
i,t
= I(1)
i,t ), I(2)†
i,t
←I(2)
i,t , and I†
i,τ,t ←Ii,τ,t.
Additionally, notice that
Pr
h
I(4)
i,t · I(3)
i,t = 1 | I(1)
i,t ,I(2)
i,t ,I(3)
i,t
i
= ϕzt( ˆSt,i) · I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t =ϕz†
t ( ˆS†
t ,i) · I(1)†
i,t · I(2)†
i,t · I(3)
i,t
= Pr
h
I(4)†
i,t · I(3)
i,t = 1 | I(1)†
i,t ,I(2)†
i,t ,I(3)
i,t
i
,
where the first equality holds due to the guarantee of the sub-assortment sampling in Proposition 3
and the second equality holds because of the coupling above. Also, the third equality holds automat-
ically when I(3)
i,t = 0, and when I(3)
i,t = 1 it holds because of the guarantee of sub-assortment sampling
in Proposition 3 and the fact that I(3)
i,t = I(3)†
i,t . Again – because of the coupling above – we conclude
that:
Pr
h
I(4)
i,t · I(3)
i,t = 1 | I(1)
i,t ,I(2)
i,t
i
= Pr
h
I(4)†
i,t · I(3)
i,t = 1 | I(1)†
i,t ,I(2)†
i,t
i
.
Hence, we can further couple random variables I(4)†
i,t · I(3)
i,t ←I(4)
i,t · I(3)
i,t . Therefore, I(4)†
i,t · I(3)†
i,t ≥I(4)†
i,t ·
I(3)
i,t = I(4)
i,t · I(3)
i,t , which guarantees that I†
i,t · I†
i,τ,t ≥Ii,t · Ii,τ,t for all i,t,τ in this coupling. Thus, it is
sufficient to show that
Pr
"X
τ<t
I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t ≥ci
#
≤exp

−γ2cmin
2 −γ

.
To show the above bound, we first rewrite the expectation E

I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t

as follows,
E

I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t

= E
h
I(1)†
i,τ · I(2)†
i,τ · I(4)†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t
i
= E
h
I(1)†
i,τ · I(2)†
i,τ · E
h
I(4)†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t | I(1)†
i,τ ,I(2)†
i,τ
ii
= E
h
I(1)†
i,τ · I(2)†
i,τ ·

ϕz†
τ ( ˆS†
τ,i) · I(1)†
i,τ · I(2)†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t
i
= E
h
I(1)†
i,τ · I(2)†
i,τ · ϕz†
τ ( ˆS†
τ,i) · I†
i,τ,t
i
= (1 −γ)
X
zτ ∈Zτ
X
S∈S
Fτ(zτ) ¯Gzτ
i (t −τ)ϕzt(S,i)y∗
S,t,zt ,
where we use the facts that E
h
I(4)†
i,t
| I(1)†
i,t ,I(2)†
i,t
i
= ϕz†
t ( ˆS†
t ,i) · I(1)†
i,t
· I(2)†
i,t
by Proposition 3;
E
h
I(2)†
i,t
| I(1)†
i,t
i
= (1 −γ)I(1)†
i,t
by construction; and random variables I†
i,τ and I†
i,τ,t are independent
conditioned on zτ. Thus,
E
"X
τ<t
I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t
#
= (1 −γ)
X
τ<t
X
zτ ∈Zτ
X
S∈S
Fτ(zτ) ¯Gzτ
i (t −τ)ϕzt(S,i)y∗
S,t,zt

ec12
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
≤(1 −γ)ci
We finish the proof of our claim – i.e., tail bound in (EC.2)– by applying the multiplicative form of
Chernoff bound (Lemma EC.2) for the sequence of independent random variables

I†
i,τ · I†
i,τ,t
 t−1
τ=1.
Now, fix any time t and product i. Consider the expected contribution of product i at time period
t in the revenue of Algorithm 2. By definition, it is equal to
E[rzt
i Ii,t] = E
h
rzt
i I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t · I(4)
i,t
i
= E
h
rzt
i I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t · E
h
I(4)
i,t | I(1)
i,t ,I(2)
i,t ,I(3)
i,t
ii
= E
h
rzt
i I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t ·

ϕzt( ˆSt,i) · I(1)
i,t · I(2)
i,t · I(3)
i,t
i
≥(1 −γ)

1 −exp

−γ2cmin
2 −γ
 X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S
Ft(zt)rzt
i ϕzt(S,i)y∗
S,t,zt
where the third equality holds by Proposition 3; and the last inequality holds since I(3)
i,t is mutually
independent from rzt
i , I(1)
i,t , I(2)
i,t and ˆSt, and the fact that by our tail bound in (EC.2) we have
E
h
I(3)
i,t
i
≥1 −exp

−γ2cmin
2 −γ

Thus, Algorithm 2 is at least (1 −γ)

1 −exp

−γ2cmin
2−γ

-competitive against the Bayesian expected
LP benchmark for any γ ∈[0,1]. Finally, setting γ = γ∗(cmin) finishes the proof.
□
EC.6. Omitted Technical Details of Section 3.3 (Small Inventory)
In this section, we provide the detailed analysis of the competitive ratio of Algorithm 3, stated
in Theorem 2. The analysis consists of two major parts, as mentioned in the sketch of the proof
of Theorem 2. We first compare Algorithm 3 with the simple dynamic programming described in
Section 3.3.1 and show the total expected revenue of Algorithm 3 due to rentals of product i is at
least ciVi,1 (Part (i), Appendix EC.6.1). We then compare this simple dynamic programming with
the expected linear programming benchmark and show for each product i, ciVi,1 is at least 1/2 of
the contribution of product i to the optimal objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] (Part (ii),
Appendix EC.6.2). Combining the two parts finishes the proof of Theorem 2.
EC.6.1. Part (i) of the Proof: Comparing with the Optimistic DP
In this part, we use vector variable J = (J1,...,JT) to track the state of inventory of the fixed product
i, where Jt is the number of copies of product i that will return to inventory at time t. Note that at
each time t, a possible state J has the form
J = (0,...,0,Jt,Jt+1,...,JT) ,
where PT
τ=t Jt = ci. Now suppose Qi,t(J) denotes the per-unit revenue of product i generated by
Algorithm 3 from time t to T, when algorithm starts from initial state J at time t.12 As a convention,
12 Equivalently, Qi,t(J) is equal to the total revenue of product i generated in [t : T] divided by Jt, which is the number
of on-hand units of product i at the starting time t.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec13
let Qi,T +1(J) = 0. We prove the following stronger lemma, which also shows total revenue generated
from product i is no less than ciVi,1. The intuition behind Lemma EC.3 is as follows: Vi,t is computed
by an optimistic DP that “imagines” the deficiency in inventory is replenished every period, and the
expected revenue-to-go is a concave function of inventory level – i.e., the higher the inventory level,
the lower the per-unit expected revenue-to-go.
Lemma EC.3. For every t ∈[T] and every possible inventory state J at time t, Qi,t(J) ≥Vi,t.
Proof. To simplify the proof, we first assume that the algorithm does not perform the sub-
assortment sampling as the post-processing step (and hence ˜St is the same as ¯St). We finish the
proof first under this simplifying assumption. Then, we show why the proof still remains intact when
we replace the assortment set ¯St in the proof with ˜St ⊆¯St, which is the relevant case when use the
sub-assortment sampling procedure in the post-processing step of Algorithm 3.
The proof is based on backward induction on t. For the base of induction, Qi,T +1(J) = Vi,T +1 = 0.
Now suppose for any time in [t + 1 : T] and possible state J the statement of lemma holds. We can
simply write the following update equation for Qi,t(J) (following exactly the same logic as the update
rule of the dynamic programming in eq. (3), but considering that only Jt products are on-hand):
Qi,t(J) =
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
 
1

rzt
i < P zt
i,t
 
Qi,t+1(J′)
+ 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
 
 1 −ϕzt   ¯S,i

Qi,t+1(J′)
+ ϕzt   ¯S,i

Jt
X
d gzt
i (d)

rzt
i + E
h
Qi,t+d(˜J
(d,d)) + (Jt −1)Qi,t+1(˜J
(1,d))
i!!
(EC.3)
where ¯S ⊆S is the assortment offered in Algorithm 3 for consumer t after the discarding step,
J′ ≜(0,...,0,0,Jt + Jt+1,Jt+2,...,JT) is the next state at time t + 1 if no rental happens at time
t, and ˜J
(τ,d) is the (randomized) state of Algorithm 3 at time t + τ if a rental happens at time t
with rental duration d (where the randomness in this state comes from all type realizations and
consumer choices during future times [t + 1 : t + d −1]). Now, By applying our inductive hypotheses
to eq. (EC.3) and the weak-substitution (i.e., ϕ(S,i) ≤ϕ( ¯S,i) for all i ∈¯S), we have:
Qi,t(J) ≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
 
1

rzt
i < P zt
i,t
 
Vi,t+1
+ 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
 
 1 −ϕzt   ¯S,i

Vi,t+1 + ϕzt   ¯S,i

Jt
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d + (Jt −1)Vi,t+1)
!!
≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
 
1

rzt
i < P zt
i,t
 
Vi,t+1
+ 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
(1 −ϕzt (S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt (S,i)
Jt
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d + (Jt −1)Vi,t+1)
!
(EC.4)

ec14
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
Note also that the RHS of above inequality is non-increasing as a function of Jt, simply because if
1
Jt increases by additive ϵ > 0 then RHS increases by
ϵ · 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
· ϕzt(S,i) ·
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d −Vi,t+1)

=ϵ · 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
· ϕzt(S,i) ·
 rzt
i −P zt
i,t

≥0
Therefore, as Jt ≤ci, we have
Qi,t(J) ≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
 
1

rzt
i < P zt
i,t
 
Vi,t+1+
+ 1

rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t
 
(1 −ϕzt(S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt(S,i)
ci
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d + (ci −1)Vi,t+1)
!
=
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
× max

Vi,t+1 , (1 −ϕzt(S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt(S,i)
 1
ci
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) + ci −1
ci
Vi,t+1

= Vi,t
(holds because of Bellman update in eq. (3))
Now suppose we use the sub-assortment sampling (Procedure 1) in the post-processing step. Per-
forming this post-processing step does not decrease the revenue guarantee of discarding with “per-
unit revenue thresholds” P zt
i,t in Algorithm 3. In fact, showing any subset of ¯S (for example, the
output ˜S ⊆¯S of the sub-assortment sampling procedure at each time) can only increase the per-unit
revenue-to-go of the policy that follows the thresholds of the optimistic DP. To be more precise, look
at the inductive step in the above proof at some time t. When rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t, the right-hand-side of the
first inequality in Equation (EC.4) can only increase if we replace ¯S with ˜S ⊆¯S, simply because
ϕzt( ¯S,i) < ϕzt( ˜S,i) due to weak-substitution and the coefficient of ϕzt( ¯S,i) in the right-hand-side of
the first inequality in Equation (EC.4) is non-negative when rzt
i ≥P zt
i,t. The rest of the induction
follows similar to the simplified case, which finishes the final proof.
□
EC.6.2. Part (ii): Comparing the Optimistic DP with the Expected-LP
In order to prove this part, we use the connection between DP of Section 3.3.1 and a related LP.
This connections leads us to apply simple duality arguments to find a lower-bound on the ratio of
ciVi,1 and the contribution of product i to the optimal objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1].
Note that scaling {rzt
i } does not change the ratio. Hence, without loss of generality, we normalize
the contribution of product i to the optimal objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], i.e.,
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)rzt
i = 1

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec15
Given the above observation and the Bellman update in (3), consider the following primal linear
program that gives a lower-bound on worst-case value of the ratio:
min
r,V≥0
ciVi,1
s.t.
Vi,t ≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt
∀t
×max
n
Vi,t+1 , (1 −ϕzt(S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt(S,i)

1
ci
P
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) + ci−1
ci Vi,t+1
o
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)rzt
i ≥1
(EC.5)
in which we allow both V = {Vi,t}T
t=1 and r = {rzt
i }t∈[T ],zt∈Zt to be variables (and this is an important
feature of this technique). We first relax and simplify this program by switching the outer summation
and max operator in the RHS of the first constraint (which only makes RHS smaller, hence a
relaxation). Note also that:
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztVi,t+1 = Vi,t+1 ≜A,
and
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt

(1 −ϕzt(S,i))Vi,t+1 + ϕzt(S,i)
 1
ci
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) + ci −1
ci
Vi,t+1

= 1
ci
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) −Vi,t+1

+ Vi,t+1 ≜B
Now, by replacing the new constraint Vi,t ≥max{A,B} with two constraints Vi,t ≥A and Vi,t ≥B,
we get the following final primal linear programming:
min
r,V≥0
ciVi,1
s.t.
Vi,t ≥1
ci
X
zt∈Zt,S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)
X
d gzt
i (d)(rzt
i + Vi,t+d) −Vi,t+1

+ Vi,t+1 t ∈[T] ⟨αt⟩
Vi,t ≥Vi,t+1
t ∈[T] ⟨βt⟩
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)rzt
i ≥1
⟨µ⟩
(Primal-LP1)
Now, we write its dual program with dual variable {αt}, {βt} and µ as follows:
max
α,β,µ≥0 µ
s.t.
µ
XT
t=1
X
S∈S ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,zt

≤1
ci
XT
t=1
X
S∈S ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,ztαt

zt ∈Zt
⟨rzt
i ⟩
αt −αt−1 + βt −βt−1 ≤1
ci
X
zt−1∈Zt−1,S∈S XS,t−1,zt−1ϕzt−1(S,i)αt−1
−1
ci
X
d<t
X
zt−d∈Zt−d,S∈S g
zt−d
i
XS,t−d,zt−dϕzt−d(S,i)αt−d t ∈[2 : T] ⟨Vi,2:T⟩
α1 + β1 ≤ci
⟨Vi,1⟩
(Dual-LP1)

ec16
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
Now, we try to guess a feasible solution for the dual program to obtain our desired lower-bound on
the optimal primal objective. To this end, let ∀t : αt = µci (therefore, first set of constraints will be
satisfied automatically) and let all other constraints to be tight. In particular, β1 = ci −α1 = ci(1−µ)
and for all t ∈[2 : T]:
βt = βt−1 + 1
ci
X
zt−1∈Zt−1,S∈S XS,t−1,zt−1ϕzt−1(S,i)αt−1
−1
ci
X
d<t
X
zt−d∈Zt−d,S∈S g
zt−d
i
XS,t−d,zt−dϕzt−d(S,i)αt−d
= βt−1 + µ
X
z∈Zt−1,S∈S XS,t−1,zϕz(S,i)
−µ
X
d<t
X
z∈Zt−d,S∈S gz
i XS,t−d,zϕz(S,i)
(1)
= β1 −µ
X
τ≤t
X
z∈Zt,S∈S XS,τ,zϕz(S,i)
X
d≥t−τ
gz
i (d)
(2)
≥ci(1 −µ) −µci = ci(1 −2µ) ,
where (1) can be obtained by changing the order of summations and rearranging the terms, and
(2) holds because of inventory feasibility of {y∗
S,t,zt} in expectation in Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]. Now,
setting µ = 1/2 guarantees dual feasibility as ∀t : αt ≥0,βt ≥0, and other constraints of the dual
are satisfied by construction. By applying weak duality, the desired ratio is at least µ = 1/2, which
finishes the proof.
EC.7. Omitted Details for the Special Case of Infinite Rental Durations
In this section, we consider the setting where the rental times are infinite, i.e., once products are
purchased by consumers, they never return to the platform. In this setting, the inventory level
of each product is weakly decreasing over time. This enables us to develop inventory-dependent
discarding policies in polynomial time using dynamic programming. These discarding policies are
more refined than the per-unit revenue thresholding policy discussed in Section 3.3.1 and achieve a
better competitive ratio (i.e., 1 −
1
√cmin+3), which is near-optimal when inventories are large.
Theorem EC.2. Let cmin = mini∈[n] ci be the smallest inventory. The competitive ratio of Algo-
rithm 4 against offline Bayesian expected LP benchmark, i.e., Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] is at least

1 −
1
√cmin+3

. Moreover, it runs in time Poly(n,T,P
t∈[T ]|Zt|) given oracle access to an offline algo-
rithm for assortment optimization (Assumption 3).
The proof of Theorem EC.2 follows a similar structure as for Theorem 2: we first use induction to
show {EI
i,t} are lower-bounds the for future revenue-to-go of Algorithm 4 (Part (i)), then introduce
a linear program to show Eci
i,1 is at least 1 −1/√ci + 3 of the contribution of product i to the objective
value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1] (Part (ii)).
Proof of Theorem EC.2. The running time is proved by Proposition 2, and the fact that the
simple DP in Section 3.3.1 can be solved in polynomial time. The proof of competitive has two parts:

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec17
Part (i). Here we show for any product i, time t and inventory I, the future expected revenue in
Algorithm 4 from product i with current inventory I at time t is at least EI
i,t by induction on time t
from T +1 to 1. The base case t = T +1 is satisfied due to our boundary assumption that EI
i,T +1 = 0.
Now, suppose from time t + 1 to T + 1, the induction hypothesis holds. Consider the algorithm at
time t. An assortment ˆS is sampled with probability XS,t,zt. Let ¯S ⊆ˆS be the assortment offered to
consumer at time t after discarding. For any product i with inventory I, the algorithm discards it
if EI−1
i,t+1 + rzt
i < EI
i,t+1. By induction hypothesis at time t + 1, it guarantees to gain future expected
utility at least max{EI
i,t+1,ϕzt( ¯S,i)(rzt
i +EI−1
i,t+1)+(1−ϕzt( ¯S,i))EI
i,t+1,}. Since the choice model satisfies
substitutability (Assumption 1), ϕzt( ˆS,i) ≤ϕzt( ¯S,i) for all i ∈¯S. Therefore, by similar calculations
as in the proof of Lemma EC.3, the induction hypothesis holds at time t, i.e., EI
i,t lower-bounds the
future expected revenue from product i with inventory I at time t. Thus, the expected revenue of
Algorithm 4 from product i from time 1 is at least Eci
i,1.
Part (ii). Here we show Eci
i,1 is at least

1 −
1
√ci+3

fraction of the contribution of product i
to the objective value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]. Note that scaling {rzt
i } does not change the ratio.
Hence, without loss of generality, we normalize the contribution of product i to the optimal objective
value of Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1], i.e.,
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)rzt
i = 1
Given the above observation and the Bellman update in (EC.1), consider the following primal linear
program that gives a lower-bound on worst-case value of the ratio:
min
r,E≥0
Eci
i,1
s.t.
EI
i,t ≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,zt max
n
EI
i,t+1,
ϕzt(S,i)(rzt
i + EI−1
i,t+1) + (1 −ϕzt(S,i))EI
i,t+1
o
t ∈[T], I ∈[ci]
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S rzt
i ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,zt ≥1
(EC.6)
where the variables are {rzt
i } and {EI
i,t}. To prove our result, it is sufficient to show that for all
inventory feasible {XS,t,zt} (i.e., P
t,zt,S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i) ≤ci), the value of program (EC.6) is at least
1 −
1
√ci+3. To see this, we relax the first constraint in (EC.6) by switching the outer summation and
max operator, which provides a relaxed linear program as follows,
min
r,E≥0
Eci
i,1
s.t.
EI
i,t ≥
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)(rzt
i + EI−1
i,t+1)
+

1 −
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)

EI
i,t+1 t ∈[T], I ∈[ci] ⟨αI
t⟩
EI
i,t ≥EI
i,t+1
t ∈[T], I ∈[ci] ⟨βI
t ⟩
XT
t=1
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S rzt
i ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,zt ≥1
⟨µ⟩

ec18
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
We write its dual program with dual variable αI
t, βI
t and γ as follows
max
α,β,µ≥0
µ
s.t.
αci
1 + βci
1 ≤1
⟨Eci
i,1⟩
αI
1 + βI
1 ≤0
I ∈[ci −1]
⟨EI
i,1⟩
αI
t+1 + βI
t+1 ≤
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)αI+1
t
+
+

1 −
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i)

αI
t + βI
t t ∈[T −1], I ∈[ci] ⟨EI
i,t+1⟩
XT
t=1
X
S∈S ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,ztµ
≤
XT
t=1
X
S∈S

ϕzt(S,i)XS,t,zt
Xci
I=1 αI
t

zt ∈Z
⟨rzt
i ⟩
By weak duality, any feasible dual solution offers a lower bound for the primal.
Let qt ≜P
zt∈Zt
P
S∈S XS,t,ztϕzt(S,i). By definition, PT
t=1 qt ≤ci. Now, suppose we are interested
in generating a feasible dual assignment where the all the constraints corresponding are tight, i.e., a
solution assignment for the following program (EC.7).
max
α,β,µ≥0
µ
s.t.
αci
1 + βci
1 = 1
αI
1 + βI
1 = 0
I ∈[ci −1]
αI
t+1 + βI
t+1 = qtαI+1
t
+ (1 −qt)αI
t + βI
t t ∈[T −1], I ∈[ci]
µ =
Xci
I=1 αI
t
z ∈Z
(EC.7)
Notice that Lemma EC.4 below is sufficient to finish the proof of Theorem EC.2.
Lemma EC.4. For any non-negative sequence {qt}T
t=1 such that PT
t=1 qt ≤ci, the objective value of
program (EC.7) is at least 1 −
1
√ci+3.
To show Lemma EC.4, we use a technical lemma (Definition EC.1, Lemma EC.5) developed in Alaei
(2014) described below.
Definition EC.1 (Sand/Barrier Process, Alaei 2014). Consider a tape of infinite length
with one unit of infinitely divisible sand at position 0 and a barrier at position 1. A sequence of
q1,...,qT (with all qt ∈[0,1]) and a parameter γ ∈(0,1) are given as the input. The sand and the
barrier are gradually moved to the right in T rounds. At the t-th round the following takes place.
The left most γ fraction of the sand on the tape is selected and the qt fraction of this sand is moved
one position to the right. This can be defined formally as follows. Let sj
t denote the amount of sand
at postition j at the beginning of round t and let yj
t ∈[0,1] denote the fraction of sand selected from
position j during round t. yj
t are chosen such that P
i sj
tyj
t = γ and such that for some integer θt,
yj
t = 1 for any j < θt, and yj
t = 0 for any j > θt. So during round t, a qtyj
tsj
t amount of sand is moved

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec19
from each position j to position j + 1. The barrier is moved one position to the right at the end of
any round when the total amount of sand at the position of the barrier is more than 1 −γ. We will
use λt to denote the position of the barrier at the beginning of round t.
Lemma EC.5 (Sand/Barrier Process, Alaei 2014). For any γ and any sequence q1,...,qn,
throughout the sand/barrier process the position of the barrier at the beginning of round t, i.e., λt,
satisfies
λt ≤
t−1
X
τ=1
qτγ + 1 −γλt
1 −γ .
Proof of Lemma EC.4. We now construct such a feasible solution of program (EC.7) by using
the sand/barrier argument. Let {sj
t},{yj
t}, and {λt} be variables defined in sand/barrier process of
Definition EC.1, with parameter T, {qt}t∈[T ] and γ = 1 −
1
√ci+3. Think of different inventory levels
as different positions on the tape of sands, but in reveres order. In other words, position ci −I
corresponds to inventory level I (basically, sand moves from higher to lower inventory levels). We
have T number of rounds of sand/barrier process. At round t of the process, there is a total of sci−I
t
unit of sand at each position ci −I for I ∈[ci]. The amount of sand sci−I
t
is divided into selected
sand sci−I
t
yci−I
t
that determines αI
t, and non-selected sand sci−I
t
(1 −yci−I
t
), that determines βI
t . In
summary, we construct the dual solution as follows,
µ = γ, αI
t = sci−I
t
yci−I
t
, and βI
t = sci−I
t
(1 −yci−I
t
).
Note that all constraint in program (EC.7) is satisfied by above dual construction. Based on the
description of sand/barrier process in Definition EC.1, only ci positions of tape will have sand (and
hence this construction is well-defined) if the barrier never passes position ci, i.e., λT +1 ≤ci. Invoking
Lemma EC.5 and rearranging the terms finish the proof.
□
EC.8. Numerical Experiments
Experimental setup. In our test problems, we have six products indexed by {1,2,3,4,5,6}. Each
product has an initial inventory ci = 30. We consider consumers who choose from their own “con-
sideration sets”
(Howard and Sheth 1969, Aouad et al. 2020). Given the consideration set of a
consumer, we assume she chooses a product from this set based on a Multinomial Logit (MNL) choice
model. More specifically, we have six types of consumers. Consumer of type j ∈{1,2,3,4,5,6} con-
siders products [1 : j]. Given assortment set S, she chooses product i ∈S with probability ϕj(S,i) =
αj
i/(αj
0 + P
l∈S αj
l ). For a consumer of type j, αj
i = 0 for i > j (i.e., she does not pick a product
outside of her consideration set). Each non-zero αj
i is drawn independently and uniformly at random
from interval [0.9,1.1]. To give consumers the possibility of picking an outside option, we set αj
0 so

ec20
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
that αj
0/(αj
0 + P
l∈[1:j] αj
l ) = 0.1. Note that consumers of type 1 are the most choosy ones (single-
minded), while the consumers of type 6 are the least choosy ones. For a consumer of type j, the
rental fee rj
i of product i is drawn uniformly at random from the interval [10 · η(j,κ),25 · η(j,κ)]
where η(j,κ) ≜1 + 2κ · 6−j
5 , and κ ≥0 is a parameter that varies in our simulation cases (will be
specified later). After generating rental fees rj = (rj
1,...,rj
6) for consumer of type j, we reorder them
so that rj
1 ≥rj
2 ≥... ≥rj
6.
We consider a discrete-time selling/renting horizon of length T = 300, and a non-stationary model
for the arrival of different types in a similar fashion to Rusmevichientong et al. (2020). Roughly
speaking, in order to have worst-case sequence of type distributions, we intend to have an arrival
ordering where choosy consumers arrive later in the selling horizon. In this way, policies need to
either carefully preserve enough inventories for these consumers (in case of no rental), or take finite
rental durations of products into account and carefully manage in a way that enough items return to
the inventory when choosy consumers arrive (in case of rentals). To capture this style of arrival, we
divide the selling horizon into chunks of equal length τ = T/6. Let τ j = (6−j)τ +1 for j = 1,2,...,6.
At each time t, a consumer of type j arrives with probability proportional to e−0.001κ|t−τj|, i.e.,
Probability of type j arriving at time t =
e−0.001κ|t−τj|
P6
l=1 e−0.001κ|t−τl| ,
(EC.8)
Note that κ = 0 corresponds to i.i.d. arrival of types from the uniform distribution. As κ increases,
the arrival becomes more heterogeneous (converging towards a deterministic arrival in a descending
order of types).
We consider two categories of scenarios: first without rentals (see Figure EC.2) and second with
rentals (see Figure EC.3). For each category, we consider four test scenarios corresponding to κ ∈
{0,1,2,3}. In the first case, we set initial inventory ci = 30 for each product i. In the second case,
we set initial inventory ci = 20 for each product i and consider stochastic rental durations. The
rental duration of a product i for a consumer of type j is set to be the random variable T/10 + Xj,
where Xj is geometrically distributed with a mean that is drawn uniformly at random from interval
[20 · η(7 −j,κ),30 · η(7 −j,κ)] at the beginning of the simulation.
In order to measure the expected revenue of different policies in each scenario, we consider running
the target policy over independent sample paths of the input (including type realizations, consumer
choices, and rental durations) by doing 50 iterations of Monte-Carlo simulation. We then record
the generated revenues of all runs/sample paths, and use “box and whisker” plots to demonstrate
the median revenues and the resulting confidence intervals for these quantities (Figure EC.2 and
Figure EC.3). Moreover, we compute average revenue over all runs/sample paths as an estimate for
expected revenue of each policy (Table EC.1 and Table EC.2).

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec21
Policies. In our numerical experiments, we compare the expected revenue of eleven different poli-
cies/benchmarks that are proposed in this paper or previous work:
1. Inventory Balancing (IB): an adaptation of the inventory balancing algorithm in Golrezaei
et al. (2014) by keeping track of inventory levels of reusable products. For our experiments, we
consider a variant that uses exponential penalty function Ψ(x) = e1−x−e
1−e .
2. Myopic greedy policy (GR): given available products at each time, GR offers the (myopic) optimal
assortment at this time. This policy is a special case of IB when Ψ(x) = 1{x > 0}.
3. Greedy with linear approximate of value-to-go (GR-APXLinValue): this policy is the approximate
DP policy suggested in Rusmevichientong et al. (2020), which is essentially a greedy myopic
policy with respect to a linear approximation of optimal revenue-to-go function. See Section 3
of Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) for more details.
4. Rollout policy (Rollout): this policy is obtained by applying rollout13 on the static policy
propsoed in Section 4 of Rusmevichientong et al. (2020).
5. Decomposition (Decomp): this policy is another approximate DP policy suggested in Liu and van
Ryzin (2008), which first decomposes the original DP across the products and then constructs
value function approximations by solving a separate DP for each product. This policy is a widely
used heuristics in practice, but has no theoretical performance guarantees.
6. Simulation-based policy with random discarding (Sim+Random): this policy is the simulation-
based policy that randomly discard each product with probability γ and is discussed in Sec-
tion 3.2 (Algorithm 2). For our experiments, we set γ = 0.1.
7. Simulation-based policy with per-unit revenue thresholds (Sim+Infusion): this policy is the
simulation-based policy that assumes infusion/replenishment of inventories to compute its dis-
carding rule and is discussed in Section 3.3 (Algorithm 3).
8. Simulation-based policy with inventory-dependent revenue thresholds (Sim+OPTDis): this policy
is designed for the special case of no rentals. It combines an exact randomized rounding of
expected LP with the optimum online discarding rules for each product to maintain inventory
feasibility of all the products. We implement this policy for the no-rental scenario. See its formal
description in Section EC.7 (Algorithm 4).
9. Simulation-based policy with hybrid discarding rules (Sim+Hybrid(i)): this policy is the first
type of simulation-based hybrid policy discussed in Section 3.4. Specifically, for each product, it
compares the approximation guarantees for different discarding policies, i.e., random discarding
in Algorithm 2 and per-unit revenue thresholds in Algorithm 3 (as well as inventory-dependent
revenue thresholds in Algorithm 4 for the no rental scenario). Then it chooses the discarding
policy with higher approximation guarantee for each product separately.
13 In this context, rollout of a static policy is computed by first computing the revenue-to-go function of the static
policy using bakward induction, and then greedily picking the best assortment at each time assuming future revenues
are equal to the computed revenue-to-go values of the static policy.

ec22
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
10. Simulation-based policy with hybrid by Monte-Carlo simulation (Sim+Hybrid(ii)): this policy
is the second type of simulation-based hybrid policy discussed in Section 3.4. Specifically, after
every 10 periods, it estimates the expected future revenue of Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3 (as
well as Algorithm 4 for the no rental scenario) by doing 20 iterations of Monte-Carlo simulation;
and switches to the policy with higher estimated future revenue.
11. Bayesian expected LP: this benchmark is the Bayesian LP benchmark Expected-LP[{Ft}T
t=1]
defined in Section 2. It provides an upper-bound on the expected revenue of any feasible online
policy (when the expectation is taken over the randomness of types, consumer choices, and
rental durations, as well as internal randomness of the policy).
Table EC.1
Comparing average revenue of different policies; No rentals and ∀i : ci = 30; Policies/benchmarks with
∗are proposed or analyzed in this paper.
κ = 0
κ = 1
κ = 2
κ = 3
Expected-LP∗
3540.84 7156.37 11277.60 14898.52
IB
3217.19 6061.12
8983.46
11223.27
GR
3010.94 5312.55
7587.48
9097.80
GR-APXLinValue
2985.39 5297.21
7203.79
9310.97
Rollout
3127.90 5514.05
7606.67
9406.78
Decomp
3054.57 5785.07
8521.41
10227.28
Sim+Random∗
3185.99 6382.40 10455.97 13741.67
Sim+Infusion∗
3353.12 6715.98 10415.32 13718.31
Sim+OPTDis∗
3339.37 6389.41
9905.52
13723.17
Sim+Hybrid(i)∗
3358.77 6392.97 10537.14 13799.11
Sim+Hybrid(ii)∗3345.92 6774.01 10827.79 14286.46
Table EC.2
Comparing average revenue of different policies; With rentals and ∀i : ci = 20; Policies/benchmarks
with ∗are proposed or analyzed in this paper.
κ = 0
κ = 1
κ = 2
κ = 3
Expected-LP∗
5224.14 10142.05 15163.47 17552.75
IB
4600.11
7864.58
10577.72 12096.74
GR
4321.88
7052.60
9191.56
10387.23
GR-APXLinValue
3860.43
5968.55
8148.01
9234.32
Rollout
3970.43
6373.85
8828.02
10012.41
Decomp
4417.60
7148.10
9484.07
10580.31
Sim+Random∗
4405.69
8110.84
12139.91 13531.74
Sim+Infusion∗
4576.72
8025.13
11531.98 13253.71
Sim+Hybrid(i)∗
4583.40
8228.66
12109.57 13578.05
Sim+Hybrid(ii)∗4590.80
8540.15
12683.29 14223.66

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec23
(a) κ = 0
(b) κ = 1
(c) κ = 2
(d) κ = 3
Figure EC.2
Box and whisker comparison of different policies in terms of expected revenue when there is no rental.
Results are based on 50 iterations of Monte-Carlo simulation.
Results. To summarize our findings from simulations we have run in this section, we consider the
two categories mentioned above separately:
1. No rentals: in this case, it is clear from both Table EC.1 and Figure EC.2 that Sim+Hybrid(i)
and Sim+Hybrid(ii) have better performance than others for all κ. Specifically, compare other
policies with our hybrid policies by averaging over scenarios κ ∈{0,1,2,3}: Sim+Hybrid(ii)
achieves 15.90%, 34.59%, 35.92%, 31.01%, 23.35%, 4.67%, 4.52%, 3.08%, 2.97% higher
performance than IB, GR, GR+APXLinValue, Rollout, Decomp, Sim+Random, Sim+Infusion,
Sim+OPTDis,
Sim+Hybrid(i)
on
average,
respectively.14
Notably,
both
hybrid
policies
14 An important point to mention is that Rusmevichientong et al. (2020) reports a better performance for Rollout
compared to IB in a very similar simulation setup. While this looks contradictory at the surface level, we verified the

ec24
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
(a) κ = 0
(b) κ = 1
(c) κ = 2
(d) κ = 3
Figure EC.3
Box and whisker comparison of different policies in terms of expected revenue when there are type-
dependent rentals with stochastic durations. Results are based on 50 iterations of Monte-Carlo sim-
ulation.
Sim+Hybrid(i) and Sim+Hybrid(ii) are better than their components, i.e., Sim+Random,
Sim+Infusion and Sim+OPTDis in almost all parameter regimes. In Sim+Hybrid(i), on average
there are 58.9% products using the uniform discarding procedure, and the remaining 41.1%
products using inventory-dependent revenue threshold discussed in Section EC.7. The running
times of two hybrid policies differ significantly. Specifically, the running time of Sim+Hybrid(i)
is almost the same as all other policies except Sim+Hybrid(ii) whose running time is 766.39x
slower due to its Monte-Carlo simulation. See Table EC.3.
reason behind this discrepancy is that they recompute the approximate values used by Rollout every 100 time periods,
which improves its performance. We did not recompute any of the parameters for the sake of having a fair comparison.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec25
2. Stochastic and finite rentals: in this case, it is clear from both Table EC.2 and Figure EC.3
that both Sim+Hybrid(i) and Sim+Hybrid(ii) perform noticeably better than other poli-
cies for all κ. Specifically, Sim+Hybrid(ii) achieves 11.47%, 25.56%, 42.92%, 33.84%, 22.89%,
4.77%, 5.17%, 3.36% higher performance than IB, GR, GR+APXLinValue, Rollout, Decomp,
Sim+Random, Sim+Infusion, Sim+Hybrid(i) on average, respectively. Notably, both hybrid poli-
cies Sim+Hybrid(i) and Sim+Hybrid(ii) are better than their components, i.e., Sim+Random
and Sim+Infusion. In Sim+Hybrid(i), on average there are 57.0% products using the uniform
discarding procedure, and the remaining 43.0% products using per-unit revenue threshold dis-
cussed in Section 3.3. The running times of two hybrid policies differ significantly. Specifically,
the running time of Sim+Hybrid(i) is similar to all other policies except Sim+Hybrid(ii) whose
running time is 511.18x slower due to its Monte-Carlo simulation. See Table EC.3.
Table EC.3
Comparing normalized average running time of different policies; Policies/benchmarks with ∗are
proposed or analyzed in this paper.
no rentals stochastic rentals
IB
1.06
0.96
GR
1.04
0.92
GR-APXLinValue
1.10
0.94
Rollout
1.10
0.95
Decomp
4.57
1.85
Sim+Random∗
0.98
0.98
Sim+Infusion∗
1.00
0.97
Sim+OPTDis∗
0.99
Sim+Hybrid(i)∗
1
1
Sim+Hybrid(ii)∗
766.39
511.18
EC.9. Application of Sub-Assortment Sampling in Advanced Booking of
Upgrades
To demonstrate the power of our framework and to show why the sub-assortment sampling pro-
cedure (Algorithm 1) can be helpful in other related problems, we introduce and briefly sketch a
variation of our model which we call “advanced booking of upgrades” in this section. This variation
has applications in hotel upsell revenue management.
Advanced booking of upgrades model. Suppose a hotel booking management system would like to
sell upgrade options to the users who have already booked rooms. These upgrade options should be
thought of as a combination of reusable resources (e.g., upgrade to a suite, or access to parking) and
non-reusable resources (e.g., breakfast at the hotel). Each arriving booking request at time t encodes
a check-in time st ≥t, and customer type zt. We assume (st,zt) is drawn from known distribution
{Ft}T
t=1. Customer type zt specifies the rental fees, duration distributions and choice model as our

ec26
e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
original model. After observing the request at time t, the platform immediately display an assortment
of possible upgrade options, the customer selects one upgrade option based on her choice model given
by type zt. Then at time st when the customer actually checks in, the platform finalizes the decision
of whether or not to fulfill the customer’s selected option. If the upgrade is allocated, the platform
collects the reward. Note that at the check-in time st, the platform makes the decision to finalize
the upgrade options based on the realized requests between t and st as well as their realized selected
options.
Bayesian expected LP benchmark. In this model, there exists a Bayesian expected LP benchmark
as follows
max
y,x≥0
XT
t=1
XT
st=t
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S
Xn
i=1 Ft(stzt)rzt
i yS,t,st,zt,i
s.t.
Xt
τ=1
XT
st=t
X
zt∈Zt
X
S∈S Fτ(sτ,zτ) ¯Gzτ
i (t −sτ)yS,τ,sτ ,zτ ,i ≤ci
i ∈[n], t ∈[T]
X
S∈S xS,t,st,zt ≤1
t ∈[T], st ∈[t : T], zt ∈Z
yS,t,st,zt,i ≤ϕzt(S,i)xS,t,st,zt
i ∈[n],t ∈[T], st ∈[t : T], zt ∈Z
(Expected-LP-AdvBooking[{Ft}T
t=1])
Here, variables {xS,t,st,zt} correspond to the probabilities that assortment S is offered to consumer t
given check-in time st and type zt is realized; and variables {yS,t,st,zt,i} correspond to the probabilities
that assortment S is offered to consumer t and upgrade option i is allocated at check-in time st given
check-in time st and type zt is realized.
Similar to Proposition 1, the Bayesian expected LP benchmark Expected-LP-AdvBooking[{Ft}T
t=1]
is an upper bound on the clairvoyant optimum online benchmark, and hence the weaker non-
clairvoyant optimum online.15
Proposition EC.2. For any distributions Ft
T
t=1, the expected total revenue of the clairvoyant opti-
mum online benchmark is upper-bounded by Expected-LP-AdvBooking[{Ft}T
t=1].
Simulation-based Algorithm. We construct a simulation-based algorithm given the optimal solution
of above benchmark and using random discarding and sub-assortment sampling as follows:
• at time t, for consumer t with check-in time st and type zt
1. sample assortment ˆSt based on {xS,t,st,zt}S∈S;
2. randomly discard each option with probability γ, and obtain assortment ¯St ⊆ˆSt;
3. use sub-assortment sampling to match probability y ˆSt,t,st,zt,i, and obtain assortment ˜St;
4. offer assortment ˜St to consumer t;
15 All the analysis in this section for advanced booking of upgrades model is similar to the ones in our original model.
We omit them to avoid repetition.

e-companion to Feng, Niazadeh, Saberi: Near-Optimal Bayesian Online Assortment of Reusable Resources
ec27
Algorithm 5: Simulation-based Algorithm for Advanced Booking of Upgrades
Input: discarding probability γ ∈[0,1]
1 Pre-processing: Compute the optimal assignment {x∗
S,t,st,zt,y∗
S,t,st,zt,i} of
Expected-LP-AdvBooking[{Ft}T
t=1]
2 for t = 1 to T do
/* consumer t with check-in time st, type zt such that (st,zt) ∼Ft arrives */
3
Simulation: Upon realizing consumer check-in time st and type zt, sample ˆSt ∼{x∗
S,t,st,zt}S∈S
4
Discarding: Initialize ¯St ←ˆSt
5
for each product i ∈ˆSt do
6
Flip an independent coin and remove i from ¯St with probability γ
7
if there is no available unit of product i then
8
Remove i from ¯St
9
Post-processing: Let ˜St ←Sub-assortment Sampling

ϕzt, ¯St,{y∗
ˆSt,t,st,zt,i}i∈¯St

/* Send a query call to Procedure 1 with appropriate input arguments */
10
Offer assortment ˜St to consumer t, and fulfill consumer t’s selected option if it is still
available at check-in time st
• at check-in time st, fulfill the customer t’s selected option with probability one if it is still
available
See the formal description of the simulation-based algorithm in Algorithm 5.
Similar to the analysis in Theorem 1, our simulation-based algorithm achieves near-optimal com-
petitive ratio in the advanced booking of upgrades model when the initial inventory is large. As the
proof is almost identical, we omit the details for brevity.
Theorem EC.3. By setting γ = γ∗(cmin), the competitive ratio of Algorithm 5 against the
Bayesian expected LP benchmark Expected-LP-AdvBooking[{Ft}T
t=1] is at least 1 −ε∗(cmin) = 1 −
O
p
log(cmin)/cmin

.