TITLE: Corporate Use of Social Media After ESG Incidents
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478241277205
---

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Production and Operations Management Society 
Disclaimer: This is the Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) version. This version has been peer-reviewed and 
accepted, but has not been copyedited, formatted, or typeset by the publisher. The final published version may 
differ from this manuscript. 
 
This AAM is made available in accordance with the publisher’s self-archiving policy under the terms of CC BY-
NC-ND 4.0 international license, solely for personal, non-commercial use. Under this license, you must give 
appropriate attribution, and reuse is restricted to non-commercial purposes with no derivatives permitted. Any 
commercial use requires prior permission from the copyright holder(s). 
CEIBS Institutional Repository 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corporate Use of Social Media After ESG Incidents
Jingchuan Pu, Hongyu Shan, Tao Yuan
Production and Operations Management
August
 
11, 2024
DOI:
 
https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478241277205
This
 
Author Accepted Manuscript
 
is available from CEIBS Institutional Repository at
https://repository.ceibs.cn/en/publications/corporate-use-of-social-media-after-esg-incidents/

Corporate Use of Social Media After ESG Incidents
Jingchuan Pu∗, Hongyu Shan† and Tao Yuan‡
Production and Operations Management, Forthcoming
July 25, 2024
Abstract
Despite increasing investments in Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) initia-
tives and practices, firms often fail to meet public expectations, causing ESG incidents.
While firms often choose to remain silent after an incident, we argue that this is not at-
tractive to firms anymore on social media platforms, where consumers and stakeholders
can freely share information and publicize concerns. That is, firms tend to use offi-
cial social media accounts to increase communication frequency and communicate with
stakeholders about the incidents (i.e., incident-related posts) after the occurrences. We
are also interested in the extent to which firms would adjust their use of social media
in terms of non-incident-related posts, as the current prevailing practical advice and
studies offer contradicting predictions. Using data from different sources, we construct
an event-based firm-day dataset and empirically show that firms significantly increase
the number of social media posts after ESG incidents. The impact is more salient for
firms in consumer-oriented industries and when the incident is more impactful. Using
a semi-supervised, dictionary-based approach, we delve into the content of tweets and
demonstrate that firms are inclined to increase both the number of incident-related
and the number of non-incident-related tweets after an ESG incident. The follow-up
analyses at the incident level indicate that firms that post more after an ESG incident
experience a better reaction from the capital market, especially for customer-oriented
firms or incidents that receive high attention from the traditional media.
Keywords: ESG incidents; ESG practices; corporate use of social media; capital market
∗Associate Professor of Information Systems, Warrington College of Business, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611. Email: pjchuan@gmail.com.
†Assistant Professor of Finance, China Europe International Business School (CEIBS), Shanghai, China.
Email: hongyushan@ceibs.edu.
‡Corresponding author. Assistant Professor of Finance, School of Business, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China. Email: finyuan@nju.edu.cn.

1
Introduction
As Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) goals are gradually incorporated into
business models, firms face growing internal and external pressures to improve performance
in the realms of environmental impacts, social welfare, and fair labor practices (e.g., B´enabou
and Tirole, 2010). Failure to meet expectations may lead to an ESG incident and negative
media coverage, with the potential for serious reputation damage and boycotts from cus-
tomers (Houston et al., 2022).
For example, in October 2016, the CEO of Wells Fargo
stepped down after an ESG incident involving a fake accounts scandal and the decision to
lend money to firms operating private prisons (Merle, 2016). In January 2019, General Mo-
tors employees sued the company over racial discrimination and a toxic work environment,
and the company received intensive media criticism (Asare, 2019; Simon and Sidner, 2019).
In the aftermath of an ESG incident, the firm needs a strategy for communicating with
the public and stakeholders. Communication in traditional channels, such as press releases
and official statements on the company’s website, are no longer sufficient in the era of social
media (Eriksson, 2018). Official corporate accounts on social media (e.g., Twitter) play an
increasingly important role in communication and engagement with the public. In 2017,
nearly 97% of all Fortune 500 companies used at least one social media platform to promote
their initiatives and communicate with their stakeholders, and 79% of these companies had
an active Twitter account as of 2019 (Statista, 2019).
Relative to other communication
channels, corporate social media accounts have a higher frequency of posts (often daily) and
interactions for the purposes of marketing and customer relationship management (e.g., Gu
and Ye, 2014; Yang et al., 2019). Corporate social media accounts require investments in
continuous maintenance and content generation, as these accounts represent the best oppor-
tunity to connect with customers (Sprout Social, 2018) and a firm’s marketing performance
is closely related to its content generation on social media (e.g., Goh et al., 2013).
Despite the prevalence of corporate use of social media via official accounts and the
significance of ESG incidents, how firms use social media after an ESG incident is largely
unknown.
Literature on crisis management in traditional settings (without using social
media) suggests that companies may use passive ways such as denial or keeping silent (Le
et al., 2018) when facing a brand crisis. Silence, either avoiding, limiting, or delaying an
immediate response, is a valid choice for practitioners when dealing with a crisis (Claeys
and Opgenhaffen, 2016). While it is possible that practitioners choose to be silent simply
because they hope to signal confidence (Pang et al., 2022) or firms are not ready to disclose
enough information (Claeys and Opgenhaffen, 2016), many firms strategically do so to control
1

available information and limit the publicity of the incident (Dimitrov, 2015).
In this study, we propose that being silent after ESG incidents is not attractive to firms
on social media platforms, and firms tend to take immediate action on their social media ac-
counts after an ESG incident. Social media is a natural channel for information distribution
and publicity (Gao et al., 2022; Al Balawi et al., 2023). Consumers or stakeholders can post
complaints and distribute information regarding the incident on social media (i.e., informa-
tion channel), and these complaints and discussions are all public (i.e., publicity channel).
Even if the firm’s account would choose to remain silent after an ESG incident, other in-
formation sources or social media accounts can still discuss and disseminate the incident.
The motivation to remain silent (i.e., to control available information and limit publicity)
is not attractive on social media because firms may risk a more intensified crisis after the
forcefully breaking from the stakeholders and consumers (Le et al., 2018). In this light, firms
may choose to increase (or at least not decrease) the communication level in social media
after an incident. A firm’s official social media account serves as its communication chan-
nel, and all the discussions and information are visible and public to all other participants
(e.g., Al Balawi et al., 2023). With more posts after an incident, firms can better ensure
that discussions and information distribution happen along with the posts from their official
accounts. Against this backdrop, we expect that firms would not adopt passive ways (i.e.,
being silent or simply denying) or limit the communication frequency on social media (i.e.,
decreasing the number of posts) after an ESG incident; instead, firms tend to communicate
more with the public about their current practices related to the incident and generate more
incident-related posts.
Although we expect that firms may increase (or at least not decrease) the communication
frequency on social media after the incidents, it is not straightforward whether and to what
extent the firms would adjust their non-incident-related posts after an ESG incident. This
is also important because firms usually use their official social media accounts for purposes
irrelevant to specific ESG incidents, such as customer relationship management. Firms post
non-incident-related content and use their corporate social media accounts for marketing
promotions and customer relationship management. For example, even after Volkswagen’s
emission scandal on September 18, 2015, the company’s official Twitter account published
only 17 incident-related tweets up to October 30, 2015 (vs. 344 non-incident-related tweets
during the same period) (Stieglitz et al., 2019). On the one hand, some practitioners rec-
ommend suspending non-incident-related posts and focusing exclusively on the incident and
the firm’s related actions (e.g., Newberry and Dawley, 2019; Nierman, 2020; FrontierMar-
keting, 2020), as a mix of incident-related and non-incident-related posts might make the
2

public wonder whether the firm has taken the incidents seriously and might confuse the
affected users (Stieglitz et al., 2019). On the other hand, firms may increase the number of
non-incident-related posts to alleviate the adverse impact of an ESG incident. Specifically,
firms can focus more effort on customer relationship management in the hope of gaining
more positive customer feedback (e.g., Al Balawi et al., 2023). Firms may also need to raise
different topics to divert public attention from the crisis (Hu and Pang, 2016).
In light of the theorizations and conflicting practical suggestions regarding firms’ social
media reaction after ESG incidents, this study aims to empirically examine the general
change in the corporate use of social media after ESG incidents, including the overall number
of posts and that of the incident-related or non-incident-related posts. The analyses should
include explorations on whether and to what extent corporate social media accounts change
the number of social media posts after an ESG incident, including categorizing the posts to
incident-related and non-incident-related.
The analyses require a clear definition of ESG incidents and a clear strategy to identify
occurrences of these incidents. Some prior research has focused only on one type of ESG
incident (e.g., product recalls in Gao et al., 2015) or on a single incident (e.g., Germanwings
Flight 9525 crash in He et al., 2018). Such an approach allows for a clean definition but
comes with low external validity. Furthermore, as firms from different industries face a variety
of ESG incidents, their responses should potentially express a high level of heterogeneous
patterns across different industries and incident types. To unveil the heterogenous patterns
and provide the relevant practical implications, our study examines firms from different
industries and different types of ESG incidents.
In this study, we use the RepRisk dataset to identify the ESG incidents and to have a
more inclusive picture. RepRisk captures ESG incidents by screening more than 100,000
media, regulatory, and commercial documents in 23 languages on a daily basis (see details in
Section 3). The RepRisk dataset is different from commercial datasets on ESG ratings, and
it is uniquely suitable for our study for two reasons. First, ESG incidents are different from
ESG ratings regarding the data sources; Datasets on ESG ratings such as Sustainalytics,1
MSCI ESG STATS (formerly KLD),2 Bloomberg ESG,3 and Refinitiv (formerly ASSET4)4
1Sustainalytics discloses that when generating ESG ratings, it uses company reporting as one of the data
sources. See https://www.sustainalytics.com/esg-data.
2MSCI discloses that when generating ESG ratings, it includes company disclosure documents as one of
the data sources. See https://www.msci.com/our-solutions/esg-investing/esg-ratings.
3Bloomberg discloses that when generating its ESG scores, it considers company-reported data.
See
https://www.bloomberg.com/explore/esg.
4Refinitiv specifies that when generating ESG ratings, it uses company websites and company annual
reports as data sources. See https://www.refinitiv.com/en/sustainable-finance/esg-scores.
3

use data from a blend of sources including the firm’s self-reported efforts (Li and Wu, 2020;
Berg et al., 2021, p. 12). However, we are more interested in the negative media coverage of
an ESG incident than in the firm’s related efforts. The RepRisk dataset is suitable to identify
ESG incidents because it uses only public sources to identify negative media coverage and
real-world incidents that result in real reputation damage to firms.5 Also, RepRisk updates
the dataset daily, so it captures ESG incidents as they are covered by the media, while the
datasets on ESG ratings (e.g., MSCI ESG STATS) update at most once a year or month
(Berg et al., 2021, p. 41). The higher frequency and more up-to-date records allow us to
conduct more precise analyses of firms’ activities after ESG incidents.
Regarding the corporate use of social media in this study, we focus on firms’ official
accounts on Twitter, an important platform through which firms communicate with the
public (e.g., Schmidt et al., 2020). We identify each firm’s corporate Twitter account by
manually checking its official website, and we collect all historical tweets from the firm’s
account.
Using an event-based analysis, we explore whether a firm significantly adjusts
the number of Twitter posts after an ESG incident. Following Li et al. (2021), we apply
Word2Vector to understand the content of corporate Twitter posts by developing related
dictionaries on Environmental, Social, and Governance incidents, respectively. Finally, we
explore the outcome of the documented impact by examining the relationship between the
change in the number of Twitter posts after an ESG incident and the capital market reaction
around the occurrence.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is one of the first to explore the corporate use
of social media after ESG incidents (e.g., He et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al., 2023).
Our
study contributes to the literature on ESG practices and incidents as well as the literature
on the operational value of social media.
We extend discussions about the purposes of
corporate social media from promotions or marketing to mitigating the negative impact of
ESG incidents. Most of prior studies focus on one single type of incident or one single industry
(e.g., He et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2015; Al Balawi et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2022). Our study
generalizes the previous analyses by using a comprehensive sample of ESG incidents and
industries and shows that there exist significant variations regarding corporate social media
responses for different incident types and industries. We also differentiate the posts and
theorize that firms tend to adjust both their incident-related and non-incident-related posts
after an ESG incident. Using datasets from multiple sources and an event-based analysis,
5This is explicitly stated on the RepRisk website: “Born out of credit risk management, the purpose of
RepRisk’s dataset is not to provide ESG ratings, but to systematically identify and assess material ESG risks.
We have always taken an outside-in approach to ESG risks, by analyzing information from public sources and
stakeholders and intentionally excluding company self-disclosures.” See https://www.reprisk.com/approach.
4

we show that, on average, firms would increase the number of incident-related posts after an
ESG incident. However, contrary to the prevailing advice from practitioners and suggestions
from some studies (Stieglitz et al., 2019), we find that firms tend to increase both the number
of incident-related and the number of non-incident-related posts after an ESG incident. As a
byproduct of the determinations on the incident-related and non-incident-related posts, we
create an ESG Classification Dictionary, which can be a useful text analysis tool for future
ESG-related studies.
The broad analyses considering different types of incidents further enable us to conduct
heterogeneity analyses with respect to industries and incident topics, adding new insights
to previous literature on a single type of incident or a single industry (e.g., He et al., 2018;
Gao et al., 2015; Al Balawi et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2022). Specifically, our follow-up anal-
yses indicate that the impact is more pronounced when the firm is in consumer-oriented
industries, supporting our arguments that firms may tend to consider the information and
publicity functions of social media (for the increase in incident-related posts) and that firms
are motivated to increase their efforts in customer relationship management or divert public
attention after an ESG incident (for the increase in the non-incident-related posts). The
documented impact better manifests when the ESG incidents are highly impactful, support-
ing the argument that firms adjust their social media communication strategies in response
to the potential impacts of incidents.
We examine whether the number of social media posts after an ESG incident can have
any potential practical outcomes. The analyses and results can add to the discussions on
the outcomes of corporate social media communication strategies after brand crisis (e.g., He
et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al., 2023). Different from the existing studies that analyze outcomes
related to customer relationship management or customer satisfaction, our analyses focus
more on the reactions from the capital market because the market potentially reflects how the
public and stakeholders think about the firms after the incident (Jacobs and Singhal, 2020;
Xiao et al., 2024). We show that firms that post more after an ESG incident experience
a less negative reaction from the capital market, especially for consumer-oriented firms.
The findings are in line with the argument that after major incidents or crises, firms tend
to mitigate the negative impact of incidents and use social media to respond public timely
concerning the incidents, better manage consumer relationships (e.g., Al Balawi et al., 2023),
or develop new topics to divert public attention (e.g., Hu and Pang, 2016).
The main takeaway for practitioners from our analysis is that the effectiveness of corpo-
rate social media strategies following ESG incidents can be significantly enhanced. Currently,
companies often respond to these incidents by either maintaining silence or indiscriminately
5

increasing their social media output, without considering the type of incident or the level
of media attention it attracts. Our findings suggest that this approach is most beneficial
after social incidents, particularly when these incidents receive extensive media attention.
Therefore, firms should tailor their social media responses based on the specific type of ESG
incident, industry classification, and the extent of its media coverage to better mitigate po-
tential negative impacts. By adopting this targeted strategy, companies can manage market
volatility effectively, thus improving the overall effectiveness of their communication efforts
in the wake of such incidents.
2
Literature Review and Propositions
2.1
ESG Practices and Incidents
Firms are facing increasing scrutiny of their ESG practices and incidents (Lee and Tang,
2018; Astvansh et al., 2022). While the notion of ESG is relatively new, firms’ Corporate
Social Responsibility (i.e., CSR) practices and incidents have been widely discussed in the
Operations Management (i.e., OM) literature. Note that there is no clear distinction between
the notions of ESG and CSR in the existing literature,6 and in this study, we use ESG to
refer to firms’ practices or incidents related to environmental, social, and governance issues.
We do not make a clear distinction between the notions of ESG and CSR; instead, we
discuss the existing ESG and CSR literature in terms of the difference in practices and
incidents. Specifically, firms’ ESG practices and ESG incidents have different antecedents
and consequences: while a firm’s ESG practices involve its efforts and plans related to ESG
issues (which can be reflected in the firm’s self-disclosure reports or the firm’s commitment
and engagement in improving the social responsibility issues), its ESG incidents comprise
only the negative media coverage of the firm’s real violations related to ESG issues.
Firms’ ESG practices and commitments are associated with a wide range of corporate
financial and operating outcomes (see literature review in Li and Wu (2020)). Firms have
been making more and more investments in and commitments to ESG practices. More than
80% of S&P 500 companies regularly publish CSR or ESG reports (Cao et al., 2019). Studies
usually use two strategies to quantify a firm’s ESG practices. First, one firm’s commitment
and engagement to improve ESG performance can be proxied as its participation in certain
6For example, while Li and Wu (2020) describe CSR as firms’ commitments to and engagements in
improving the social responsibility issues and ESG as firms’ violations on the social responsibility issues,
Flammer (2015) mentions that ESG and CSR differ in terms of coverage; specifically, apart from the social
and environmental aspects discussed in CSR, ESG also includes the governance aspect.
6

organizations. For example, Dhanorkar et al. (2018) use firms’ supportive environmental
improvement projects to proxy for the commitment to environmental improvement, and Li
and Wu (2020) treat firms that participated in the United Nations Global Compact program
as those that actively engage in ESG practices. In the same vein, participation in United
Nations Principles for Responsible Investment is usually treated as the indication of the trust
funds’ ESG practices and engagements (Kim and Yoon, 2023). Second, studies use datasets
on ESG ratings (e.g., Sustainalytics, MSCI ESG STATS, Bloomberg ESG, and Refinitiv) to
describe one firm’s ESG practices as its initiatives and performances in general. For example,
using MSCI ESG ratings, Cao et al. (2019) show that one firm’s ESG practices are followed
by the adoption of similar practices by its peer firms. Similarly, Nardi et al. (2022) use
Refinitiv ratings to capture the uniqueness of one firm’s ESG practices.
Differing from the literature on ESG practices that take the firm’s perspective to analyze
its effort and investment (Li et al., 2024), studies on ESG incidents focus more on firms’ real
violations on ESG issues and the reactions from the capital market as well as traditional
media. For example, Demerjian et al. (2021) and Houston and Shan (2022) show that both
banks and firms fail to raise capital from the depositors and corporate loan market after
exposures to negative ESG incidents. Lo et al. (2018) show that Chinese manufacturers
experience a negative stock market reaction after announcing environmental incidents, but
the negative outcome is mitigated by a higher share of government ownership. Supply chain
glitches can also negatively affect firm value, and Twitter reactions after a glitch accentuate
the relationship between supply chain glitches and stock market returns (Schmidt et al.,
2020). Wang et al. (2013) show that the firm’s self-disclosed security risk factors with risk-
mitigation themes are less likely to be related to the future breach incidents reported by the
media, and the stock market’s reaction to a breach depends on the nature of the disclosure
in the firm’s announcement.
The relationship between ESG practices and incidents is not straightforward. Regardless
of the level of firms’ ESG practices, however, firms cannot guarantee that ESG incidents
will never happen. Li and Wu (2020) show that public firms do not experience significantly
fewer ESG incidents after improving their ESG commitments by joining the United Nations
Global Compact.
Also, the purpose of firms’ ESG practices is not necessarily to avoid
ESG incidents. Specifically, it is not uncommon that firms conduct ESG practices simply
for marketing purposes, focusing only on the practices that consumers can observe while
ignoring the unobservable aspects (Wu et al., 2020). It is possible that firms experiencing a
high number of ESG incidents tend to invest heavily in their ESG reporting and practices
Strike et al. (2006). As a result, a firm with a high probability of ESG incidents may at the
7

same time have good ESG ratings that place weight on the firm’s own ESG practices and
reporting (Berg et al., 2021, p. 8).
This study contributes to the growing literature on ESG practices and incidents. We
are particularly interested in firms’ operations on their official Twitter accounts after ESG
incidents and whether such a corporate use of social media can serve as a potential mitigator
for the incidents’ negative outcomes.
2.2
Operational Value of Social Media
Organizations are increasingly adopting social media for its operational value (e.g., Lam
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2019; Yan and Pedraza-Martinez, 2019) or internal knowledge
sharing (e.g., Chen et al., 2022; Pu et al., 2022). The Information Systems and OM literature
has been interested in whether and how public social media (e.g., Twitter) can provide such
value through serving as an additional information source, marketing channel for customer
relationship management, and crisis management. In this subsection, we discuss existing
studies on the operational value of the corporate use of social media and how this study can
contribute to this stream of literature. Figure 1 illustrates the topics from the literature and
the focus of this study.
As an additional information source, social media facilitates social interactions and online
discussions, from which firms can better understand the market in terms of demand (Cui
et al., 2018) and what customer needs (Fu and Fisher, 2023). For example, Chan et al. (2016)
show that new product development is informed by the preferences and needs expressed by
consumers on social media. Firms can also use publicly available textual data from social
media websites and sources to better measure brand personality (Hu et al., 2019).
Firms also tend to use social media as a tool for customer relationship management or
marketing to help promote awareness of products (e.g., Lee et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021;
Hotkar et al., 2023). In addition to the user-generated discussions and shared information
on social media (Davis et al., 2021; Qiu et al., 2021), firm-generated (or marketer-generated)
content can also affect purchases through information sharing and persuasion (Goh et al.,
2013). Retailers can use social-media-based strategies such as word-of-mouth (Huang et al.,
2019), online customer communities (Manchanda et al., 2015), and social promotion cam-
paigns (Gao et al., 2020) to encourage consumers to discuss the products and engage more
with other customers. Social media is also an effective channel by which firms can manage
customer relationships after a service or product failure. Studies show that after a service or
brand crisis, firms proactively adjust their social media posting to better maintain customer
8

Figure 1. Studies on Operational Value of Social Media
relationships on social media. For example, in a service recovery stage, hotels use social
media websites to respond to reviews, and the responses can further impact the satisfaction
of future customers reflected on the same website (Gu and Ye, 2014). Along the same vein,
after certain major incidents, such as major service failures (Al Balawi et al., 2023) or severe
accidents (He et al., 2018), major airlines tend to adjust their Twitter content to better man-
age customer relationships on social media. Customers even file complaints through a firm’s
Twitter account and can talk directly with representatives in a private chat or comment
section about the service failure.
Our study of changes in the volume of social media posts after ESG incidents is closely
related to those on corporate use of social media strategies in crisis management (e.g., He
et al., 2018). However, our study differs in the scope (i.e., a set of ESG incidents as covered
by the media), the specific corporate use of social media, and outcomes of interest (i.e.,
capital market reaction). First, instead of discussing a single significant incident, such as
Germanwings Flight 9525 crash (He et al., 2018) or the 2017 United Express Passenger
Removal (Al Balawi et al., 2023), we are interested in a broad range of ESG incidents
covered by the media. The broad analyses considering different types of incidents enable
9

us to conduct heterogeneity analyses with respect to industries and incidents, adding new
insights to the literature. Second, in addition to maintaining customer relationships, firms
also use their official Twitter accounts as an important communication channel to the public.
In this study, we investigate whether and how firms adjust the strength of their social media
communication channel by changing the volume of the posts after ESG incidents. To quickly
restore their reputations, we argue that it is possible that firms adjust both the number of
posts relevant to the incidents and those not.
In this light, the purpose and actions of
corporate social media discussed in this study can be different from (while closely related
to) the literature on how firms manage customer relationships and change other posting
behaviors on social media platforms (e.g., Gu and Ye, 2014; He et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al.,
2023). Third, as a byproduct of the determinations on the incident-related and non-incident-
related posts, we create an ESG Classification Dictionary by using Word2Vector (Li et al.,
2021), and the dictionary can be a useful text analysis tool for future ESG-related studies.
Finally, since our focus is the corporate use of social media for mitigating reputation damage,
we further explore the related outcome (vs.
the existing studies that analyze outcomes
related to customer relationship management or customer satisfaction (e.g., He et al., 2018;
Al Balawi et al., 2023)).
2.3
Theorization and Propositions
Benoit’s image repair theory categorizes firms’ response types after an image-crisis in-
cident into five types: denial, evasion of responsibility, reducing offensiveness of event, cor-
rective action, and mortification (see the detailed definitions and illustrations on Page 179
in Benoit (1997)). In addition to these proactive responses, crisis management scholars also
note that silence, either avoiding or delaying an immediate response, is also one valid com-
munication strategy used by practitioners after the crisis (e.g., Dimitrov, 2015; Le et al.,
2018; Claeys and Opgenhaffen, 2016). While it is possible that practitioners choose to be
silent simply because they hope to signal their confidence (Pang et al., 2022) or firms are
not able to disclose enough information (Claeys and Opgenhaffen, 2016), firms often strate-
gically choose to remain silent to control available information and limit the publicity of
the incident. Keeping silent may also help firms limit available information and constrain
its transmission, achieving similar results as denial, evasion of responsibility, and reducing
offensiveness (Le et al., 2018). Dimitrov (2015) argues that firms remain silent intentionally
as a response to crisis because keeping silent can evade the real issue (i.e., defensive) or
cascade the information to a platform of lower visibility (i.e., preserving).
We argue that remaining silent is not a good option anymore on social media because it is
10

a natural channel for information distribution and publicity (Gao et al., 2022). Consumers
or stakeholders can post complaints and distribute information regarding the incident on
social media (i.e., information channel), and the complaints and discussions are all public
(i.e., publicity channel). In other words, even if the firm could choose silence after an ESG
incident, other information sources or social media accounts can still discuss and disseminate
the incident. That key motivation to remain silent (i.e., to control available information and
limit the publicity of the incident) is less valid than before because firms may risk a more
intensified crisis after the forcefully broken from the stakeholders (Le et al., 2018). A crisis
can generate substantial discussion in social media even without the information disclosure
from firms, and firms need to proactively react to the incident to reinforce the organizational
image (Eriksson, 2018). To mitigate the negative impact of the incident, firms may choose
to generate informational posts to better explain the updates on and progress of the incident
(e.g., Ott and Theunissen, 2015; Romenti et al., 2014) or emotional posts, such as formal
apologies and justifications. Also, to achieve more positive attitudes from the public, firms
may choose to use social media to have a dialogue related to the incident with different
stakeholders, and the incident-related posts are not necessarily about the incident itself
because firms may also describe relevant topics, such as the effort or agenda associated with
the incident. We propose that: Firms are likely to increase the volume of posts (and the
incident-related posts) after an ESG incident.
We are also interested in examining whether and to what extent firms change the number
of non-incident-related posts after an ESG incident. The potential result is not straightfor-
ward. Some practitioners recommend decreasing (or even suspending) non-incident-related
posts and focusing exclusively on the incident and the firm’s related actions (e.g., Newberry
and Dawley, 2019; Nierman, 2020; FrontierMarketing, 2020). Their main argument is that an
incident-related-only posting strategy may help the firm recover from the incident by show-
ing that the firm is taking the incident seriously, whereas a mix of incident-related posts and
non-incident-related posts might send mixed signals about the firm’s priorities, making the
public wonder whether the firm has taken the incidents seriously. Stieglitz et al. (2019) ar-
gues that after Volkswagen’s emission scandal, the continuous posting of non-incident-related
content confused and upset users and customers.
It is also possible that firms may increase their number of non-incident-related posts.
Regardless of the severity and reach of the ESG incidents, not all social media users are
affected by the incidents. Applying universal crisis management dialogue to the unaffected
users may lead to confusion or even fuel anger (Ott and Theunissen, 2015).
Firms also
use their social media accounts for marketing and customer relationship management, and
11

firms may need to at least maintain the original volume of regular posts to meet such user
needs. Also, most discussions between the firm and the public on social media happen in the
comments sections of posts generated by the firm’s official account, so a decrease in regular
posts may unintendedly direct the public’s focus to the incident and attract unnecessary
negative attention.
In fact, firms are motivated to increase their customer relationship
efforts on social media after the incidents because the degree of interactions is positively
related to customers’ satisfaction with firms, and the more positive evaluation may, in turn,
help firms restore the damaged reputation (e.g., Al Balawi et al., 2023). Apart from the
marketing effort, when a crisis happens, another strategy that firms can adopt is to raise
different topics to divert public attention from the crisis (Hu and Pang, 2016). Based on
the two contradicting perspectives, we propose that: Firms tend to increase or decrease the
volume of non-incident-related posts after an ESG incident.
3
Research Context and Data
3.1
ESG Incidents and Data
We explore negative news coverage of ESG incidents by external, third-party media as
a quasi-exogenous reputation shock, the timing of which is arguably outside the control of
firms. Specifically, this study utilizes the RepRisk database, which tracks negative ESG
news relevant to both shareholders and stakeholders from January 2007 to October 2021. A
dedicated team of RepRisk analysts uses artificial intelligence and curated human analysis
to monitor more than 180,000 public and private firms globally, screening more than 100,000
public sources and stakeholders in 23 languages daily. Upon identifying an incident, analysts
undertake three steps. First, they confirm that the incident is related to ESG activities
or business conduct.
Second, they remove any possible duplicate media coverage of the
same incident to ensure that each incident appears only once in the database. Lastly, they
categorize the incident by mapping it to 28 issues and 45 topics (e.g., “discrimination in
employment,” “controversial products,” “tax evasions”). Figure 2 lists the 28 issues within
the three main ESG categories (environmental, social, and governance) as well as a fourth
“cross-cutting” category. Each incident is assigned three proprietary scores for its severity
(i.e., harshness), reach (i.e., influence), and novelty (i.e., newness). To ensure the incidents
that we study are sufficiently salient, we require that at least one of the three scores (i.e.,
severity, reach, and novelty) be ranked at its highest level. After merging with corporate
Twitter data, we are left with 12,366 unique incidents from January 2007 to December 2020.
12

Figure 2. Classification of ESG Incidents by 28 Issues
The RepRisk database tracks external news coverage on 28 issues within the three main ESG categories
(environmental, social, and governance) as well as a fourth “cross-cutting” category. Negative news coverage
about one of these issues is recorded as an “incident.” RepRisk details the definitions for each issue at
https://www.reprisk.com/content/static/reprisk-esg-issues-definitions.pdf.
Figure 3 presents the anecdotal evidence on the daily number of RepRisk ESG Incidents
involving United Airlines and Wells Fargo, respectively. Specifically, the figures describe a
15-day window that covered the two high-profile ESG scandals in recent years. The first is
the United Airlines Passenger Removal event that happened around April 10, 2017. The
second is the Wells Fargo Cross-selling Scandal that was exposed in the Los Angeles Times
and other media around December 19, 2013. The number of ESG incidents in the RepRisk
dataset across the 15-day window confirms the validity of the database as a source of quasi-
exogenous ESG reputation shocks.
3.2
Corporate Social Media Data
For each US-based public firm covered by the RepRisk database, we obtain the link to
its official corporate website from the database. We visit the official corporate website and
then web scrape the link to its corporate Twitter account; in most cases, the corporate social
media profiles are listed at the bottom or the side of the company website’s homepage. We
supplement this automated web scraping process by hand-collecting the Twitter profiles for
those firms whose social media icons are not listed on the corporate homepages. Lastly, we
open the manually-collected links to the firms’ corporate profiles one-by-one to confirm that
13

Figure 3. Daily Number of ESG Incidents - United Airline and Wells Fargo
These two figures present anecdotal evidence of the daily number of RepRisk ESG Incidents involving United
Airlines and Wells Fargo, respectively. We focus on a 15-day window that covered the two high-profile ESG
scandals in recent years. The first is the United Airlines Passenger Removal event that happened around
April 10, 2017. The second is the Wells Fargo Cross-selling Scandal that was exposed in the Los Angeles
Times and other media around December 19, 2013.
the firm’s corporate social media accounts are correctly linked to the firms described in the
RepRisk database.
We focus on Twitter for its unparalleled reach to various stakeholders including cus-
tomers, suppliers, competitors, and regulators. Schmidt et al. (2020), Bartov et al. (2018),
and Sul et al. (2017) show that corporate Twitter accounts are a valuable channel for dis-
closing critical information following a significant corporate event, and the disseminated
information subsequently drives the reactions of both customers and the capital market.
Furthermore, corporate Twitter accounts are well-suited for the frequent sharing of ideas,
real-time responses, and trendy news with the general public, while corporate Facebook
pages are used primarily to exchange information within a smaller, restricted social network.
One firm may have multiple Twitter accounts for different purposes, but we focus on the
main corporate Twitter account listed on the firm’s official website because it usually serves
a more comprehensive purpose and draws more public attention. As an example, Figure 4
illustrates how Wells Fargo used Twitter to communicate their plan to rebuild trust after an
ESG incident.
For each firm in our sample, we use its corporate Twitter account ID and collect the
full history of posts from the Twitter account, including the text, the publish time, and the
number of likes/comments on each tweet.
14

Figure 4. Examples of Social Media Posts After an ESG Incident: Wells Fargo
This figure provides anecdotal evidence that firms make incident-related posts on Twitter. In this example,
Wells Fargo reiterated the leadership’s firm stance on rebuilding trust on February 9, 2017.
3.3
Additional Data
While the timing of ESG incidents is quasi-exogenous to companies’ social media ac-
tivities, we collect additional data to further control other potential confounding factors,
such as firm characteristics and media attention. Specifically, we collect firm characteristics
from Compustat, including the natural logarithm of total assets, sales growth, R&D, capital
investment, leverage, etc. We further control media attention from both institutional and
retail investors. First, from RavenPack, we collect news coverage for each firm in our sample
from various popular traditional news media including The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s,
MarketWatch, all major PR newswires, and regulatory feeds. This comprehensive dataset
helps gauge the attention of large investors and traditional media; the dataset has been fre-
quently used in the literature (e.g., Jiang et al., 2021). Second, we collect articles and the
associated comments for the sampled firms from SeekingAlpha, a leading online investment
community with 20 million active users every month; the dataset helps us capture the media
attention from retail investors and the attention about the firm at the online investment
communities. Finally, we collect sell-side recommendations by equity analysts from the de-
15

tailed recommendation file of the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES) to take into
account the attention of professional analysts.
In the analyses of the relationship between corporate social media usage and capital mar-
ket, we obtain stock returns and stock index returns from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP) daily stock file and the CRSP stock market indexes file. We calculated the
market-adjusted cumulative abnormal return (CAR) during the [-3,3] day window around
an ESG incident (in percentage). The CAR was estimated using historical returns from -360
days to -30 days, with at least 100 non-missing trading days during the estimation window.
4
Corporate Use of Social Media after ESG Incidents
We have combined several data sources to create a panel dataset at the firm-day level,
including comprehensive information about ESG incidents and the firm’s activities on cor-
porate Twitter accounts. To minimize the confounding effects of other events, we sharpen
the window of observations to focus on a range of [-7,7] days centered on the incident date as
reported by RepRisk. We further exclude firm-day observations that precede the initiation
of the company’s official Twitter account or before January 2007 (i.e., the beginning of the
RepRisk database). Our final panel dataset consists of 70,484 observations and encompasses
887 unique firms with RepRisk coverage and Twitter profiles between January 2007 and
December 2020. In Table A.1, we describe our sample construction step by step.
With the data collected from multiple sources, we investigate whether firms adjust the
number of posts on their social media accounts following an ESG incident, and the capital
market change after the corporate social media posts change. Our findings in Section 4
indicate that firms tend to increase the number of posts they made after ESG incidents. In
Section 5, we extend the analyses and show that firms with a higher increase in Twitter posts
after an ESG incident experience a smaller negative market reaction. These results suggest
that corporate use of social media plays a unique role in mitigating reputation damage, as
reflected in mitigated capital market fallouts following the revelation of ESG incidents.
Our analysis focuses on understanding within-firm variations by comparing the number
of posts on days right after the incident (i.e., EventWindow) and that on other days. To
preclude the impacts of time-invariant firm-level omitted variables and time-varying industry-
level shocks, in most analyses, we include both firm and industry-year-month fixed effects.
Table 1 presents the summary statistics and definitions of the key variables that we use in
Section 4.1. The average number of tweets that a firm posts on a given day is 1.776. The
16

mean value of EventWindow is 0.24, indicating that about 24% of our firm-day observations
lie in the [1,3] window after an ESG incident. An average firm has logarithm of book assets
of 10.067 million, sales growth rate of 3.9%, R&D-to-asset ratio of 2.4%, ROA of 14.7%,
capital-expenditure-to-assets ratio of 0.052, book leverage of 0.271, market-to-book ratio of
4.702, and cash-to-asset ratio of 0.136.
Table 1. Variable Definition and Summary Statistics of the Firm-Day Sample
This table reports the definition of main variables and summary statistics of our firm-day sample used in
Specification 1.
Variable
Definition
Source
Mean
S.D.
T Num
The number of tweets posted by firm i on day d.
Twitter
1.776
5.237
EventWindow
An indicator variable that equals one for three days
(i.e., [1,3] days) after an ESG incident of firm i.
RepRisk
0.244
0.429
Log (Asset)
The natural logarithm of a firm’s book assets in
millions (at).
Compustat
10.067
1.640
Sales Growth
The annual growth rate of a firm’s sales
((saley −saley−1)/saley−1).
Compustat
0.039
0.140
RD
Research and development expense scaled by total
assets (xrd/at). The value is assigned zero if data on
research and development expense is missing.
Compustat
0.024
0.038
ROA
EBITDA scaled by total assets (oibdp/at).
Compustat
0.147
0.071
Capex
Capital expenditures divided by the lagged total assets
(capx/at).
Compustat
0.052
0.039
Leverage
Long-term debt scaled by total assets ((dltt+dlc)/at).
Compustat
0.271
0.149
MB
The market value of equity divided by book equity
(me/ceq).
Compustat
4.702
5.541
Cash
Total cash holding or equivalents scaled by total assets
(che/at).
Compustat
0.136
0.127
4.1
Main Analyses and Robustness Checks
Our study aims to investigate whether firms adjust the number of social media posts they
make following ESG incidents. We apply an event-based analysis and analyze a firm-day
sample within the [-7, 7] days window centered on the revelation date of each ESG incident.
We compare the average number of tweet posts during [1, 3] days after an ESG incident
with the average number of tweet posts on other days (-7, -6,...,0, 4, 5, 6, 7) to determine
if there is a statistically significant difference in terms of corporate use of social media
right after the incident. Specifically, the empirical model mimics an event-based analysis, a
specification that has been broadly applied in economics and finance studies (e.g., Armitage,
1995; Kolari and Pynn¨onen, 2010; Moss et al., 2024).7 Note that the comparison is about
7The analysis exclusively focuses only on firms that have experienced ESG incidents, which is different
from the difference-in-differences framework (e.g., Pu, 2022). This methodological choice aligns with the vast
17

the same firm’s number of tweets right after the incident (i.e., days 1-3) and that during
the other time window (i.e., other days in the [-7, 7] window). This approach allows us
to sharply identify a firm’s immediate reaction on social media following an ESG incident
(relative to another period) within a very short event period (in our case, 3 days) that is
unlikely to be confounded by the firm’s other actions or other events.8 The negative ESG
incident must be reported by third parties or news agencies, and it seems unlikely that firms
would intentionally manipulate and time third-party disclosures of negative information in
a manner that could damage their reputations (Houston and Shan, 2022). In this light, the
timing of one ESG incident and negative disclosure should be quasi-exogenous to the firm
(i.e., the firm has little control over). To operationalize this empirical strategy, we estimate
the following ordinary least squares (OLS) specification with this event-based firm-day level
data:
T Numi,d = β0 + β1EventWindow + Controlsi,y + FEi + FEj,y,m + εi,d
(1)
where i indexes firm, y indexes year, j indexes industry, m indexes month, and d indexes
day. The dependent variable, T Numi,d, is the number of tweets posted by firm i on day
d. The variable of interest, EventWindow, equals one for [1,3] days right after an ESG
incident that happened at day 0. In this light, β1 captures the difference in the number of
tweets posted [1,3] days right after an ESG incident with the number posted on other days.
Controlsi,y represents a set of control variables, including the natural logarithm of book
asset (Log(Asset)), sales growth, R&D scaled by book asset (RD), ROA, capital expenditure
(Capex), financial leverage, market-to-book ratio (MB), and cash-to-asset ratio (Cash). We
further incorporate firm fixed effects (FEi) and industry-year-month fixed effects (FEj,y,m).
Standard errors are adjusted for firm-level clustering.
The results are reported in Table 2. In Column (1), we do not add any control variables
except for the industry (2-digit NAICS level) and year-month fixed effects. The coefficient
is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. In Column (2), we add the control
variables, and the results are consistent. In Column (3), we tighten our specification by
studies that examine cumulative abnormal returns within a brief event window, also limiting the analyses
to the group of firms directly impacted, and the approach is widely used since Fama et al. (1969). In the
robustness check, we also use a univariate analysis and compare the average number of Twitter posts during
the [1,3] days and other windows prior to the incident, such as [-7,1], [-30,-1], [-60, -1], and [-90, -1] window,
confirming that the number of tweets is abnormally higher during the [1, 3] window.
8Without the control firms, this event-based analysis implicitly assumes that no other confounding factors
will significantly affect the dependent variable (i.e., number of tweets) within a brief event window (i.e., 3
days). This assumption is likely to be met in our context because the confounding factors that also potentially
affect firms’ social media posts, e.g., firms’ long-term social media strategies, other media exposures, media
connections, ESG practices, or economic situations, are unlikely to vary systematically in such a brief window.
18

including firm fixed effects and industry-year-month fixed effects. They help remove time-
constant firm heterogeneity and time-varying industry shocks, respectively. Under this high
dimensional fixed-effects strategy, we still find similar results. In terms of the economic mag-
nitude, based on the regression results of Column (3), firms increase their posting activities
by 0.048 tweets per day in the three days following an ESG incident. This increase can be
translated into a 2.7% increase relative to the average daily number (1.776) of Twitter posts
in our sample. The analyses and results are closely related to the growing OM literature on
the outcomes after ESG incidents (Lo et al., 2018; Schmidt et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2013).
However, we are more interested in firms’ proactive responses in terms of their use of social
media and the associated outcomes. Moreover, instead of focusing on one type of incident,
we are interested in having an overall picture with a comprehensive set of ESG incidents.
Table 2. Results on Corporate Use of Social Media after ESG Incidents
This table reports the regression results on whether a firm increases its posts on its Twitter account after an
ESG incident during 2007-2020. The tested sample structure is a firm-day panel. The dependent variable,
T Numi,d, is the number of tweets posted by firm i on day d. The variable of interest, EventWindow, is an
indicator variable that equals one for three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after an ESG incident of firm i at day
0. Detailed variable definitions are in Table 1. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm clustering, are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
T Num
T Num
T Num
EventWindow
0.064**
0.043**
0.048**
(2.428)
(2.337)
(2.212)
Log(Assets)
0.126
-0.045
(1.553)
(-0.124)
Sales Growth
0.002
0.303
(0.005)
(0.594)
RD
7.382
-24.714***
(1.265)
(-2.676)
ROA
-0.953
1.920
(-0.719)
(1.033)
Capx
1.179
5.243*
(0.459)
(1.779)
Leverage
0.230
0.789
(0.339)
(0.549)
MB
0.009
0.005
(0.607)
(0.346)
Cash
-1.828*
-3.381**
(-1.737)
(-2.298)
Industry FE
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Industry-Year-Month FE
Yes
Observations
70,484
70,484
70,465
R-squared
0.160
0.166
0.493
We further conduct dynamic tests to explore the changes in Twitter posts around the
19

incident date. In particular, we create several dummy variables indicating the relative time
gap between a day and the incident date. For example, Time 0 represents the incident data.
Time 2 indicates that the ESG incident took place two days ago and time -2+ means that
the incident will happen in more than two days. The other variables are defined similarly.
We then replace EventWindow with these time dummies in our baseline regression. The
coefficients on these dummies and the associated 90% confidence intervals are plotted in
Figure 5. We do not observe any significant increase in Twitter posts prior to the incident.
Instead, the surge of corporate Twitter activities mainly concentrates within 3 days in the
post-incident period. This pattern justifies our choice of [1,3] days as the event window
in our specification and helps alleviate the concern that our findings are driven by other
confounding factors.
Figure 5. Dynamic Analysis
This figure plots the dynamic changes in Twitter posts around the incident date. Time 0 represents the
incident date. Time 2 indicates that the ESG incident took place two days ago and time -2+ means that
the incident will happen in more than two days. The other variables are defined similarly. We replace
EventWindow with these time dummies in our baseline regression. The coefficients on these dummies and
the associated 90% confidence intervals are plotted.
Next, we conduct several robustness checks of our main findings in Table 3. First, to
make sure that our results are not sensitive to our regression model specifications, in Panel
A, we conduct univariate analysis by comparing the average number of Twitter posts during
the [1,3] days and other windows prior to the incident, such as [-7,1], [-30,-1], [-60, -1], and
20

[-90, -1] window. Figure 6 presents the timeline of the reputation shock where we compare
the average number of Twitter posts during the [1,3] and [-90,-1] window.
This simple
univariate analysis does not depend on specific model specifications. The results indicate
that, regardless of the choice of pre-period windows, the average number of Twitter posts
during the [1,3] days is statistically larger than that during the pre-period. The results are
consistent with our baseline findings that firms would increase their Twitter posts following
the occurrence of an ESG incident.
To mitigate concerns that our results may be driven by fundamental differences between
the [1,3] days after an ESG incident and other days, we repeat our baseline analysis using an
entropy-balanced sample. Recent studies have argued that the entropy-balancing technique
has certain advantages over the propensity-score-matching method (Chapman et al., 2019).
This technique assigns weights to control observations so that the distributional properties of
the treatment group and the post-weighting control group are virtually identical. Specifically,
using a maximum-entropy reweighting scheme (Hainmueller and Xu, 2013), we perform
entropy balancing on the first three moments (i.e., mean, variance, and skewness) of all
firm covariates to ensure that the distributions of all included control variables are similar
for post-incident days and other days. To ensure that each treated firm can be matched
to a group of control firms, in this test, we do not restrict our analysis to a [-7,7] window
surrounding the event. Instead, we use the full sample with all firm-days included.9 Table
3, Column (1) of Panel B, reports the results. Furthermore, since our dependent variable
(i.e., number of tweets) is count or quasi-count in nature and OLS estimates can be biased
(Cohn et al., 2022; Pu et al., 2020), we conduct a Poisson regression in Column (2) where we
treat the dependent variable as a count variable. Our results are robust to these alternative
model specifications.
Figure 6. Timeline of the Reputation Shock
This figure plots the timeline of the reputation shock. Our study compares the average number of Twitter
posts during the [1,3] window and time window prior to the shock (e.g., [-90,-1] window)
9Firm-days in the [0,3] window post an ESG incident serve as the treated group, and firms have not yet
experienced an ESG incident or firms experienced an incident many days ago serve as the control group.
21

In addition, we take into account alternative explanations by including additional con-
trol variables in the estimation. Specifically, we include the daily coverage of news articles
(News Num) from RavenPack; analyst coverage in a year (Analyst), which is collected from
the IBES database; and the monthly ESG reputation risk index from RepRisk (RRI). We
also focus on the online discussions made by investors on the online investment community
SeekingAlpha. Specifically, we calculate the number of comments (Comment Num) on the
articles related to each firm each day and add it as an additional control variable. We also
control for the total number of Twitter posts of firms other than the focal firm on each
day (TNum Other). These additional controls help alleviate concerns that our findings are
related to other confounding factors, such as media or public attention toward the incidents.
We further control for the incident impact, including the severity, reach, novelty fixed effects.
We report the regression results in Column (3) of Table 3 Panel B. The results are consistent
with those in Table 2.
Lastly, to further check the potential concerns of selection bias, we conduct an Oster test
following Oster (2019). Oster (2019) proposes a ratio that represents the ratio of selection
on unobservables relative to selection on observables that would be required in order for the
true coefficient to not be in the observed direction (Hoffman and Tadelis, 2021). In other
words, a positive ratio greater than one suggests that selection on unobserved variables must
be greater than selection on observed variables to fully explain the estimated effect, which
is unlikely to be the case when a large set of covariates is controlled; and a negative ratio
suggests that the estimated effect is biased downward and that adding more controls could
make the coefficient larger. We thus perform the Oster test and the value of delta (the
ratio) is 3.19, meaning that it requires the selection on unobservables to be 3.19 times as
the selection on observables to explain the estimated effect, and this is unlikely given an
extensive set of control variables and fixed effects in Specification 1. The result suggests
that our findings are not likely driven by the selection issues.
4.2
Heterogeneity Test: Consumer-Oriented Industry
We next explore whether the increase in tweets posted is greater for companies in the
consumer-oriented industry. Consumers are an important type of firm stakeholder, and one
important function of social media platforms is to connect firms with their consumers. We
propose that part of the reason for firms to adjust their use of social media is to increase
their customer relationship management efforts and to mitigate potential reputation damage.
Based on this theorization, more consumer-oriented firms, such as those that sell consumer
goods, should have stronger incentives to manage their Twitter accounts to build up or re-
22

Table 3. Robustness Checks
This table reports the regression results of several robustness checks of our baseline regression. In Panel A,
we compare the average number of tweets during the [0,3] window and different windows prior to the incident,
such as [-7,1], [-30,-1],[-60, -1], and [-90, -1]. The difference and t statistic are reported. In Column (1) of
Panel B, we implement an entropy balancing matching method using the full sample. In Column (2), we
run a Poisson regression. In Column (3), we add several additional control variables, including the monthly
ESG reputation risk index from (RRI), the coverage of news articles (News Num), the number of analysts
following (Analyst), the number of comments made on the articles about the firm published on SeekingAlpha
(Comment Num), and the total number of tweets on that day posted by other firms (TNum Other), as
well as severity, reach, and novelty fixed effects. Control variables from Table 2 are all included and are
not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table 1. All continuous variables
are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm clustering, are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Univariate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Windows of Observation
[-7, -1]
[-30, -1]
[-60, -1]
[-90, -1]
Difference
0.134***
0.163***
0.187***
0.201***
t statistic
3.684
4.974
5.470
5.612
Panel B: Multivariate
(1)
(2)
(3)
Entropy Balancing Matching
using full sample
Poisson Regression
Additional Controls
EventWindow
0.061**
0.022**
0.042**
(2.315)
(1.966)
(1.995)
RRI
0.007
(1.231)
News Num
0.001***
(3.258)
Analyst
-0.025
(-1.626)
Comment Num
0.042
(1.316)
TNum Other
-0.037
(-0.844)
Severity FE
Yes
Reach FE
Yes
Novelty FE
Yes
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry-Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
1,113,851
63,922
63,661
R-squared
0.423
0.499
store their reputation (by posting incident-related tweets) and preserve customer capital (by
posting non-incident-related tweets). We thus hypothesize that the increase in the number
of tweets should be larger for firms in the consumer-oriented industry.
To test our hypothesis, we identify consumer-oriented industries following NAICS indus-
try classification and create an indicator, C Ind, which equals one for retail industries with
23

2-digit NAICS code 44 (Consumer - Durable) or 45 (Consumer - Non-durable).10 Firms
in retail industries directly serve consumers and thus face high pressure to maintain good
customer relationships. In other words, if firms hope to increase customer relationships to
mitigate the negative impact of ESG incidents, we should observe that the impact of incidents
on corporate use of social media is more pronounced for firms in consumer-oriented indus-
tries. To explore this conjecture, we constructed an interaction term between EventWindow
and C Ind, which captures the asymmetric effect on consumer-oriented and non-consumer-
oriented industries. The regression results are reported in Table 4 Column (1). The co-
efficient on EventWindow×C Ind is positive and statistically significant at the 10% level.
This implies that the increase in tweet posts following an ESG incident is stronger for the
consumer-focused industry.
In Columns (2) and (3), we divided our sample into two subgroups: consumer-oriented
industry and non-consumer-oriented industry. We then repeated our baseline analysis using
the two subsamples separately. Consistent with our interaction-term specification, the co-
efficient on EventWindow is much larger for the consumer-oriented industry than for the
non-consumer-oriented industry. Overall, the cross-sectional tests are in line with our conjec-
ture that firms in the consumer-oriented industry react more strongly to their social media
accounts when an ESG incident occurs.
4.3
Heterogeneity Test: Incident Impact
In this section, we examine whether a firm’s use of social media depends on the impact
of the incident, including the severity, reach, and novelty of the incident. For incidents that
cause widespread impact, firms may be more responsive and thus post more tweets to clarify
relevant issues. In this light, if it is indeed that firms change the number of tweets in response
to the ESG incident, we should expect that the magnitude be contingent on the impact of
the incident.
In our baseline regression, we only include incidents with at least one of the three scores
(i.e., severity, reach, and novelty score) ranked at its highest level. To test this conjecture,
we supplement our baseline sample by including all incidents in our analysis. We define
those used in our baseline results as high-impact ones (High Impact) and the remaining
ones as low-impact. We then compare whether the increase in Twitter posts is greater for
high-impact incidents than low-impact incidents.
10See the detailed definition and examples of the retail industries at https://www.naics.com/what-is-naics-
sector-44-45-full-description-and-statistics/.
24

Table 4. Heterogeneity Test on Specification 1: Consumer-Oriented Industry
This table reports the regression results on whether industry consumer orientation matters in the associa-
tion between a firm’s tweet posts and ESG incidents. The dependent variable, T Num, is the number of
tweets posted by firm i on day d. In Column (1), the variable of interest is the interaction term between
EventWindow and C Ind. EventWindow is an indicator variable that equals one for three days (i.e., [1,3]
days) right after an ESG incident of firm i at day 0. C Ind indicates consumer-oriented industries and
equals one if a firm’s 2-digit NAICS industry code is 44 or 45, and zero otherwise. In Columns (2) and
(3), we divide our sample into two sub-samples based on the value of C Ind. Control variables from Table
2 are all included and are not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table 1.
All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm
clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
T Num
T Num
T Num
Consumer Oriented
Industry
Non-Consumer
Oriented Industry
EventWindow
0.037*
0.118***
0.037*
(1.694)
(2.914)
(1.685)
EventWindow × C Ind
0.084*
(1.867)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry-Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
70,484
7,688
62,796
R-squared
0.380
0.442
0.371
The results are reported in Table 5. In Column (1), we first repeat our baseline setting
by using all incidents and find consistent results, suggesting our findings are not sensitive
to the selection of incidents. In Column (2), we interact EventWindow with High Impact.
The coefficient on the interaction term is positively significant, suggesting that firms increase
their Twitter posts more when the incident has a greater impact. In Column (3), we focus
only on the subsample where the incidents are of lower impact (i.e., High Impact=0). We
can see that the coefficient on EventWindow is only significant for the high-impact group
(i.e., Table 2), but not for the low-impact group (i.e., Column (3) of Table 5). Our subsample
analysis further confirms our conjecture that firms change the post frequency in their social
media account in response to the ESG incidents, as the change becomes more salient when
the incidents are more impactful.
We also conducted another heterogeneity test in terms of media coverage in traditional
media outlets. The intuition is that firms may be more motivated to change their use of
social media when incidents attract more attention from the traditional media. We obtain
information on media coverage from the Ravenpack database and find that the corporate
use of social media does not change with the intensity of media coverage following the
ESG incidents. We suspect that this is because the intensity of media coverage cannot be
25

accurately predicted, and firms may not be able to proactively adjust their use of social
media in a timely manner by closely observing or predicting the media coverage. We do not
present this group of results for ease of exposition.
Table 5. Heterogeneity Test on Specification 1: Incident Impact
This table examines whether the incident impact matters in the documented association between a firm’s
tweet posts and ESG incidents. The dependent variable, T Num, is the number of tweets posted by firm
i on day d. In Column (1), the variable of interest EventWindow is an indicator that equals one if a firm
experiences an ESG incident and for the three days following an ESG incident. In Column (2), the variable
of interest is the interaction between EventWindow and High Impact. High Impact indicates incidents with
high impact and equals one if at least one of the three scores (i.e., severity, reach, and novelty) is ranked at
its highest level for an incident, and zero otherwise. In Column (3), we focus only on the subsample where
the incidents are of lower impact (i.e., High Impact=0). Control variables from Table 2 are all included
and are not reported for brevity.
Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table 1.
All continuous
variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm clustering, are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
T Num
T Num
T Num
Low Impact
EventWindow
0.030*
0.002
0.003
(1.924)
(0.120)
(0.140)
EventWindow × High Impact
0.050*
(1.893)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry-Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
123,561
123,561
53,066
R-squared
0.473
0.473
0.567
4.4
Decomposing the Tweet Content
In the tests above, we focused on the total number of tweets posted by a firm without
differentiating tweet content. The results provide an understanding of how firms change the
strength of this communication channel. To better understand how firms communicate with
their stakeholders and shareholders through the corporate use of social media, we decompose
the content of the posts into four categories: tweets that explicitly discuss Environmental,
Social, and Governance issues, and others. By doing so, we can gain a more nuanced under-
standing of how corporate social media use changes following a specific type of ESG incident
in terms of tweet content.
To operationalize this test, we use a semi-supervised, dictionary-based approach to
classify each tweet into one of the four aforementioned categories.
Following Li et al.
(2021), we apply Word2Vector to extract topics from unstructured textual documents. The
26

Word2Vector algorithm is a word-embedding model that identifies an expanded set of syn-
onyms for each seed word provided by the user (Mikolov et al., 2013). It is based on the
simple, time-tested linguistics concept that words tend to co-occur with neighboring words
with similar meanings (Harris, 1954).
For a given word, the algorithm searches for the
neighboring words in the textual document and creates a vector matrix consisting of the
frequencies of each neighboring word. The model then applies a neural network to reduce
the dimension of the matrix to a fixed number. The similarity between any two words in
the document can be calculated as the cosine product between the two corresponding vec-
tor representations. Lastly, the algorithm performs the bootstrapping process to iteratively
associate words gleaned from the document with each seed word. The most similar words
(i.e., those with the highest cosine similarity) are considered an expanded dictionary adding
to the original set of seed words provided by the user.
Specifically, we first sort all words in the tweets by their corresponding frequencies of
mentions and manually screen the top 1,000 words through many iterations to understand
how firms communicate with customers and other stakeholders. We select six seed words
with similar meanings along each dimension from this high-frequency word list. The seed
words for Topic 1 consist of “environment,” “climate,” “weather,” “pollution,” “emission,”
and “EPA”, which we label as topic Environmental. The seed words for Topic 2 consist
of “social,” “society,” “community,” “diversity,” “poverty,” and “racial,” which we label as
topic Social. The seed words for Topic 3 consist of “governance,” “transparency,” “account-
ing,” “disclosure,” “fraud,” and “shareholder,” which we label as topic Governance. This
step leaves us 18 seed words associated with each aspect of the ESG spectrum.
For each seed word, we follow Li et al. (2021) to obtain its unique neighboring words in
the reviews and their corresponding frequencies of mentions. We define neighboring words
as the five words before and after the position of the seed word. The information about
neighboring words is condensed into a 100-dimensional vector. We associate the seed words
with the words gleaned from the tweets to calculate their cosine products – the top 20
closest synonyms of each seed word from the same topic are pooled together as the expanded
dictionary for the topic. We then drop the duplicate keywords in the expanded dictionary,
and remove the ambiguous keywords that are clearly unrelated to ESG.11 These steps leave
us with final environmental, social and governance dictionaries consisting of 50, 33 and 25
keywords, respectively. The final lists of keywords in each dictionary are reported in Table
11For example, the expanded dictionary for the seed word “emission” includes the keyword “pollution.”
This is a duplicate given that we have already included “pollution” as another seed word. We drop these
duplicates when we create the aggregate environmental dictionary.
Furthermore, many of the keywords
recommended by the algorithm are clearly unrelated to ESG, such as “stricter” and “tarriff,” which are part
of the expanded dictionary for “EPA.” We drop these keywords from the final dictionary as well.
27

B.1.
Using these three dictionaries, we can classify the tweets as E, S, or G-related if the text
contains at least one of the keywords in the corresponding dictionary. We construct three
variables, ET Numi,d, ST Numi,d, and GT Numi,d as the total number of tweets posted by
firm i, on day d, that explicitly discuss E, S, and/or G issues. We further construct three in-
dependent variables. E EventWindow is an indicator variable that equals one for three days
(i.e., [1,3] days) right after an Environmental incident of firm i on day 0. S EventWindow
is an indicator variable that equals one for three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after a Social
incident of firm i on day 0. G EventWindow is an indicator variable that equals one for
three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after a Governance incident of firm i on day 0.
We run three separate regressions for each type of incident and the related tweet. The
regression results are in Table 6, Columns (1), (3), and (5).
We find that following an
environmental incident firms post more tweets related to environmental issues. This pattern
also applies to social and governance incidents. The content analysis is consistent with our
hypothesis that firms tend to increase the number of incident-related tweets on their social
media accounts following an ESG incident. Notably, the results reveal that firms proactively
react to an ESG incident through their use of social media, as they tend to discuss more
content related to a specific type of incident.
We further examine the change in the number of non-incident-related tweets. For exam-
ple, we test whether a firm will significantly increase its posts of non-environmental tweets
(NonET Numi,d) following an environmental incident. Some practitioners and studies argue
that decreasing the non-incident-related content and having an incident-related-only posting
strategy may help the firm recover from the incident by showing that the firm is taking the
incident seriously (Stieglitz et al., 2019; Newberry and Dawley, 2019); however, it is also
true that firms have the incentives to create non-incident-relevant content to divert public
attention (Al Balawi et al., 2023) or to increase the firm’s customer relationship manage-
ment. Our regression results are consistent with the latter hypothesis. For example, Table
6 Column (2) indicates that firms increase the number of non-environmental-related tweets
on their corporate Twitter account after an environmental incident. The same is also true
for social and governance incidents. We note that differing from the existing literature that
mainly focuses on firms’ efforts in marketing or customer relationship management after an
incident (e.g., He et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al., 2023), we are the first to examine the Twitter
posts regarding whether the content is incident-related or not. The empirical results are in
line with the argument that firms tend to exert higher efforts related to other matters on
social media after an ESG incident.
28

Table 6. Decomposing the Tweet Content
This table reports the regression results on the change in the number of tweets with different contents
following a specific type of ESG incident. We classify tweets into three types based on the keyword search,
including environmental tweets, social tweets, and governance tweets. We also classify ESG incidents into
environmental, social, and governance ones based on the classification from RepRisk. For example, ET Num
is the number of environmental tweets posted by firm i on day d. NonET Num is the number of tweets
excluding environmental ones posted by firm i on day d. ST Num is the number of social tweets posted
by firm i on day d. NonST Num is the number of tweets excluding social ones posted by firm i on day d.
GT Num is the number of governance tweets posted by firm i on day d. NonGT Num is the number of tweets
excluding governance ones posted by firm i on day d. E EventWindow is an indicator variable that equals
one for three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after an Environmental incident of firm i at day 0. S EventWindow
is an indicator variable that equals one for three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after a Social incident of firm i at
day 0. G EventWindow is an indicator variable that equals one for three days (i.e., [1,3] days) right after a
Governance incident of firm i at day 0. Control variables from Table 2 are all included and are not reported
for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table 1. All continuous variables are winsorized at
1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
ET Num
NonET Num
ST Num
NonST Num
GT Num
NonGT Num
E EventWindow
0.013*
1.358***
(1.766)
(8.504)
S EventWindow
0.035***
1.520***
(3.496)
(11.463)
G EventWindow
0.008**
1.637***
(2.281)
(11.457)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry-Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
70,465
70,465
70,465
70,465
70,465
70,465
R-squared
0.126
0.385
0.099
0.386
0.057
0.388
5
Corporate Use of Social Media and Capital Market
Reactions
In this section, we extend our analyses and examine if an increase in a firm’s tweet
posts helps moderate the potential capital market fallout following the revelation of an ESG
incident. In the theorization, we argue that firms may intend to increase their use of social
media after an incident in terms of both incident-related and non-incident-related tweets
because doing so can help mitigate reputation damage. If it is indeed the case that firms
tend to adjust their use of social media to mitigate reputation damage after the incidents, we
may observe that capital market fallouts can be mitigated as an outcome after the incidents
with higher corporate use of social media. This is different from the existing studies that
mainly focus on the outcomes related to customer relationships on social media (e.g., He
et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al., 2023).
29

We merge our RepRisk-Twitter dataset with the stock returns provided by CRSP database
and form a new sample with each incident as the unique observation unit. In some cases,
multiple firms may be involved in the same incident. Our sample consists of 7,501 incident-
firm observations with non-missing information on the main variables.
To measure the
capital market reaction, we calculated the market-adjusted cumulative abnormal return
(CAR[−3, 3]) during the [-3,3] day window around an ESG incident (in percentage, scaled up
by 100). The CAR was estimated using the market model and historical returns from -360
days to -30 days. We removed firms with less than 100 trading days during the estimation
window. Our analysis employs the following incident-level regression specification:
CAR[−3, 3]i,d = β0 + β1∆TNumi,d + Controlsi,y + FEj + FEy,m + εi,d
(2)
where CAR[−3, 3] represents the cumulative abnormal return during the [-3,3] day period
surrounding an ESG incident. The variable of interest in this regression is ∆TNum, which is
calculated as the difference between the number of Twitter posts during the [1,3] day period
and the number of Twitter posts during the [-3,-1] day period. This variable captures the
increase in the number of tweet posts surrounding an ESG incident. The Controlsi,y include
all of the firm-level control variables in Specification 1. In addition, we control for several
incident-level characteristics, including whether the incident is sharp, as well as the severity,
novelty, and reach scores of the incident. We also incorporate industry and year-month fixed
effects. Standard errors are adjusted for firm clustering. Table 7 presents the summary
statistics and definitions of our key variables that we use in Section 5.
Table 7. Variable Definition and Summary Statistics of the Incident Sample
This table reports the definition of main variables and summary statistics of our incident sample used in
Specification 2.
Variable Name
Definition
Source
Mean
S.D.
CAR[-3.3]
Cumulative abnormal return during the [-3,3]
days around the ESG incident date.
CRSP
-0.072
4.023
∆TNum
The difference between the number of tweets
posted during the three days before an ESG
incident and that during the three days after an
ESG incident.
Twitter
0.416
10.528
Severity
A score measures the harshness of an ESG
incident and ranges between one and three.
RepRisk
1.359
0.523
Reach
A score measures the harshness of an ESG
incident and ranges between one and three.
RepRisk
2.048
0.843
Novelty
A score measures the newness of an ESG
incident and ranges between one and two.
RepRisk
1.694
0.461
Unsharp
A dummy variable equals one if the incident is
an unsharp one.
RepRisk
0.217
0.412
30

The regression results are in Table 8. In Column (1), we do not include any firm-level
control variables. The coefficient on ∆TNum is positive and statistically significant at the
1% level. In Column (2), we include both firm-level and incident-level covariates and find
similar results. In Column (3), we further control for the firm fixed effects and our findings
are robust to these additional considerations. These empirical results indicate that when a
firm increases its tweet posts surrounding an ESG incident, the stock market reaction is more
positive. In terms of economic magnitude, based on the estimated results in Column (3),
a one-standard-deviation increase in ∆TNum is associated with a 0.084 increase in CAR.
Combined with our findings in Section 4, we show that following a negative ESG incident,
firms tend to increase their corporate use of social media and such a strategy can potentially
benefit them in terms of positive capital market reactions.
We also conduct several robustness checks and include the details of these tests in Ap-
pendix B and Table C.1. First, we add several additional control variables to Specification
2 that may simultaneously affect corporate behavior on their social media accounts and the
stock market reaction to ESG incidents. Second, we employ an alternative dependent vari-
able to measure stock market reactions. Specifically, we calculate the buy-and-hold return
during the [-3,3] day window surrounding an ESG incident (BHAR[−3, 3]). Third, we adopt
an alternative independent variable by computing the change in the number of retweets dur-
ing the three days before and after an ESG incident (∆RetNum). Fourth, to ensure that
our results are not sensitive to the estimation window of the CAR, we calculate the CAR
during the [0,7] day window after an ESG incident and repeat our regression specified in
Specification 2. The results are in Columns (1) to (4) of Appendix Table C.1. Finally, we
implement an instrumental variable (IV) approach, where we define the IV as the number
of tweets posted by a firm during the 30 days prior to an ESG incident. The results are
reported in Columns (5) and (6) of Appendix Table C.1.
Despite the extensive set of robustness checks and the short period around the incidents,
we acknowledge that this group of analyses does not intend to establish the causality in
the relationship between corporate social media use and capital market reaction around
ESG incidents. It is still possible that some other unobservable activities of a firm that are
correlated to its social media may drive the results. This is different from our main analyses
in Section 4.1, where the timing of the occurrence of an ESG incident and the negative
media coverage is quasi-exogenous to firms’ other behaviors or long-term strategies. In this
light, we use the conservative and correlation statements when investigating/describing the
relationship between corporate social media use and capital market reaction. We note that
this group of analyses is mainly intended to examine the outcomes of corporate use of social
31

Table 8. Results on Corporate Use of Social Media and Capital Market Reactions
This table reports the regression results on whether and to what extent a firm’s capital market reactions
surrounding an ESG incident change after a firm changes its corporate use of social media after the incidents.
The sample is formed at the incident level. The dependent variable, CAR[-3,3], is the cumulative abnormal
return during the [-3,3] days around the ESG incident date.
The variable of interest, ∆TNum, is the
difference between the number of tweets posted by firm i during the three days before an ESG incident
and that during the three days after an ESG incident. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the
Table 7. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm
clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
∆TNum
0.009***
0.009***
0.008**
(2.867)
(2.954)
(2.409)
Log(Assets)
0.002
-0.162
(0.038)
(-0.492)
Sales Growth
0.628
0.949*
(1.307)
(1.686)
RD
-6.507**
-2.044
(-2.393)
(-0.274)
ROA
0.940
-3.266*
(0.914)
(-1.675)
Capx
-0.068
5.846
(-0.034)
(1.351)
Leverage
0.311
0.024
(0.638)
(0.022)
MB
-0.020**
-0.022
(-2.129)
(-1.500)
Cash
1.855***
2.524**
(3.344)
(2.150)
Unsharp
-0.016
-0.049
(-0.111)
(-0.322)
Severity FE
No
Yes
Yes
Novelty FE
No
Yes
Yes
Reach FE
No
Yes
Yes
Industry FE
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Observations
7,501
7,501
7,408
R-squared
0.051
0.055
0.121
media, potentially enriching the understanding of why firms tend to increase their corporate
use of social media after ESG incidents.
5.1
Heterogeneity Test: Consumer-Oriented Industry
In this part, we explore whether the positive relationship between corporate social media
use and stock market reactions is stronger for firms in the consumer-oriented industry. The
32

rationale behind the argument that being in the consumer-oriented industry should play a
role in this relationship is that social media plays a more pronounced role in communicating
with consumers than in communicating with other business entities. Thus, the social media
activity of consumer-oriented firms can have a greater moderating effect on capital market
fallout during ESG incidents.
To test this conjecture, following the procedures in Section 4.2, we define consumer-
oriented industries (C Ind) as those with a 2-digit NAICS code of 44 or 45.
We then
construct an interaction term between ∆TNum and C Ind to capture the differential im-
pact on consumer-oriented and non-consumer-oriented industries. The regression results are
reported in Table 9, Column (1), where the coefficient on ∆TNum×C Ind is positive and
statistically significant at the 1% level. This implies that the positive association between
corporate use of social media and stock market reactions is greater for the consumer-oriented
industry. In Columns (2) and (3), we implement subsample analysis by dividing our sample
into consumer-oriented and non-consumer-oriented industries. Consistent with the findings
in our interaction-term specification, the coefficient on ∆TNum is much larger for firms in
the consumer-oriented industries (Column (2)) than for firms in the non-consumer-oriented
industries (Column (3)). Overall, the cross-sectional tests are in line with our conjecture
that the relationship between corporate social media activities and stock market reactions
is greater for firms in the consumer-oriented industry. These results also echo our earlier
findings in Section 4.2 that firms that are more focused on consumers increase their Twitter
posts more following ESG incidents.
5.2
Heterogeneity Test: Media Coverage
We examine whether media coverage matters in the association between a firm’s tweet
posts and the capital market reactions surrounding ESG incidents. When an incident attracts
extensive attention from traditional news outlets, social media may be able to play a more
pronounced role in communicating with the public and better help firms mitigate reputation
damage. Thus, we predict that the positive association between tweet posts and capital
market reactions is more salient when the coverage in traditional media outlets is high.
To test this hypothesis, we obtain information on media coverage from the Ravenpack
database and constructed a dummy variable, Media High, which equals one if the number
of news articles during the [1,3] days following an ESG incident is above the median of the
sample. We added an interaction term between ∆TNum and Media High, which captures the
asymmetric impact of news coverage. Table 10, Column (1), reports the regression results.
33

Table 9. Heterogeneity Test on Specification 2: Consumer-Oriented Industry
This table reports the regression results on whether industry consumer orientation matters in the association
between a firm’s tweet posts and the capital market reactions surrounding ESG incidents. The sample is
formed at the incident level. The dependent variable, CAR[-3,3], is the cumulative abnormal return during
the [-3,3] days around the ESG incident date. In Column (1), the variable of interest is the interaction
term between ∆TNum and C Ind. ∆TNum is the difference between the numbers of tweets posted by firm
i during the three days before and three days after an ESG incident. C Ind indicates consumer-oriented
industries and equals one if a firm’s 2-digit NAICS industry code is 44 or 45, and zero otherwise. In Columns
(2) and (3), we divide our sample into two sub-samples based on the value of C Ind. Control variables from
Table 8 are all included and are not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table
7. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm
clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
Consumer-
Oriented Industry
Non-Consumer-
Oriented Industry
∆TNum
0.005*
0.021***
0.005*
(1.655)
(3.796)
(1.666)
C Ind
-1.623***
(-4.026)
∆TNum × C Ind
0.017***
(2.788)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
7,408
918
6,479
R-squared
0.121
0.368
0.132
The coefficient on ∆TNum×Media High is positive and statistically significant at the 5%
level. In Columns (2) and (3), we divided our sample into two subgroups based on the value
of Media High. The positive association between the tweet posts and stock market reaction
remains statistically significant at the 1% level in Column (2). In Column (3), the statistical
significance disappears and the economic magnitude is much smaller than that in Column
(2). In summary, we present consistent evidence that the corporate use of social media can
be more beneficial for firms when the media coverage is high after ESG incidents.
5.3
Subsample Analysis by Incident Type
We continue to explore whether the significance of our main results varies by the types
of ESG issues. We follow the classification system in RepRisk and break down the negative
news exposure along the Environmental, Social, and Governance pillars. In Table 11, we
replicate the analysis in Equation 2 using three subsamples. We report the coefficients on
∆TNum in Columns (1) to (3), for firms involved in scandals related to environmental,
34

Table 10. Heterogeneity Test on Specification 2: News Coverage
This table reports the regression results on whether media coverage affects the association between a firm’s
tweet posts and the capital market reactions surrounding ESG incidents.
The sample is formed at the
incident level. The dependent variable, CAR[-3,3], is the cumulative abnormal return during the [-3,3] days
around the ESG incident date. ∆TNum is the difference between the numbers of tweets posted by firm i
during the three days before and three days after an ESG incident. Media High equals one if the number
of news articles during the [1,3] days following an ESG incident is above the median of the sample. Control
variables from Table 8 are all included and are not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are
provided in Table 7. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics,
adjusted for firm clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
High Coverage
Low Coverage
∆TNum
0.002
0.011***
0.002
(0.612)
(2.751)
(0.457)
News High
-0.374*
(-1.865)
∆TNum × News High
0.010**
(2.071)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
6,134
3,092
3,011
R-squared
0.127
0.130
0.216
social, and governance issues, respectively.
The coefficient is only significant in Column (2), indicating that the moderating effect of
Twitter posts on market reaction mostly pertains to social issues, such as impacts on commu-
nities, discrimination in employment, occupational health, and poor employment conditions.
The coefficients on ∆TNum for the Social and Governance subsamples are insignificant, de-
spite the positive sign. The results indicate that while firms use social media at a similar
level regardless of the type of ESG incidents (as described in Table 6), the outcomes may
vary. We suspect that this is because the public may have different levels of expectation and
attention regarding different types of incidents, or the corporate use of social media may
work differently when alleviating the reputation damage of different types of incidents.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
Firms are complying with growing pressure to improve their performance on ESG mea-
sures, but a firm’s efforts cannot fully preclude the possibility of a negative ESG incident.
35

Table 11. Subsample Analysis by Incident Type
This table reports the regression results on whether the association between a firm’s tweet posts and the
capital market reactions surrounding ESG incidents differs in the type of incidents. The sample is formed
at the incident level. We divide all incidents into three subsamples (i.e., environmental incidents, social
incidents, and governance incidents). The dependent variable, CAR[-3,3], is the cumulative abnormal return
during the [-3,3] days around the ESG incident date. ∆TNum is the difference between the numbers of
tweets posted by firm i during the three days before and three days after an ESG incident. Control variables
from Table 8 are all included and are not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in
Table 7. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for
firm clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
CAR[-3,3]
Environmental
Social
Governance
∆TNum
0.008
0.016***
0.007
(0.754)
(2.916)
(1.626)
Controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
1,782
3,446
2,986
R-squared
0.238
0.171
0.176
When incidents inevitably occur, firms are expected to publish incident-related posts on their
corporate social media accounts, which are important channels for communicating with the
public. Given that social media is a natural channel for information distribution and pub-
licity (Gao et al., 2022; Al Balawi et al., 2023), we argue that the passive communication
ways such as denial or keeping silent (Le et al., 2018) when facing an ESG incident are less
likely to be used by firms. Instead, firms tend to increase the communication frequency and
number of incident-related posts on social media platforms. At the same time, however, it
is unclear whether and to what extent firms should adjust their use of social media after
ESG incidents in terms of non-incident-related posts. On the one hand, corporate social
media accounts may need to publish regular and non-incident-related posts for marketing
and promotion purposes (e.g., Yang et al., 2019), customer management (e.g., He et al.,
2018), or diverting public attention (e.g., Hu and Pang, 2016). On the other hand, many
practitioners recommend avoiding posts that are unrelated to the incident (e.g., Newberry
and Dawley, 2019; Nierman, 2020; FrontierMarketing, 2020), and the existing studies argue
that the continued posting of non-incident-related content has confused and upset users and
customers (Stieglitz et al., 2019).
We use multiple sources to construct a comprehensive dataset of firms, ESG incidents,
posts from corporate Twitter accounts, and abnormal returns surrounding ESG incidents.
We show that in the current practice, on average, firms tend to increase communication
36

frequency on social media platforms and thereby the number of posts after ESG incidents.
The impact is more salient for firms in consumer-oriented industries and when the incident
is more impactful. We further use a semi-supervised, dictionary-based approach to delve
into the content of tweets. With the developed dictionaries on Environment, Social, and
Governance incidents, our analyses show that firms tend to increase both the number of
incident-related and the number of non-incident-related Twitter posts after the incidents.
We also explore the outcomes of firms’ use of social media after ESG incidents in terms of
capital market reactions. Specifically, the increased corporate use of social media benefits
firms by experiencing less damage to firm value—contrary to the prevailing advice to focus
only on the incident-related posts (which presumably would lead to fewer tweets posted on
firms’ official accounts).
This study adds to the growing literature on ESG practices and firm reactions to ESG
incidents (e.g., Li and Wu, 2020) and offers new evidence regarding the operational value
of social media (e.g., Hu et al., 2019). First, our study generalizes the previous analyses
regarding one single type of incident and firms’ social media reactions to different ESG
incidents (e.g., He et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2015; Al Balawi et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2022). The
broad analyses considering different types of incidents enable us to show that the documented
impact is more pronounced in consumer-oriented industries and for the incidents with higher
impact, adding new insights to the literature. Second, we propose that it is possible for firms
to adjust both the number of posts relevant to the incidents and those not. In this light,
the purpose and actions of corporate social media discussed in this study can be different
from (while closely related to) the literature on how firms manage customer relationships
and change other posting behaviors on social media platforms (e.g., Gu and Ye, 2014; He
et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al., 2023). Third, as a byproduct of the determinations on the
incident-related and non-incident-related posts, we create an ESG Classification Dictionary
by using Word2Vector (Li et al., 2021), and the dictionary can be a useful text analysis
tool for future ESG-related studies. Finally, we also explore the outcome in terms of the
capital market reactions (vs. the existing studies that analyze outcomes related to customer
relationship management or customer satisfaction (e.g., He et al., 2018; Al Balawi et al.,
2023)). The findings have important practical value for any firm that is involved in an ESG
incident and wishes to use corporate social media as part of the recovery strategy.
Our study is subject to several limitations that present future research opportunities.
First, our approach limits our analyses to the firms that are covered by RepRisk Dataset
and that list corporate Twitter accounts on official websites. We chose the RepRisk Dataset
for its inclusive approach to ESG incidents, and our selection process ensured that Twitter
37

was the main social media outlet for firms in the study. However, future studies can extend
our analyses by exploring the tested relationships with other social media platforms and with
specific ESG incidents. Second, as we acknowledged in Section 5, readers may need to use
caution when interpreting the causal relationship between the number of corporate social
media posts and financial market reactions. Future studies could further verify the causal
relationship by using an exogenous event that affects only the corporate use of social media
but not the financial market reactions.
38

References
Al Balawi, Ramah, Yuheng Hu, Liangfei Qiu. 2023. Brand crisis and customer relation-
ship management on social media: Evidence from a natural experiment from the airline
industry. Information Systems Research 34(2) 442–462.
Armitage, Seth. 1995. Event study methods and evidence on their performance. Journal of
Economic Surveys 9(1) 25–52.
Asare, Janice Gassam. 2019. How general motors can overcome its toxic work culture. Forbes
https://www.forbes.com/sites/janicegassam/2019/01/21/how-general-motors-
can-overcome-its-toxic-work-environment/?sh=3b04cb174cac.
Astvansh, Vivek, Yen-Yao Wang, Wei Shi. 2022. The effects of the news media on a firm’s
voluntary product recalls. Production and Operations Management 31(11) 4223–4244.
Bartov, Eli, Lucile Faurel, Partha S Mohanram. 2018. Can twitter help predict firm-level
earnings and stock returns? The Accounting Review 93(3) 25–57.
B´enabou, Roland, Jean Tirole. 2010. Individual and corporate social responsibility. Eco-
nomica 77(305) 1–19.
Benoit, William L. 1997. Image repair discourse and crisis communication. Public relations
review 23(2) 177–186.
Berg, Florian, Julian F K¨olbel, Anna Pavlova, Roberto Rigobon. 2021. Esg confusion and
stock returns: Tackling the problem of noise. Working Paper. Available at SSRN https:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3941514.
Cao, Jie, Hao Liang, Xintong Zhan. 2019. Peer effects of corporate social responsibility.
Management Science 65(12) 5487–5503.
Chan, Hing Kai, Xiaojun Wang, Ewelina Lacka, Min Zhang. 2016. A mixed-method approach
to extracting the value of social media data. Production and Operations Management 25(3)
568–583.
Chapman, Kimball, Gregory S Miller, Hal D White. 2019. Investor relations and information
assimilation. The Accounting Review 94(2) 105–131.
Chen, Yuan, Hsing Kenneth Cheng, Yang Liu, Jingchuan Pu, Liangfei Qiu, Ning Wang.
2022. Knowledge-sharing ties and equivalence in corporate online communities: A novel
source to understand voluntary turnover. Production and Operations Management 31(10)
3896–3913.
Claeys, An-Sofie, Micha¨el Opgenhaffen. 2016. Why practitioners do (not) apply crisis com-
munication theory in practice. Journal of Public Relations Research 28(5-6) 232–247.
Cohn, Jonathan B, Zack Liu, Malcolm I Wardlaw. 2022. Count (and count-like) data in
finance. Journal of Financial Economics 146(2) 529–551.
39

Cui, Ruomeng, Santiago Gallino, Antonio Moreno, Dennis J Zhang. 2018. The operational
value of social media information. Production and Operations Management 27(10) 1749–
1769.
Davis, Andrew M, Vishal Gaur, Dayoung Kim. 2021. Consumer learning from own experience
and social information: An experimental study. Management Science 67(5) 2924–2943.
Demerjian, Peter R, Joel F Houston, Hongyu Shan, Yu Shan. 2021. Customer capital and
deposit stability. Available at SSRN 3697693 .
Dhanorkar, Suvrat S, Enno Siemsen, Kevin W Linderman. 2018. Promoting change from
the outside: Directing managerial attention in the implementation of environmental im-
provements. Management Science 64(6) 2535–2556.
Dimitrov, Roumen. 2015. Silence and invisibility in public relations. Public Relations Review
41(5) 636–651.
Eriksson, Mats. 2018. Lessons for crisis communication on social media: A systematic review
of what research tells the practice.
International Journal of Strategic Communication
12(5) 526–551.
Fama, Eugene F, Lawrence Fisher, Michael C Jensen, Richard Roll. 1969. The adjustment
of stock prices to new information. International Economic Review 10(1) 1–21.
Flammer, Caroline. 2015.
Does corporate social responsibility lead to superior financial
performance? a regression discontinuity approach. Management Science 61(11) 2549–
2568.
FrontierMarketing. 2020. See how to adapt your social media strategy during a crisis!
ht
tps://frontiermarketingllc.com/adjust-your-social-media-strategy-during-
a-crisis/.
Fu, Youran, Marshall Fisher. 2023. The value of social media data in fashion forecasting.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management Forthcoming.
Gao, Haibing, Jinhong Xie, Qi Wang, Kenneth C Wilbur. 2015. Should ad spending increase
or decrease before a recall announcement? the marketing–finance interface in product-
harm crisis management. Journal of Marketing 79(5) 80–99.
Gao, Haibing, Huazhong Zhao, Yinliang Tan, Ya Lin, Lai Wei. 2020. Social promotion:
A creative promotional framework on consumers’ social network value. Production and
Operations Management 29(12) 2661–2678.
Gao, Yang, Wenjing Duan, Huaxia Rui. 2022. Does social media accelerate product recalls?
evidence from the pharmaceutical industry. Information Systems Research 33(3) 954–977.
Goh, Khim-Yong, Cheng-Suang Heng, Zhijie Lin. 2013.
Social media brand community
and consumer behavior: Quantifying the relative impact of user-and marketer-generated
content. Information Systems Research 24(1) 88–107.
40

Gu, Bin, Qiang Ye. 2014. First step in social media: Measuring the influence of online
management responses on customer satisfaction. Production and Operations Management
23(4) 570–582.
Hainmueller, Jens, Yiqing Xu. 2013.
Ebalance: A stata package for entropy balancing.
Journal of Statistical Software 54(7).
Harris, Zellig S. 1954. Distributional structure. Word 10(2-3) 146–162.
He, Shu, Huaxia Rui, Andrew B Whinston. 2018. Social media strategies in product-harm
crises. Information Systems Research 29(2) 362–380.
Hoffman, Mitchell, Steven Tadelis. 2021. People management skills, employee attrition, and
manager rewards: An empirical analysis. Journal of Political Economy 129(1) 243–285.
Hotkar, Parshuram, Rajiv Garg, Kristen Sussman. 2023. Strategic social media marketing:
An empirical analysis of sequential advertising. Production and Operations Management
32(12) 4005–4020.
Houston, Joel F, Chen Lin, Hongyu Shan, Mo Shen. 2022. How does esg shape consumption?
Available at SSRN 4243071 .
Houston, Joel F, Hongyu Shan. 2022. Corporate esg profiles and banking relationships. The
Review of Financial Studies 35(7) 3373–3417.
Hu, Yang, Augustine Pang. 2016. Public relations practitioners’ perceptions of the use of
crisis response strategies in china. Public Relations Review 42(2) 333–335.
Hu, Yuheng, Anbang Xu, Yili Hong, David Gal, Vibha Sinha, Rama Akkiraju. 2019. Gen-
erating business intelligence through social media analytics: Measuring brand personality
with consumer-, employee-, and firm-generated content. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems 36(3) 893–930.
Huang, Ni, Tianshu Sun, Peiyu Chen, Joseph M Golden. 2019.
Word-of-mouth system
implementation and customer conversion: A randomized field experiment. Information
Systems Research 30(3) 805–818.
Jacobs, Brian W, Vinod R Singhal. 2020.
Shareholder value effects of the volkswagen
emissions scandal on the automotive ecosystem. Production and Operations Management
29(10) 2230–2251.
Jiang, Hao, Sophia Zhengzi Li, Hao Wang. 2021. Pervasive underreaction: Evidence from
high-frequency data. Journal of Financial Economics 141(2) 573–599.
Kim, Soohun, Aaron Yoon. 2023.
Analyzing active fund managers’ commitment to esg:
Evidence from the united nations principles for responsible investment.
Management
science 69(2) 741–758.
Kolari, James W, Seppo Pynn¨onen. 2010. Event study testing with cross-sectional correlation
of abnormal returns. The Review of Financial Studies 23(11) 3996–4025.
41

Lam, Hugo KS, Andy CL Yeung, TC Edwin Cheng. 2016. The impact of firms’ social media
initiatives on operational efficiency and innovativeness. Journal of Operations Management
47 28–43.
Le, Phuong D, Hui Xun Teo, Augustine Pang, Yuling Li, Cai-Qin Goh. 2018. When is silence
golden? the use of strategic silence in crisis communication. Corporate Communications:
An International Journal 24(1) 162–178.
Lee, Hau L, Christopher S Tang. 2018. Socially and environmentally responsible value chain
innovations: New operations management research opportunities. Management Science
64(3) 983–996.
Lee, Lian Fen, Amy P Hutton, Susan Shu. 2015. The role of social media in the capital
market: Evidence from consumer product recalls. Journal of Accounting Research 53(2)
367–404.
Lee, Shun-Yang, Liangfei Qiu, Andrew Whinston. 2018. Sentiment manipulation in online
platforms: An analysis of movie tweets. Production and Operations Management 27(3)
393–416.
Li, Jun, Di Wu. 2020. Do corporate social responsibility engagements lead to real environ-
mental, social, and governance impact? Management Science 66(6) 2564–2588.
Li, Kai, Feng Mai, Rui Shen, Xinyan Yan. 2021. Measuring corporate culture using machine
learning. The Review of Financial Studies 34(7) 3265–3315.
Li, Qing, Hongyu Shan, Yuehua Tang, Vincent Yao. 2024. Corporate climate risk: Measure-
ments and responses. The Review of Financial Studies 37(6) 1778–1830.
Lo, Chris KY, Christopher S Tang, Yi Zhou, Andy CL Yeung, Di Fan. 2018. Environmental
incidents and the market value of firms: An empirical investigation in the chinese context.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 20(3) 422–439.
Manchanda, Puneet, Grant Packard, Adithya Pattabhiramaiah. 2015. Social dollars: The
economic impact of customer participation in a firm-sponsored online customer community.
Marketing Science 34(3) 367–387.
Merle, Renae. 2016. Wells fargo ceo steps down in wake of sham accounts scandal. The
Washington Post https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/business/wp/2016/10/12
/wells-fargo-ceo-to-retire-in-wake-of-sham-accounts-scandal/.
Mikolov, Tomas, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.
Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 3111–3119.
Moss, Austin, James P Naughton, Clare Wang. 2024. The irrelevance of environmental,
social, and governance disclosure to retail investors. Management Science .
42

Nardi, Leandro, Todd Zenger, S´ergio Giovanetti Lazzarini, Sandro Cabral. 2022.
Doing
well by doing good, uniquely: Materiality and the market value of unique csr strategies.
Strategy Science 7(1) 10–26.
Newberry, Christina, Sarah Dawley. 2019. How to manage a social media crisis: A practical
guide for brands. Hootsuite Blog
https://frontiermarketingllc.com/adjust-your
-social-media-strategy-during-a-crisis/.
Nierman, Evan. 2020. Five steps to effectively use social media for crisis management. Forbes
https://www.forbes.com/sites/theyec/2020/03/25/five-steps-to-effectively
-use-social-media-for-crisis-management/.
Oster, Emily. 2019. Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37(2) 187–204.
Ott, Larissa, Petra Theunissen. 2015. Reputations at risk: Engagement during social media
crises. Public relations review 41(1) 97–102.
Pang, Augustine, Yan Jin, Youngji Seo, Sung In Choi, Hui-Xun Teo, Phuong D Le, Bryan
Reber. 2022. Breaking the sound of silence: Explication in the use of strategic silence in
crisis communication. International Journal of Business Communication 59(2) 219–241.
Pu, Jingchuan. 2022. Do online communities improve job performance in the geographically
dispersed organization? Production and Operations Management 31(2) 403–421.
Pu, Jingchuan, Yuan Chen, Liangfei Qiu, Hsing Kenneth Cheng. 2020. Does identity disclo-
sure help or hurt user content generation? social presence, inhibition, and displacement
effects. Information Systems Research 31(2) 297–322.
Pu, Jingchuan, Yang Liu, Yuan Chen, Liangfei Qiu, Hsing Kenneth Cheng. 2022. What
questions are you inclined to answer? effects of hierarchy in corporate q&a communities.
Information Systems Research 33(1) 244–264.
Qiu, Liangfei, Arunima Chhikara, Asoo Vakharia. 2021.
Multidimensional observational
learning in social networks: Theory and experimental evidence.
Information Systems
Research 32(3) 876–894.
Romenti, Stefania, Grazia Murtarelli, Chiara Valentini. 2014. Organisations’ conversations
in social media: applying dialogue strategies in times of crises. Corporate Communications:
An International Journal 19 10–33.
Schmidt, Christoph G, David A Wuttke, George P Ball, Hans Sebastian Heese. 2020. Does
social media elevate supply chain importance? an empirical examination of supply chain
glitches, twitter reactions, and stock market returns. Journal of Operations Management
66(6) 646–669.
Simon, Mallory, Sara Sidner. 2019. Inside the gm plant where nooses and ’whites-only’ signs
hung. CNN
https://www.cnn.com/2019/01/16/us/gm-toledo-racism-lawsuit/ind
ex.html.
43

Sprout Social. 2018. Brandsgetreal: What consumers want from brands in a divided society.
Report, Sprout Social.
Statista. 2019. Most popular social networks used by inc. 500 companies in 2017. Report,
In Statista - The Statistics Portal.
Stieglitz, Stefan, Milad Mirbabaie, Tobias Kroll, Julian Marx. 2019. “silence” as a strategy
during a corporate crisis – the case of volkswagen’s “dieselgate”. Internet Research 29(4)
921–939.
Strike, Vanessa M, Jijun Gao, Pratima Bansal. 2006. Being good while being bad: Social
responsibility and the international diversification of us firms. Journal of international
business studies 37 850–862.
Sul, Hong Kee, Alan R Dennis, Lingyao Yuan. 2017. Trading on twitter: Using social media
sentiment to predict stock returns. Decision Sciences 48(3) 454–488.
Wang, Tawei, Karthik N Kannan, Jackie Rees Ulmer. 2013. The association between the
disclosure and the realization of information security risk factors. Information Systems
Research 24(2) 201–218.
Wang, Yen-Yao, Chenhui Guo, Anjana Susarla, Vallabh Sambamurthy. 2021.
Online to
offline: the impact of social media on offline sales in the automobile industry. Information
Systems Research 32(2) 582–604.
Wu, Yue, Kaifu Zhang, Jinhong Xie. 2020. Bad greenwashing, good greenwashing: Corporate
social responsibility and information transparency. Management Science 66(7) 3095–3112.
Xiao, Ping, Kai-Yu Hsieh, Weining Bao. 2024. Donations by disaster-afflicted firms and
changes in firm value: Self-protection and reputation-building perspectives. Production
and Operations Management 33(1) 323–341.
Yan, Lu, Alfonso J Pedraza-Martinez. 2019. Social media for disaster management: Oper-
ational value of the social conversation. Production and Operations Management 28(10)
2514–2532.
Yang, Mochen, Yuqing Ren, Gediminas Adomavicius. 2019. Understanding user-generated
content and customer engagement on facebook business pages. Information Systems Re-
search 30(3) 839–855.
44

Appendix A
Table A.1. Sample Construction
This table provides a detailed breakdown of our sample construction.
Data Merging Steps
# of Observations
Incidents from RepRisk during 1 Jan 2007 and 31 Dec 2020
626,284
Merge with CRSP
120,197
Keep incidents with at least one of the scores in severity, reach, and
novelty ranks the highest.
62,622
Extend to [-7,7] day window around each incident
391,691
Keep observations after the date of the first tweet posted by the firm
90,559
Remove financial and utility firms
78,546
Delete observations with missing financial variables
70,484
A.1

Appendix B
Table B.1. ESG Classification Dictionary
This table lists the keyword dictionary for the classification of ESG-related tweets.
Environmental
Social
Governance
pollution
rains
socioeconomic
transparency
pollutant
snowfall
society
governance
ozone
snowfalls
humane
disclosure
emission
snows
democracy
fraud
deforestation
snowstorms
immigrant
accounting
greenhouse
storms
immigration
audit
landfill
temperatures
community
reporting
epa
thundersnow
volunteerism
shareholder
weather
thunderstorms
nonprofit
regulation
thunderstorm
tornados
volunteer
law
climate
typhoons
employee
compensation
unseasonably
weatherwise
charitable
transparent
snowstorm
weather-related
humanity
disclose
hurricane
wildfire
homeless
discloses
decarbonization
wildfires
ethical
disclosed
forest
windstorm
ethics
disclosing
ecosystem
windstorms
equitable
fraudulent
avalanches
minority
audits
blizzards
philanthropy
audited
drought
accountability
auditing
droughts
philanthropic
shareholders
drouth
diversity
regulatory
flooding
poverty
regulates
hailstorm
racial
regulated
hailstorms
disparity
regulating
hurricanes
injustice
landslides
racism
mudslide
equality
mudslides
gender
precipitation
transgender
precipitations
harrassment
rainfall
violence
rainfalls
LGBT
B.1

Appendix C
In this appendix, we elaborate robustness checks for the analyses of the relationship
between the corporate use of social media and the capital market reaction (i.e., Section 5).
First, we add several additional control variables to Equation 2 that may simultaneously
affect corporate behavior on their social media accounts and the stock market reaction to
ESG incidents. Specifically, we include the number of analyst coverage in a year, which is
collected from the IBES database. We also control for the monthly ESG reputation risk
index from RepRisk and news articles related to the firm on a day from RavenPack. We
further employ a web-crawling technique to collect all the comments made by investors
on the SeekingAlpha stock forum. We then calculate the number of comments related to
each company each day and add it as an additional variable. Finally, we control for the
total number of Twitter posts by other firms in the three days following an ESG incident
(TNum Other). Column (1) of Appendix Table C.1 reports the regression results. After
incorporating the four additional controls, the coefficient on ∆TNum remains significant at
the 5% level, suggesting that our findings are not spurious.
Secondly, we employ an alternative dependent variable to measure stock market reactions.
Specifically, we calculate the buy-and-hold return during the [-3,3] day window surrounding
an ESG incident (BHAR[−3, 3]).
Thirdly, each tweet may differ in its social influence.
For example, a tweet that is retweeted by other Twitter users should be more influential.
Therefore, we adopt an alternative independent variable by computing the change in the
number of retweets during the three days before and after an ESG incident (∆RetNum).
Fourthly, to ensure that our results are not sensitive to the estimation window of the CAR,
we calculate the CAR during the [0,7] day window around an ESG incident and repeat
our regression specified in Equation 2. The results are reported in Columns (2) to (4) of
Appendix Table C.1. conclusions are all robust to these additional considerations.
Last, we implement an instrumental variable (IV) approach, where we define the IV
as the number of tweets posted by a firm during the 30 days prior to an ESG incident
(Before TNum).
Firms that are more active on their Twitter account prior to an ESG
incident may increase their tweet volume more significantly during a crisis (Lee et al., 2015).
Moreover, firms’ activities before an ESG incident should not affect the outcome after the
ESG incident. Therefore, both the relevance and exclusion assumptions are satisfied for
the choice of our IV. The results of the first- and second- stage regressions are reported in
Columns (5) and (6), respectively. The coefficient on Before TNum is significantly positive,
satisfying the relevance assumption. Moreover, the F statistic is 2726, indicating a strong first
stage. After instrumentation, we still find a positive impact of corporate Twitter activities
and capital market reaction. The instrumental variable analysis helps enhance our confidence
in the robustness of our analyses.
C.1

Table C.1. Robustness Checks
This table reports the results of several robustness tests. In Column (1), We add several additional controls,
including RepRisk reputation risk index (RRI ), the coverage of news articles in the three days following
an ESG incident (News Num), analyst coverage in the incident year (Analyst), the number of comments
that appeared on the Seeking Alpha platform (Comment Num), and the total number of Twitter posts by
other firms in the three days following an ESG incident (TNum Other). In Column (2), we use the buy
and hold return during the window [-3,3] around an ESG incident as the dependent variable. In Column
(3), we use the change in the number of retweets between three days before and after an ESG incident
as the independent variable.
In Column (4), we calculate CAR using the time window [0,7] around an
ESG incident as the dependent variable. In Columns (5) and (6), we implement an instrumental variable
approach with the number of tweets posted by a firm during the thirty days prior to an ESG incident as
the instrument. The results of first- and second- stage are reported, respectively. Control variables from
Table 8 are all included and are not reported for brevity. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Table
7. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for firm
clustering, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
More
Controls
Buy and
Hold Return
Retweet
Number
CAR[0, 7]
First stage
Second stage
∆TNum
0.008**
0.008**
0.000***
(2.414)
(2.408)
(2.648)
After TNum
0.013**
(2.022)
RRI
-0.000
(-0.026)
News Num
-0.131
(-1.139)
Analyst
0.001
(0.060)
Comment Num
-0.018
(-0.278)
TNum Other
-0.002
(0.271)
∆RetNum
0.000*
(1.852)
Before TNum
0.082***
5.613
F-statistic
2726.287
LM statistic
22.402
Firm FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
5,554
7,408
7,408
7,408
7,408
7,408
R-squared
0.123
0.121
0.083
0.111
0.659
0.105
C.2