TITLE: Contingent stimulus in crowdfunding
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13782
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
Contingent Stimulus in Crowdfunding 
 
Longyuan Du, Ming Hu & Jiahua Wu 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Du, L., Hu, M., & Wu, J. (2022). Contingent stimulus in crowdfunding. 
Production and Operations Management, 31(9), 3543-3558. 
 
Publisher’s Statement This is the submitted version of the following article: Du, L., Hu, 
M., & Wu, J. (2022). Contingent stimulus in crowdfunding. 
Production and Operations Management, 31(9), 3543-3558, which 
has been published in final form at 
https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13782. This article may be used for 
non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and 
Conditions for Use of Self-Archived Versions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 
 

Contingent Stimulus in Crowdfunding
Longyuan Du
School of Management, University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA 94117
{ldu5@usfca.edu}
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6
{ ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca}
Jiahua Wu
Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London, London, UK SW7 2AZ
{j.wu@imperial.ac.uk}
Reward-based crowdfunding is a form of innovative ﬁnancing that allows project creators to raise funds from
potential backers to start their ventures. A crowdfunding project is successfully funded if and only if the
predetermined funding goal is achieved within a given time. We study the optimal timing of contingently
placing a “fulcrum” in the random pledging process, with the potential of tilting it towards success, which
would be a win-win-win for the creator, backers, and platform. Speciﬁcally, we consider a model where
backers arrive sequentially at a crowdfunding project. Upon arrival, a backer makes her pledging decision
by taking into account the expected success of the project. We characterize the dynamics of the project’s
pledging process. We show that there exists a cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging, which is mainly driven by
the all-or-nothing nature of crowdfunding projects. According to our data collected from the most popular
online crowdfunding platform, Kickstarter, the majority of projects fail to achieve their goals. To address
this issue, we propose three contingent stimulus policies, namely, seeding, feature upgrade, and limited-time
oﬀer. As a result of the cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging, the optimal timing to apply stimulus policies
has a cutoﬀ-time structure. Lastly, we show that the beneﬁt of contingent policies is greatest in the middle
of crowdfunding campaigns. Testing with the dataset of Kickstarter, we obtain empirical evidence that the
projects’ success rates improve by 14.6% on average with updates in the middle of the campaign and when
the pledging progress is lagging.
1.
Introduction
Reward-based crowdfunding is a form of innovative ﬁnancing that has grown enormously in recent
years. It is reported that the crowdfunding industry will soon account for more funding than
venture capital (Barnett 2015). One of the leading crowdfunding platforms is Kickstarter, on which
creators can raise funds from potential backers to start their ventures, and backers are rewarded
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

2
with variations of the products being produced. As of February 4, 2021, 195,671 projects have been
successfully funded on Kickstarter, raising around $5.02 billion from 19 million people from nearly
every country on the planet.1
A typical reward-based crowdfunding project has a predetermined monetary goal. The project
will be successfully funded only if the goal is reached within a speciﬁed time period. Improving
chances of successfully raising the required funds lies at the core of the design of crowdfunding
projects for project creators as well as for the platforms. Higher success rates beneﬁt all parties:
creators receive much-needed funds to initiate their ventures; backers get a chance to support
their favorite projects and are rewarded with products being produced; and platforms receive a
commission from every successfully funded projects. However, owing to the unpredictability of
how many backers will arrive and what their preferences and valuations will be, there is much
uncertainty about the outcome of a project, especially since every project has a limited time to
meet its target. Using a dataset that we collected from Kickstarter from January 30 to June 27,
2015, we found that 63.4% (13,745) of the projects failed to collect more than 20% of their goals
before the deadline. An additional 8.45% (1,831) of projects collected at least 20% of their goals
but eventually failed to meet their target.
Traditionally, the eﬀort to improve the success rates of projects concentrates on optimizing the
upfront design of project characteristics, such as the targeted amount, reward levels and corre-
sponding prices, which are ﬁxed during the campaign horizon (e.g., Hu et al. 2015, Alaei et al. 2016
and Zhang et al. 2018). However, because of the inherent uncertainty and all-or-nothing mech-
anism of crowdfunding projects, we advocate that contingently providing incentives or adjusting
project characteristics over the course of a crowdfunding campaign is as important as, if not more
important than, the ex ante optimal design.
Most crowdfunding platforms do allow project creators to update their projects and post related
information on projects’ web pages. Updates can range from simple reminders and expressions of
appreciation to tangible modiﬁcations to the project, such as new designs or extra features. As a
matter of fact, both Kickstarter and Indiegogo describe updates as a good way to raise awareness
and boost success rates.2 Our data suggests that, on average, successful projects make 1.1 updates
per week, whereas the failed ones make only 0.2.
We use two projects posted on Kickstarter to illustrate the eﬀect of contingent updates on
projects’ success. The creators of project “Cuberox” seek to develop a waterproof six-screen com-
puter powered by the Linux operating system. The project was launched on February 24, 2015,
1 Source: https://www.kickstarter.com/help/stats.
2 See https://go.indiegogo.com/blog/2015/10/crowdfunding-statistics-trends-infographic.html.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

3
aiming to gather $150,000 by March 30, 2015. Figure 1(a) displays the cumulative amount pledged
to the project during its crowdfunding campaign. As the ﬁgure suggests, at ﬁrst the amount pledged
grew steadily; however the increase slowed down signiﬁcantly in the middle of the campaign. A
few backers also expressed a concern that the project might not reach its goal. But the creators
did not take any action. The pledging almost halted, and the project eventually failed as shown in
Figure 1(a).
Figure 1
Pledging Trajectories of Two Projects on Kickstarter
G
$0
$40,000
$80,000
$120,000
$160,000
$200,000
Mar 02
Mar 09
Mar 16
Mar 23
$ pledged
Cuberox − six−screen waterproof linux−powered computer
(a) Cuberox
G
$0
$20,000
$40,000
$60,000
$80,000
$100,000
$120,000
Mar 02
Mar 09
Mar 16
Mar 23
$ pledged
Looking Up/way Up! The Burt Rutan Story
(b) Looking Up, Way Up
Note. The horizontal axis indicates the time, and the vertical axis indicates the cumulative amount pledged. The
dashed horizontal lines represent the targeted amount.
Another project launched around the same time is “Looking Up, Way Up,” which is a proposed
documentary about Burt Rutan, a celebrated aerospace engineer. The project was launched on
February 25, 2015, with a deadline of March 28, 2015, and a goal of $80,000. The cumulative
amount pledged to the project over time is displayed in Figure 1(b). We can see that the ﬁrst half
of the pledging trajectory resembles that of “Cuberox.” However, the number picked up again in
the middle of the campaign and eventually reached its target. A closer look at the project timeline
shows that project creators announced two raﬄes for a few free limited-edition items on March 13
and March 17, 2015, which contributed to a signiﬁcant increase in the pledging number. Whereas
the high funding goal certainly contributed to the failure of the “Cuberox” project, updates of
“Looking Up, Way Up” that stimulated pledges in the middle of the campaign is arguably one of
the main reasons why the project eventually reached its funding target.
Motivated by the preceding examples, we study contingent stimulus policies commonly used by
creators during their project campaigns to improve their chances of raising the required funds.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

4
Speciﬁcally, we consider a situation where backers with a heterogeneous, privately known willing-
ness to pledge (or valuation) arrive sequentially at a crowdfunding project. Upon arriving, a backer
makes her pledging decision according to her valuation which depends on project characteristics,
as well as according to the expected success of the project which depends on the time of arrival
and the amount pledged at that time. We ﬁrst study, as a benchmark, the random pledging process
without any creators’ contingent stimulus. Speciﬁcally, we characterize the dynamics of a project’s
pledging process and the structural properties of the project’s success rate, using the concept of
rational expectations equilibrium. In particular, due to the all-or-nothing nature of crowdfunding
projects, we show that there exists a cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging. That is, a backer’s pledge
not only reduces the required number of pledgers by one, but also boosts the conﬁdence of backers
who arrive later, leading to a greater likelihood of pledging by future arrivals. Overall, a backer’s
pledge results in a relatively much higher success rate compared to without the pledge. The boost
in the success rate due to a pledge (in the form of a ratio of success rates with and without the
pledge) is more salient when the pledge is made closer to the deadline (hence there is less time
in the horizon to attract pledges) or when the number of additional pledgers needed in order to
reach the target is larger for a given time. In other words, the relative beneﬁt of adding one more
pledger improves as the chance of success grows dimmer.
Next, we consider three diﬀerent types of contingent stimulus policies that are costly to imple-
ment and the optimal timing of using them. For simplicity, we focus on the decision on whether
and when to use those costly stimulus policies for once.3
First, we consider a seeding policy, where the project creator has the option to acquire backers
at a cost. Owing to the cascade eﬀect, the addition of pledges increases the pledging likelihood
of future arrivals and thus leads to a higher success rate. Second, inspired by a common practice,
we consider a feature upgrade policy, where project creators are able to upgrade project features
once over the course of the crowdfunding campaign. These two policies are similar in the sense
that they are both reactive; i.e., both of them seek to increase the likelihood of future pledging if
there are fewer early pledgers than expected. As a result, the optimal policies for these two policies
follow a similar structure. That is, for any number of additional pledgers required to reach the
target, there exists a cutoﬀtime such that the creator should implement the stimulus if and only
if the remaining time is less than or equal to the cutoﬀ. As a direct consequence of this cutoﬀ
structure, both seeding and feature upgrade policies can be implemented easily, where the cutoﬀ
3 The case with the option of using a stimulus policy for a given number of times can be built on the single-usage
case through a dynamic program.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

5
time only needs to be updated when the number of pledgers changes. The main driving force
behind this cutoﬀstructure is the cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging due to the all-or-nothing
nature of crowdfunding projects. When it comes to implementing stimulus policies, there is an
essential tradeoﬀbetween the cost of stimulus policies and the potential beneﬁt measured by the
improvement in the success likelihood. Because the cascade eﬀect becomes stronger as it comes
closer to the end of a crowdfunding campaign, the stimulus policy oﬀers a greater boost in the
success rate, and thus the expected gain always outweighs the cost of the stimulus policies when
remaining time is shorter than a certain value. We also show that the cutoﬀtime increases in the
number of additional pledgers required, which indicates that the further the total amount pledged
is from the goal, the earlier the stimulus policies should be applied.
The third policy is a limited-time oﬀer, where project creators are able to oﬀer extra bonuses,
such as free T-shirts, to early adopters. Compared with the other two policies, a limited-time oﬀer
is more proactive in the sense that it encourages backers to pledge early with the hope of attracting
more backers later on owing to the cascade eﬀect. Because of this diﬀerence, the optimal use of
the limited-time oﬀer contrasts with that of the other two policies. There is still a cutoﬀtime for
any number of additional pledgers required to reach the target; however, the creator should end
limited-time oﬀers if and only if the remaining time is greater than or equal to this cutoﬀ.
Though all three policies indirectly beneﬁt all backers through the boost in the success rate,
seeding and limited-time oﬀer only directly beneﬁt a few of those who get the promotions, whereas
feature upgrade directly beneﬁts all, once the project becomes successful.
The cutoﬀ-time structure in the optimal policies suggests that the project creators should wait
and apply (or end) the stimulus only when the early pledging trajectory is unsatisfactory (or
satisfactory). In addition, what all three policies share in common is that their beneﬁt in absolute
terms vanishes when the remaining time is either too long or too short. On the one hand, when
there is ample time left, a project is likely to be successful without any stimulus. On the other
hand, when time is very limited, the chance of reaching the funding goal can still be low even with
stimulus policies. Hence, it tends to be more eﬀective to apply stimulus policies in the middle of the
pledging process. This is validated by our empirical analysis of a dataset collected from Kickstarter.
We show that, although making updates during the funding campaign always improves a project’s
chance of success, updates are most eﬀective in the middle of a campaign, especially when the
pledging is lagging. On average, updating under this scenario improves success rates by 14.6%.
We summarize the contributions of our paper as follows. First, we characterize the cascade eﬀect
on backers’ pledging which is driven by the all-or-nothing nature of crowdfunding projects. Second,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

6
as a result of the cascade eﬀect, we show that the optimal timing to apply stimulus policies has a
cut-oﬀstructure that is contingent upon the progress of the pledging. A project where the amount
pledged grows at a healthy pace does not need interference, whereas one whose pledging progress
turns out unsatisfactory would beneﬁt from applying stimuli. Last, we corroborate this ﬁnding
with the data we collected from Kickstarter. Project updates are shown to oﬀer the greatest boost
to success rates when the middle of the campaign is reached and the total amount pledged falls
behind.
2.
Literature Review
This paper contributes to the growing literature on the crowdfunding scheme (see Chen et al. 2020,
Section 4.5 and Allon and Babich 2020 for surveys on crowdfunding in the operations management
literature). The origin of crowdfunding can be traced back to the provision point mechanism that
is traditionally used in the provision of public goods from private contributions (see, e.g., Bagnoli
and Lipman 1989 and Varian 1994). Crowdfunding diﬀers from this stream of literature in that a
backer cannot beneﬁt from a crowdfunding project without actually pledging, and thus the free-
riding problem that commonly arises in the provision of public goods is not a salient concern in
the context of crowdfunding.
The recent emergence of online crowdfunding platforms, such as Kickstarter and Indiegogo, has
attracted a wide range of researchers who have studied the phenomenon both empirically and ana-
lytically. On the empirical side, researchers have studied many diﬀerent aspects of the crowdfunding
mechanism, including geographic dispersion of investors (Agrawal et al. 2011), backer dynamics
over the project funding cycle (Kuppuswamy and Bayus 2013), positive network externalities (Li
and Duan 2016), factors that lead to successful projects (Mollick 2014), the long-term beneﬁt
from launching crowdfunding campaigns (Mollick and Kuppuswamy 2014), and backers’ prosocial
behavior due to the existence of funding goals (Dai and Zhang 2019).
On the analytical side, Belleﬂamme et al. (2014) discuss the optimal choices between reward-
based and equity-based crowdfunding under various conditions. Hu et al. (2015) study pricing
and product design decisions and demonstrate unique beneﬁts of menu pricing in the context of
crowdfunding. Chakraborty and Swinney (2021) study how the creators may signal the quality
of their projects through funding targets and how the creators’ behavior can be diﬀerent under
the objective of proﬁt-maximization versus success-maximization. Roma et al. (2018) study an
entrepreneur who essentially needs venture capital but could use a crowdfunding campaign to learn
what the market is. The authors study whether the entrepreneur should launch a crowdfunding
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

7
campaign and, if so, how to choose the campaign instruments. Chakraborty and Swinney (2018)
suggest a multi-reward strategy with limited quantities for the more attractive options to mitigate
the strategic behavior of backers (who delay pledging until the campaign is more likely to succeed).
Zhang et al. (2018) model the pledging dynamics with a diﬀusion process that aligns with the U-
shape and L-shape patterns commonly observed in practice. With this model, they investigate the
optimal design of crowdfunding projects in terms of the pledge levels and campaign duration. Alaei
et al. (2016) seek to unravel the commonly observed phenomenon that crowdfunding projects either
succeed or fail by large margins, by modeling the detailed pledging process (see more discussion
below). The authors then study the creator’s ex ante decisions of reward pricing and funding target.
Unlike the analytical works that mainly address the upfront design of crowdfunding projects in
terms of price, target, and mechanism, our work focuses on the contingent policies that creators
can apply to the dynamic pledging progress after the project design has been determined. We
demonstrate the importance of contingent policies, analyze three implementable policies, and show
their beneﬁts analytically and empirically.
The closest theoretical work to ours is Alaei et al. (2016), because both papers model the dynamic
pledging process in which backers anticipate the pledging behavior of later arrivals and take the
project’s success rate into account when making pledging decisions. They model the stochastic
process as an anticipating random walk. As a base, we model the pledging process with backers’
anticipation, using a diﬀerent approach, namely, the diﬀerential and diﬀerence equations, which are
a tool commonly used in revenue management. Moreover, our model works under a more general
set of assumptions, namely, that the distribution of backers’ valuations takes a general form and
their arrivals follow a non-homogeneous Poisson process, as opposed to a two-point distribution of
backer valuations and the assumption of one backer per time period in Alaei et al. (2016). Lastly, as
mentioned above, the primary diﬀerence is that they consider upfront pricing and target decisions,
taking into account the resulting pledging process, whereas we study contingent policies as the
pledging process evolves. Moreover, another closely related paper is Burtch et al. (2021). This work
is a combination of analytical and empirical studies with a dynamic program model on how the
creators should dynamically send out referral links. Their model has no microfoundation on how
individual potential backers decide on their pledging decisions, and neither is the random success
rate taken into account. A feature of their model is that the referral links can be sent out at diﬀerent
times. But due to this complexity, the obtained theoretical structural results are somewhat limited.
The authors further estimate their models using proprietary data from a crowdfunding platform.
In contrast, by focusing on a set of one-time stimulus policies, we are able to fully characterize the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

8
structure of the optimal stimulus policies under endogenized backing decisions that depend on the
randomly evolving state of the pledging process.
The closest empirical work to the theme of our paper is by Li and Duan (2016). They study
the pledging process empirically and demonstrate that the portion of funds already raised has a
positive eﬀect on investors’ pledging decisions (i.e., positive network externality), and that the time
elapsed has a negative eﬀect (i.e., negative time eﬀect). Those empirical ﬁndings are consistent
with the structural properties of the pledging process (without stimulus) derived analytically from
our model. The authors also brieﬂy study the dynamic promotions based on simulations. For a
promotion policy that informs a larger number of investors (similar to our seeding policy), they
suggest a heuristic, which is to carry out the promotion when the simulated success rate falls under
a predetermined threshold. We show analytically that the optimal timing of one-shot promotions
has a cutoﬀ-time structure, which is simpler to implement than a policy depending on the simulated
likelihood of success. Moreover, we demonstrate theoretically the eﬀectiveness of contingent policies,
whereas their support for dynamic promotions is based on simulated counterfactual analysis.
Crowdfunding shares some similarities with group buying, which also uses the all-or-nothing
mechanism with a threshold. Anand and Aron (2003) compare the group-buying mechanism against
the listed price mechanism, and illustrate its superiority when the market size is uncertain. Chen
et al. (2010) study the optimal design of group-buying mechanisms under quantity discounts. Jing
and Xie (2011) explore the role of group buying in facilitating consumer social interactions. Hu
et al. (2013) show analytically the impact of sign-up information disclosure on the success rates of
group-buying deals. Using data from Groupon, Wu et al. (2014) ﬁnd two types of threshold-induced
eﬀects. Marinesi et al. (2018) study the beneﬁt of group buying as a means of moderating demand
between peaks and troughs. Ming and Tunca (2016) characterize the dynamic sign-up process in
group buying by capturing consumer purchase equilibrium with rational expectations of future.
Then based on the model, they perform structural estimation and ﬁnd that consumers do not
exhibit large-scale systematic waiting behavior.
On the methodological side, the contingent policies we study in this paper are similar to the
dynamic/contingent policies in revenue management (for comprehensive surveys, see, e.g., McGill
and van Ryzin 1999, Bitran and Caldentey 2003, Elmaghraby and Keskinocak 2003). In traditional
revenue management, ﬁrms seek to maximize the revenue from selling limited inventory over a ﬁxed
time horizon by changing prices dynamically depending on the progress of sales. In our work, we
adopt the rational expectations equilibrium (REE) framework that has been used in the revenue
management literature to analyze forward-looking behavior of customers (see, e.g., Su 2007, Liu
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

9
and van Ryzin 2008, Zhang and Cooper 2008, Levin et al. 2009 and Liu and Zhang 2013). Our
work diﬀers from studies of traditional revenue management in that, because of the all-or-nothing
nature of crowdfunding projects, backers’ pledging decisions are temporally linked in a direct way
as captured in the cascade eﬀect, whereas in revenue management they are typically moderated by
prices alone (though earlier prices may be indirectly linked with later ones through the inventory
depleting process).
In the revenue management settings, Levin et al. (2008) consider a risk-averse objective that
takes into account the probability of meeting a revenue target through a chance constraint. Besbes
and Maglaras (2012) study ﬁnancial milestone constraints on the revenues and sales that are
imposed at diﬀerent time points along the sales horizon. Those constraints are soft in the sense
that the constraints can be violated with a penalty. In contrast, in all-or-nothing crowdfunding, a
successfully funded project requires the predetermined funding goal to be achieved within a given
time, as a hard constraint. This situation is similar to the setting of Besbes et al. (2018) in which
the ﬁrm under debt would earn nothing if the generated revenues are not more than the debt at
the end of the sales horizon. The slight diﬀerence is that there the ﬁrm would only collect the
residual revenues after paying the debt, whereas crowdfunding creators collect all revenues if the
project is successful. Du et al. (2020) study a setting similar to Besbes et al. (2018) in the sense
that the ﬁrm can continuously update its decisions (prices in Besbes et al. 2018 and sales rates
in Du et al. 2020) under an all-or-nothing constraint. In contrast, our focus is on whether and
when to apply a one-shot stimulus policy in a setting where the pledges exhibit a cascade eﬀect
that is absent in Besbes et al. (2018) and Du et al. (2020). Moreover, in our crowdfunding setting,
the cost of a stimulus is paid out only if the hard constraint is met; however, the cost associated
with an action in those two papers is sunk regardless of whether the hard constraint is satisﬁed.
Lastly, Swinney et al. (2011) consider a start-up which maximizes the survival probability in an
investment timing game. In our setting, the creators need to not only consider the project’s success
probability, but also take into account the cost of stimuli. Given a healthy growth of the pledging
process, the creators may not want to oﬀer the stimulus even though doing so can increase the
success probability.
3.
The Model
We consider a crowdfunding platform where creators (such as entrepreneurs or artists) are able
to raise funds from potential backers to start their ventures. Initially, the creator posts its crowd-
funding project, which is characterized by a targeted goal G, a ﬁxed time horizon T, and prices
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

10
for rewards. A project is deemed to be successful only when the total pledged amount reaches or
exceeds the target G by the end of the time horizon.
Although creators are allowed or even advised to choose a price menu for rewards on most
crowdfunding platforms (Hu et al. 2015), we make a simpliﬁcation assumption that there is only
one price tier p in our model. Each backer who contributes the amount of p will be rewarded with
a copy of the ﬁnal product at the end of the crowdfunding campaign. This assumption allows us to
characterize precisely the pledging dynamics. Indeed, most analytical works in the crowdfunding
literature adopt this single-tier-pricing assumption (see, e.g., Alaei et al. 2016 and Zhang et al.
2018), and our key insights on contingent stimuli are not expected to change even with the presence
of a price menu. As we focus on the contingent policies during the campaign, the upfront design of
the project, including the target G, the duration T, and the price p are assumed to be exogenously
given.
3.1.
Individuals’ Pledging Decisions
We start by analyzing individual backers’ optimal pledging decisions. To facilitate our discussion,
we denote by t the time remaining until the end of the crowdfunding project, i.e., the time-to-go.
Potential backers patronize the project’s webpage sequentially according to a non-homogeneous
Poisson process with a time-varying rate λt. Upon arrival, they are able to observe the cumulative
amount pledged. This information assumption is consistent with the common practice by most
crowdfunding platforms such as Kickstarter and Indiegogo. In making her pledging decision, a
potential backer takes into account her valuation of the project, which is dependent on the project’s
characteristics, and her expectation of the success of the crowdfunding project, which is dependent
on the elapsed time and the cumulative amount pledged when she arrives. We assume that potential
backers form a rational expectations equilibrium. That is, potential backers act on their rational
expectations of the project’s success when making pledging decisions and the ﬁnal outcome is
consistent with their expectations. A potential backer decides to contribute to the project if and
only if she expects her utility from contributing to the project higher than that of not contributing.
We do not allow potential backers to wait strategically. That is, upon arrival, potential backers
either make a pledge or leave the system. In a similar context of online group buying, which also
adopts an all-or-nothing mechanism, Ming and Tunca (2016) empirically show that customers’
strategic waiting behavior is not signiﬁcant.
The willingness to pledge of backers is private information. In the eye of creators, the pledging
behavior can be characterized through pledging likelihood functions deﬁned as follows.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

11
Definition 1. (Individual’s Pledging Likelihood) H(q) denotes the probability that a
backer pledges to the project upon arrival, given her expectation of the success rate of the crowd-
funding project being q.
By using this notation, we emphasize the dependence of a backer’s pledging likelihood on the
success probability of the project. But we keep in mind that a backer’s pledging likelihood depends
on the project’s characteristics as well. We will discuss policies that involve contingent control
of those characteristics later in the paper. We further assume that H(q) satisﬁes the following
properties throughout the rest of the paper.
Assumption 1. (Properties of Individual’s Pledging Likelihood)
(i) H(q) increases in q.4
(ii) For any q > 0, H(q) > 0.
(iii)
H(αq)
H(q) increases in q for any 0 < α < 1.
Assumption 1(i) is consistent with the intuition that a backer is more likely to pledge when
the project is more likely to succeed eventually. Assumption 1(ii) says that, as long as the success
rate of the crowdfunding project is not zero, there will be some backers who are willing to pledge.
Assumption 1(iii) implies that the inﬂuence of the project’s success rate on backer’s pledging
decisions becomes less salient when the likelihood of success is higher. In other words, a backer’s
pledging decision becomes less sensitive to success-rate perturbations when the success likelihood is
higher. The ﬁrst two conditions are innocuous. The last condition is more involved but still seems
not unreasonable. We use the following example to illustrate the generality of Assumption 1.
Example 1. To gain granularity on how exactly backers’ pledging decisions may depend on the
success likelihood, we consider an example where the creator chooses the quality of the project as
θ. For a given quality level θ, a type-v backer has a willingness-to-pledge v ·θ for the project, where
v is assumed to be the realization of a continuous random variable, drawn from an unbounded
distribution with cumulative distribution function F(·) and probability density function f(·). If
the backer chooses to pledge but the project fails eventually, an “inconvenience penalty” c will be
incurred, where 0 ≤c < p.5 Therefore, the expected surplus from pledging for the crowdfunding
project includes two components: if the project turns out to be successful, at the end of the
4 In this paper, the monotonicity is in its weaker sense unless otherwise stated.
5 The cost may consist of psychological frustration in backers who failed to get the product or service they desired. It
may also stem from economic losses. When a crowdfunding project fails to reach its goal, backers will not be charged.
However, since they will not know that and be able to use the money for other purposes until the time expires, they
will have experienced a loss because of the time value of money.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

12
campaign the backer enjoys a payoﬀof vθ −p; otherwise, a cost of c is incurred. Any backer whose
belief in the project’s success likelihood is q will pledge if and only if
(vθ −p) · q −c · (1 −q) > 0
⇒
H(q) = ¯F
1
θ

p + c ·
1
q −1

.
(1)
Lemma 1. H(q) in (1) satisﬁes Assumption 1 if the distribution of backers’ types has an increas-
ing generalized failure rate (IGFR), i.e., v · f(v)
¯
F (v) is an increasing function in v.
Lemma 1 gives a suﬃcient condition for Assumption 1 for the speciﬁc form of H(q) in (1). The
IGFR is a very general assumption as it captures many commonly used distributions, such as
normal and uniform distributions.
□
Example 1 speciﬁes an individual discrete choice model where the pledger has full information
about the project’s success rate. The general form of the pledging likelihood function can also
accommodate observational learning behavior in which a pledger may not have complete informa-
tion about the project but can rationally anticipate the future arrivals’ pledging behaviors.
3.2.
Pledging Dynamics
The previous discussion of individuals’ pledging decisions sets the stage for our characterization
of the dynamics of the pledging process. Since backers’ pledging decisions are determined by the
expected success through the individual’s pledging likelihood function, the pledging dynamics can
be captured by the evolution of the project’s likelihood of success over time. Recall that the
crowdfunding project needs to gather G dollars before the end of a ﬁxed time horizon. Given the
price p charged to each backer, the project requires at least
N ≡⌈G
p ⌉
pledgers before time expires. From now on, we may refer to N as the target of the crowdfunding
campaign. We denote by n, where 0 ≤n ≤N, the additional number of pledgers required to reach
the project’s target, i.e., the pledges needed. The funding progress of the project towards reaching
the goal is uniquely captured by the state space {(t,n) : 0 ≤t ≤T,0 ≤n ≤N}.
3.2.1.
Success Rate. For a backer who arrives at the state of time-to-go t and pledges needed
n, her expected project’s success rate, conditional on her pledging, is denoted by Qt(n−1). Under
the rational expectations equilibrium, her expectation will be fulﬁlled by backers who arrive later
and act on their rational expectations. Then the dynamics of the project’s success likelihood in
equilibrium can be summarized as follows.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

13
Proposition 1. (Rational Expectations Equilibrium (REE)) There exists a unique
REE, such that the probability Qt(n) of the project being successfully funded at state (t,n), is given
by
∂Qt(n)
∂t
= λt · H(Qt(n −1)) · (Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)),
(2)
with boundary conditions Qt(0) = 1 for all t and Q0(n) = 0 for all n > 0.
The success likelihood at any state (t,n) can be solved by backward induction. However, in
general, obtaining the closed form of Qt(n) is extremely diﬃcult, if not impossible, even for special
forms of H(·). Nevertheless, we are able to show a set of structural properties of Qt(n).
Theorem 1. (Structural Properties of Equilibrium Success Likelihood)
(i) Qt(n) strictly increases in t for any n ≥1 and strictly decreases in n for any t > 0.
(ii)
Qt(n−1)−Qt(n)
Qt(n)
≥
1
e¯λt−1, where ¯λ ≡sup{λt : 0 ≤t ≤T}.
(iii) For any n ≥1 and t > 0, both Qt(n−1)
Qt(n)
and H(Qt(n−1))
H(Qt(n))
decrease in t and increase in n. Moreover,
lim
t→0
Qt(n−1)
Qt(n) = ∞.
(iv) For any h > 0,
Qt+h(n)
Qt(n)
strictly increases in n.
Theorem 1(i) shows that the chance of the project being successful increases with more time
remaining and fewer pledgers required. Theorem 1(ii) gives a lower bound on the relative change
in the success likelihood by adding one more pledger. The guaranteed relative improvement in the
likelihood of success with one more pledger is larger if the arrival rates are smaller.
The most interesting property of Qt(n) is shown in Theorem 1(iii). The eﬀect of backers’ pledging
decisions on a project’s success likelihood is twofold: (1) On one hand, a backer’s pledging reduces
the required number of pledgers by one and thus leads to a higher likelihood of success; (2) On the
other hand, the backer’s pledging also boosts the conﬁdence of backers who arrive later, leading to
a higher likelihood that future arrivals will pledge. These two factors add up to what we referred
to as the cascade eﬀect of an individual’s pledging on future backers’ pledging decisions. Theorem
1(iii) shows that this compounding cascade eﬀect is more salient when the time is closer to the
deadline and/or the number of additional pledgers required is larger. It would also be interesting to
contrast this property with results from a typical revenue management setting, where the ﬁrm has
to sell a limited amount of inventory within a ﬁxed period of time. There a customer’s valuation
of the product is not directly aﬀected by the purchase decisions of other customers. However, in
our crowdfunding situation, any individual backer’s pledging decision would directly and positively
aﬀect subsequent backers’ decisions. Because of this cascade eﬀect, all optimal stimulus policies
that we will discuss in the next section follow a cutoﬀ-time structure.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

14
Theorem 1(iv) shows the impact of time-to-go on the project’s success likelihood for a ﬁxed
pledges needed. A longer remaining time results in a higher likelihood of success for the project as
shown in Theorem 1(i). Theorem 1(iv) further shows that this eﬀect is more signiﬁcant when the
number of additional pledgers required is larger.
3.2.2.
Upfront Design. Given the cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging decisions, it is impor-
tant to carefully consider the project’s characteristics before launching the crowdfunding campaign.
Consider two designs of a project, namely, design a and design b, which can diﬀer in various project
characteristics, such as price and quality. Suppose that design b is more attractive in the sense that
Ha(q) < Hb(q) for any q > 0. We have the following structural results from the comparisons of the
project’s success likelihood and backers’ pledging likelihood between the two projects.
Proposition 2. (Upfront Design of Crowdfunding Projects) Consider two pledging
likelihood functions Ha(q) and Hb(q). If Ha(q) < Hb(q) for any q > 0, and
Ha(q)
Hb(q) increases in q,
then both the ratios of success likelihoods, Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n), and pledging likelihoods, Ha(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) , increase in t
and decrease in n.
Proposition 2 underscores the importance of the design of project characteristics. A small dif-
ference in backers’ pledging likelihoods may lead to a huge gap in the project’s success likelihoods
because of the cascade eﬀect. Proposition 2 states that, given two diﬀerent project designs, the
relative diﬀerence in the project’s success likelihoods is more signiﬁcant when the time is closer
to the deadline and/or the number of additional pledgers required is larger. The same applies to
backers’ pledging likelihood as well.
Recall that design a is less attractive. The assumption that Ha(q)
Hb(q)(< 1) is an increasing function
of q requires that the relative diﬀerence in the pledging likelihoods under two designs increases
when the project’s likelihood of success decreases. That is, the inferior design hurts backers’ pledg-
ing likelihood more signiﬁcantly when the success likelihood of the project is lower. We revisit
the typical case introduced in Example 1 and investigate when this assumption is satisﬁed. Two
suﬃcient conditions are summarized below. It turns out that the assumption can be easily satisﬁed
when the project can be conﬁgured with diﬀerent prices or qualities.
Lemma 2. (Properties of Pledging Likelihood) Consider the pledging likelihood function
derived in Example 1.
(i) For two quality levels θa < θb, the ratio of pledging likelihoods, Hθa(q)
Hθb(q), is an increasing function
of q.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

15
(ii) If the distribution of backers’ valuations in Assumption 1 has an increasing failure rate (IFR),
then for two prices pa > pb, the ratio of pledging likelihoods, Hpa(q)
Hpb(q), is an increasing function
of q.
3.2.3.
Expected Proﬁt. All of the above structural properties are about the success rates
and pledging likelihood. Next we derive those for the expected proﬁt of a crowdfunding project.
Conditional on reaching the funding target G, the creator would have collected enough capital to
potentially launch the new product in a mass market. As a result, in addition to the immediate
proﬁt gained during the rest of the campaign, the creator is able to continue selling the products
beyond the campaign deadline. For analytical tractability, we do not diﬀerentiate between the
proﬁt gained during the campaign after the funding goal is reached and the potential proﬁt from
selling products after the campaign, and denote the two of them combined by a long-term proﬁt
B ≥0. B can be interpreted as the total life-time discounted proﬁt after reaching the funding goal,
e.g., B =
R ∞
0 Λpδtdt, where Λ is the sales rate and 0 < δ < 1 is the discount factor.
Without loss of generality, we normalize the marginal cost of production to 0. The total expected
proﬁt at state (t,n) is therefore given by J b
t (n) = (G+B)·Qt(n). It is obvious that J b
t (n) increases
in t and decreases in n. The impact of an additional pledger on the expected proﬁt is summarized
in the proposition below, which is derived from Theorem 1(iii).
Proposition 3. (Marginal Value of a Pledger) The marginal increase in the expected
proﬁt with one more pledger at state (t,n), Jb
t (n−1)−Jb
t (n)
Jb
t (n)
, decreases in t and increases in n.
Like Theorem 1(iii), Proposition 3 shows that an additional pledger is more valuable when the
time is closer to the deadline and/or the number of additional pledgers required is larger. In the
traditional revenue management literature, monotonicity properties are derived for the absolute
diﬀerence between the expected proﬁts. However, because of the cascade eﬀect demonstrated in
Theorem 1 in the context of crowdfunding, analogous properties exist but they are for the relative
diﬀerence.
4.
Contingent Stimulus Policies
We have illustrated the importance of the upfront design of projects’ characteristics in Proposition
2. Given the stochastic nature of arriving backers and their willingness to pledge to the project, the
pledging process may still fail to meet the creator’s expectations even if the project’s characteristics
are optimized ex ante. In such cases, the creator can be better oﬀtaking ex post actions to inﬂuence
backers during the campaign. In this section, we consider three types of contingent stimulus policies
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

16
from the perspective of project creators, namely, seeding, feature upgrade, and limited-time oﬀer.
They are diﬀerent in their eﬀect on the cost structure and pledging, but they share the common
feature that the associated costs to the creators do not materialize unless the project is successful.
We discuss the optimal ways of applying these three policies, and quantify their potential beneﬁt.
4.1.
Seeding Policy
We ﬁrst study the seeding policy where the creator has the option to acquire n0 number of pledges
(1 ≤n0 < N) at a cost of R exactly once during the campaign. Seeding strategies have been widely
used in marketing campaigns where ﬁrms recruit customers to speed up the diﬀusion of the new
products. The diﬀerence in crowdfunding is that the acquiring cost R will be incurred only if the
project reaches its funding target. In practice, there are diﬀerent ways to implement the seeding
policy. For instance, the creator of “Looking up, Way Up” oﬀered free samples to backers. This
policy is also equivalent to the commonly adopted referral incentives where the creators oﬀer
bonuses to existing backers who bring in additional backers.
The adoption of the stimulus eﬀectively decreases the target level from N to N −n0. However,
the superiority of this seeding policy over the manipulation of the target level is obvious. The
creator would choose to seed only along certain sample paths in which the early pledging progress
is not satisfactory. When the pledging process materializes in a way that favors the creator, the
incentives could be saved, allowing the creator to obtain a higher proﬁt. We limit our discussion
to the case where the incentives are oﬀered once at most. In practice, too many rounds of seedings
can raise fairness concerns from backers and hurt the image of the creator.
We assume that the n0 pledges will be added immediately and that backers do not expect future
seeding when they make their pledging decisions. If they do, under our assumption of no strategic
waiting, the incentive for backers to pledge now will be even higher, thus leading to a higher value
of contingent seeding. This is because backers will be more conﬁdent in the project’s success since
they expect an intervention by the creator when the pledging progress stalls.
Theorem 2. (Optimal Cutoff for Seeding) For each n ≥1, there exists a cutoﬀtime
τ s(n), such that the creator will activate the seeding stimulus if and only if t ≤τ s(n).
Theorem 2 sheds light on the conditions under which the creator is better oﬀactivating the
seeding stimulus. For any current pledges needed n, there exists a cutoﬀτ s(n) such that the creator
should implement seeding if and only if the time-to-go is no more than this cutoﬀ. Although
details of the proof are more involved and can be found in the appendix, we describe the intuition
as follows. The creator makes the optimal stopping decision by comparing the optimal expected
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

17
proﬁts with and without using the seeding stimulus. In particular, from Theorem 1, we show that
the relative improvement in the success likelihood by seeding decreases in t. Thus, when there is
ample time left, the cost of seeding outweighs the improvement in the likelihood of success, and
the project creator will choose to hold out as a result. On the other hand, when the time-to-go is
short enough, it is optimal to use the seeding option immediately to boost the chances of success.
We present the monotonicity properties of the cutoﬀs as follows.
Corollary 1.
(i) τ s(n) increases in n, i.e.,
τ s(N) ≥τ s(N −1) ≥··· ≥τ s(n0) = ··· = τ s(1) = 0.
(ii) τ s(n) increases in B and decreases in R.
In Corollary 1(i), we show that the cutoﬀτ s(n) is increasing in the pledges needed n. This
implies that the seeding policy is more likely to be used at a time when the pledging number is
further away from the target. Again, the monotonicity of τ s(n) with respect to (w.r.t.) n can be
derived from Theorem 1, where we show that the cascade eﬀect is stronger when the number of
additional pledgers required is larger. Corollary 1(ii) implies that the seeding policy is more likely
to be used earlier when the long-term proﬁt B is larger and/or the cost of stimulus R is lower.
While the latter is intuitive, the former is sensible because the potential loss from failing to reach
the funding target becomes greater with a higher long-term proﬁt B.
In general, it is very hard to derive the closed form solution of τ s(n). To see how τ s(n) may look
like, we consider two special cases: Case (i) H(q) ≡H, i.e., a backer’s pledging decision is based
solely on the project’s characteristics, rather than the likelihood of success. From the threshold
characterization (see the proof in the appendix), for this case, we have τ s(n) = 0 for all n ≥1.
That is, the creator will never activate the seeding strategy before time expires. This is sensible
considering that the beneﬁt of the seeding policy is driven by the cascade eﬀect of backers’ pledging
decisions. The seeding policy has no inﬂuence when backers are not aﬀected by the decisions of
others. Case (ii) H(q) =
(
1
if q > ¯q
0
if q ≤¯q, as a result of that backers have homogeneous willingness to
pledge. Then the creator will seed if and only if backers’ perceived project success likelihood drops
to ¯q for the ﬁrst time; Otherwise, backers are expected to pledge upon arrival, rendering seeding
unnecessary.
Denote by J s
T,N the optimal expected proﬁt with the option of seeding when the deadline is T
and the goal is N. We compare J s
T,N with the expected proﬁt under no stimulus J b
T,N, and obtain
the following structural properties:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

18
Theorem 3.
(i) For any N ≥1,
Js
T,N
Jb
T,N decreases in T.
(ii) For any N > n0, lim
T →∞J s
T,N −J b
T,N = lim
T →0J s
T,N −J b
T,N = 0.
The seeding policy always beneﬁts the project because it gives extra ﬂexibility to the project
creator, allowing him to keep the pledging process at a healthy pace by using the stimulus if
necessary. From Theorem 3, we can see that the relative beneﬁt of seeding becomes more signiﬁcant
as the time remaining gets shorter. However, its absolute beneﬁt vanishes as T approaches either
inﬁnity or zero. When the time is long enough, having few pledgers at the beginning of the process
will not have a huge negative impact because future arrivals may still reverse the trend, resulting
in a low value of seeding. On the other end of the spectrum, when the time is very short, few
backers are expected to come to the project, leading to the ineﬀectiveness of the cascade eﬀect, as
well as the seeding policy. Consequently, the beneﬁt of seeding is signiﬁcant when time is limited
but not impossibly short. We further conﬁrm this ﬁnding numerically in Section 4.4.
4.2.
Feature Upgrade
In the second policy, we allow the creator to upgrade project features for once during the campaign.
This policy is motivated by the common practice of popular crowdfunding platforms, such as
Kickstarter and Indiegogo, on which project creators can update project features over the course
of the pledging process. The new feature could be, for example, a new color for a fashion product
or a bonus soundtrack for an album. With the upgrades the project creator hopes that backers
will be more willing to pledge. However, upgrading project features could be costly. Consequently,
the key question here is whether and when the project creators should oﬀer an upgraded version
of their project.
To answer this question, we enrich the base model as follows. Assume that the cost of an upgrade
is K. In the context of Example 1, we can interpret the feature upgrade as that the quality
level of the project increases from θ to ˜θ. As a result of the upgraded project, backers’ pledging
likelihood increases to ˜H(q), where ˜H(q) ≥H(q) for any q. We assume that
˜
H(q)
H(q) increases in q.
This assumption is consistent with Assumption 1(iii), and can be satisﬁed when the distribution of
backers’ types has the IGFR property in the context of Example 1. The corresponding likelihood
of success is denoted by ˜Qt(n).
Theorem 4. (Optimal Cutoff for Feature Upgrade) For each n, there exists a cutoﬀ
time τ u(n), such that the creator will upgrade if and only if t ≤τ u(n).
The policy of feature upgrade diﬀers from the seeding policy in that it does not directly interfere
with the pledging number. However, both of them rely on the cascade eﬀect of backers’ pledging
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

19
decisions to be eﬀective. As a result, the optimal policy of feature upgrade is similar to that of the
seeding policy. That is, for any pledges needed n, there exists a cutoﬀin time τ u(n) such that the
creator should upgrade the project features if and only if the remaining time towards the end of
the campaign is less than or equal to this cutoﬀ.
Corollary 2.
(i) τ u(n) increases in n, i.e., τ u(N) ≥τ u(N −1) ≥··· ≥τ u(1).
(ii) τ u(n) increases in B and decreases in K.
Corollary 2(i) implies that the feature upgrade policy is more likely to be used at a time when
the pledging number is further away from the target. Similar to Corollary 1(ii), Corollary 2(ii)
shows that the feature upgrade stimulus tends to be implemented earlier if the long-term beneﬁt
B is higher and/or the cost of upgrading features K is lower.
Lastly, denote by J u
T,N the optimal expected proﬁt with the option of feature upgrade when the
duration is T and the goal is N. Following a similar proof as that of Theorem 3, we show that the
relative diﬀerence in expected proﬁts with and without feature upgrade decreases in the campaign
duration T, but the absolute beneﬁt vanishes as T approaches inﬁnity or zero.
Theorem 5.
(i) For any N ≥1,
Ju
T,N
Jb
T,N decreases in T.
(ii) For any N ≥1, lim
T →∞J u
T,N −J b
T,N = lim
T →0J u
T,N −J b
T,N = 0.
When the duration is suﬃciently long, the chance that the project will be successfully funded
is high, and that eliminates any incentive for the project creator to upgrade the project features.
When the duration is very short, a project upgrade will aﬀect decisions by only a negligible fraction
of backers. Consequently, the stimulus will bring only a limited beneﬁt. The implication of Theorem
5(ii) is that the beneﬁt of a feature upgrade is greatest when the project duration is moderate. We
further conﬁrm this ﬁnding numerically in Section 4.4 and empirically in Section 5.
4.3.
Limited-Time Oﬀer (LTO)
Because of the cascade eﬀect on backers’ pledging decisions, it is important to encourage backers
to pledge early in the process. One way to achieve this is to introduce a limited-time oﬀer (LTO),
such as free T-shirts, to those who pledge early. In the context of Example 1, the creator may oﬀer
products of higher quality ˆθ for the same price p to early arrivals. The creator may choose to end
the LTO and switch back to normal quality θ whenever the momentum is established. The use
of limited-time oﬀers is prevalent in a wide range of industries, especially when new products are
being introduced to the market. In this subsection, we seek to quantify the value of LTOs in the
context of crowdfunding, and discuss related issues.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

20
LTO diﬀers from the preceding two policies, namely seeding and feature upgrade, in one impor-
tant aspect: LTO is a proactive policy in which the creator induces early pledging by making the
project more attractive at the beginning, whereas seeding and feature upgrade policies are reactive
in the sense that the creator responds to the progress of the pledging, and chooses to apply the
policies only if the number of early pledgers is low. As a result, the optimal use of an LTO diﬀers
inherently from that of those two policies.
For the creator, there is an increase in the marginal cost for each unit purchased by backers during
an LTO, which we denote by k. Compared with feature upgrade, the promotional product being
oﬀered during an LTO is typically a standard version of the product plus some extra gifts. Thus,
the creator can conveniently stop the LTO and switch back to the standard product. In contrast,
feature upgrade typically involves a permanent upgrade of certain characteristics of the product,
e.g., making a proposed smart watch waterproof. Thus a ﬁxed cost is incurred for producing the
superior product. During an LTO, backers’ pledging likelihood increases to ˆH(q), whereas that
corresponding to the normal quality level is H(q)(≤ˆH(q)) for any likelihood of success q.
Theorem 6. (Optimal Cutoff for LTO) For any n, there exists a cutoﬀtime τ l(n), such
that the creator will end the limited-time oﬀer if and only if t ≥τ l(n).
Theorem 6 shows that, for any pledges needed n, there exists a cutoﬀin time τ l(n) such that the
creator should end the LTO if and only if the time remaining before the end of the project is greater
than or equal to this cutoﬀ. In other words, if the project has already attracted a large number
of pledgers while the remaining time is long, the creator can end the LTO immediately to enjoy a
lower unit cost without jeopardizing the project’s success. However, if the remaining time is short,
in particular if it is less than the cutoﬀtime τ l(n), the creator is better oﬀcontinuing the LTO.
The proﬁt margin from each backer is lower in such circumstances; however, it is compensated for
by a greater chance of reaching the target.
Corollary 3. τ l(n) increases in B and decreases in k.
Corollary 3 implies that the creator is more likely to run LTO for a longer period of time when
the long-term proﬁt B is higher and/or the per unit cost of LTO k is lower. This result is consistent
with Corollaries 1(ii) and 2(ii). However, unlike the seeding and feature upgrade policies, the cutoﬀ
τ l(n) is not monotonic in the pledge-to-go n in general. This is because the overall cost of LTO
is a function of pledge-to-go n, rather than a ﬁxed cost as in the preceding two stimulus policies.
If the creator chooses to run LTO longer, the campaign is indeed more likely to succeed, however
the proﬁt is also lower should it succeed due to the higher per-unit cost associated with running
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

21
LTO. As a result, the expected proﬁt with the option of LTO is not necessarily monotonic w.r.t.
n, leading to possible non-monotonicity of τ l(n) in n.
It is not surprising that the beneﬁt of LTOs also vanishes as T approaches either inﬁnity or zero,
as does the beneﬁt of the other two policies. The result is summarized as follows, where J l
T,N is
the optimal expected proﬁt with the option of an LTO when the duration is T and the goal is N.
Theorem 7. For any n ≥1, lim
T →∞J l
T,N −J b
T,N = lim
T →0J l
T,N −J b
T,N = 0.
4.4.
Numerical Examples
We now demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of stimulus policies with numerical experiments. We consider
the setup as described in Example 1, where the creator can make the project more attractive by
improving the quality of the project. The parameters in the numerical experiments are speciﬁed
as follows. A backer’s valuation v is drawn from an exponential distribution with mean of $100.
The contribution p required from each backer is $120, the quality level θ of the project is 1, and
the penalty cost c for each consumer if the project fails to reach its target is $30. The goal G
of the project is set to be $1,800, which is equivalent to requiring at least N = 15 pledgers. The
duration of the campaign is 30 days, and the arrival rate λt at which potential backers land on the
project’s webpage is assumed to be time-invariant and equals to 2 per day. The long-term beneﬁt
B is assumed to be $500.
Using Proposition 1 and backward induction, we can compute the success likelihood Qt(n)
without any contingent stimulus policy. The result is displayed in Figure 2(a). The expected success
rate right after the project launch is 34.3%. Of course, whether this project indeed succeeds by
the end of the campaign depends on the realized sample path, especially the number of pledgers
appearing in the early stage of the crowdfunding campaign, due to the cascade eﬀect. For instance,
if 5 backers pledge during the ﬁrst ﬁve days, then the project’s likelihood of success increases to
over 87%. On the other hand, that drops to nearly zero if nobody pledges during the ﬁrst ﬁve days.
The latter case is when the project creator may be able to save the project with stimulus policies.
Next, we evaluate the optimal expected proﬁt under each of the three policies referred to in the
preceding subsections. The results are shown in Figure 2(b). Here, we assume that the creator has
the option to acquire 1 pledge at a cost of $120 for the seeding strategy. For feature upgrade, she
can also improve the project’s quality level to ˜θ = 1.5 with a cost of K = $600 under the feature
upgrade policy. Alternatively, the creator is able to oﬀer products at the higher quality level ˜θ = 1.5
to early arrivals with an LTO at an additional cost of k = $30 per unit. From Figure 2(b), we
ﬁrst observe that beneﬁts of stimulus policies are not monotonic in the duration of projects, given
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

22
Figure 2
A Numerical Result illustrating Beneﬁts of Stimulus Policies
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
time−to−go t
Success Probability
n=5
n=10
n=15
(a) Success Probability Qt(n)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Deadline T
Difference in Expected Profit
seeding
feature upgrade
limited time offer
(b) Improvement in Expected Proﬁt (vs. Base Model)
Note: V ∼exp( 1
100), p = $120, θ = 1, c = $30, G = $1,800 (i.e., N = 15), B = $500, T = 30 and λt = 2.
the same target N = 15. When the project duration is short (i.e., T < 15), the beneﬁt of stimulus
policies is marginal because projects are likely to fail no matter what policies the project creator
uses to attract backers. On the other end of the spectrum, when there is ample time (i.e., T > 35),
project are highly likely to succeed even without stimulus. The beneﬁt of stimulus policies is most
salient with a moderate project duration (i.e., 15 ≤T ≤35 for this particular example). In other
words, for those projects that have potential but are not overwhelmingly popular, oﬀering stimulus
at the right time could help tremendously. For instance, let us compare the results with and without
stimulus when T = 30, which is the duration of the crowdfunding campaign in our baseline setup.
The expected proﬁt without any stimulus policy is $790. With the optimal seeding policy, the
expected proﬁt increases to $1,313, i.e., a 66.2% increase benchmarked with the expected proﬁt
without stimulus. Similarly, the expected proﬁts increase by 128.8% and 149.2% with the optimal
feature upgrade and LTOs, respectively.
5.
Empirical Evidence
We built a data crawler on the Google App Engine platform to collect data from Kickstarter
between January 30 and June 27, 2015. Whenever a new project was posted, the data crawler
extracted static project information, such as the project name, goal, and campaign duration. It also
kept track of the pledging in terms of the intertemporal number of pledgers, cumulative pledged
amount, project creators’ updates and backers’ comments whenever there was any change to the
project. This real-time dataset allows us to uncover the pledging patterns, as well as the impact of
the creators’ updates.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

23
Table 1
Summary Statistics of Kickstarter Data
Project Attributes
Mean
St. Dev.
Min
Max
Goal ($)
67,009
1,401,462
1
100,000,000
Funding ratio
1.90
99.93
0
12,984
Duration (days)
33.63
11.66
1
60
# of updates per week
0.69
1.40
0
27.30
Figure 3
Funding Ratio Distribution
0
5000
10000
15000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2+
Funding ratio
Count
In total, our data includes 21,657 Kickstarter projects. Table 1 shows the summary statistics
for all of those projects. The average project target in the sample was $67,009.6 The average
crowdfunding campaign duration was 33.63 days. We compute the funding ratio as the total pledged
amount to the target. As shown in Figure 3, although 1,110 projects managed to collect over
200% of the goals, the majority of successful projects collected no more than 120% of their goals.
Project creators are allowed to make changes to their project over the course of their crowdfunding
campaign. On average, project creators updated their project 0.69 times per week. We also observe
signiﬁcant variations in project update frequencies in our sample, ranging from 0 to 27.30 times
per week. This variation allows us to study the eﬀect of project updates on the project’s likelihood
of success.
We ﬁrst display the project’s success rate as a function of time-to-go and pledges needed by
investigating the trajectories of all projects in the sample. Speciﬁcally, we break down time-to-go
and pledges needed of each project into 10 stages, i.e., 0 −10%, 10% −20%, ..., 90% −100%, and
compute the average success rate for those projects that fall into the same time stage and pledge
stage. The results are summarized in Figure 4. The ﬁrst observation is that, on average, a project
6 Project targets may be in diﬀerent currencies depending on where the project creators were located. We ignore the
diﬀerences and assume that they were all measured in dollars.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

24
Figure 4
Average Project Success Rate as a Function of Time-to-Go and Pledges Needed
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
33.3%
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Time−to−go (%of duration)
Success rate
Pledges needed (%of goal)
G
0.9
0.7
0.5
(a) Success Rate by Time-to-Go
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Time−to−go (as %of duration)
Pledges needed (as %of goal)
0.25
0.50
0.75
Success rate
(b) Success Rate by Time-to-Go and Pledges
Needed
is less likely to succeed with either a shorter remaining time given the same pledges needed, or a
higher amount required to reach the target given the same time-to-go. This is consistent with our
theoretical results on the pledging likelihood function Qt(n), as shown in Theorem 1. The empirical
evidence also shows the importance of maintaining the momentum of the pledging, especially at
the beginning of a campaign. For instance, Figure 4(b) shows that over 94% of projects will fail
if they do not secure at least 10% of their goal after one-ﬁfth of the time has passed. Secondly,
we see from Figure 4(a) that the probability that a newly launched project will eventually reach
its goal is around 33%, which is about the same as the expected success of the project shown in
the numerical example in Section 4.4. In other words, in terms of the success rate, our numerical
example is a “typical” project, and the eﬀectiveness demonstrated in the numerical experiments
further lends some credibility to the importance of stimulus policies in practical settings.
Table 2
Number of Updates in Successful and Failed Projects Per Week
Project Count
Mean
Std. Error
Successful projects
6089
1.136
0.0179
Failed projects
15568
0.186
0.0039
Next, we study the eﬀect of the creator’s updates on the project’s likelihood of success. The
eﬀectiveness of creators’ updates is supported by our data as well. We ﬁnd that, on average,
successful projects made 1.136 updates per week, while failed ones made only 0.186 weekly updates
and the diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant (see Table 2).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

25
Figure 5
Diﬀerence in Success Rates with and without Updates
+ 5 %
+ 15 %
+ 5 %
+ 1 %
+ 5 %
+ 1 %
+ 1 %
+ 1 %
+ 2 %
initial
middle
final
early 
middle
late
Time
$ pledged
0.05
0.10
It is extremely complicated to quantify the exact beneﬁt of updates because of data and identi-
ﬁcation issues. On the data side, the nature of updates, whether it is seeding, feature upgrade or
LTO, may be hard to classify. The identiﬁcation could also be challenging because the diﬀerence in
the number of updates may be a reﬂection of the creators’ intrinsic motivation, which also aﬀects
campaign outcomes. A rigorous full-scale econometric model is beyond the scope of this paper.
However, we provide some model-free evidence which demonstrates the importance of update tim-
ings. We divide campaigns along the time dimension into three stages of equal length: early, middle,
and late. Similarly, using the ratio of the pledged amount to the project’s target, we divide cam-
paigns along the pledging-ratio dimension into three diﬀerent stages, namely, initial, middle, and
ﬁnal. We then investigate the eﬀect of updates by comparing the outcomes of the projects for which
creators made updates and the projects without updates in each of the nine categories. The results
are summarized in Figure 5. In general, projects with updates have, on average, a higher success
likelihood across all nine categories. The diﬀerence is greatest in the middle of a crowdfunding
campaign and in the initial stage when the pledging amount is falling behind. In this scenario,
the average success rate increases from 11.9% to 26.5% with updates. This scenario is consistent
with our theoretical results in Theorems 2 and 4, where we show that when applying stimuli, it
is optimal to do so only if the pledging slows down but not when the pledging is going smoothly.
Moreover, the beneﬁt in this particular scenario as the greatest is consistent with our results in
Theorems 3(ii) and 5(ii), where we show that the beneﬁt of stimuli is the most signiﬁcant when
the time-to-go is in an intermediate range.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

26
6.
Conclusion
Archimedes once said “give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world.” In this paper, we study
the optimal timing of contingently placing a “fulcrum” in the context of crowdfunding, with the
potential of tilting the random pledging process from failure to success. In particular, we evaluate
three diﬀerent policies in detail, namely, seeding, feature upgrade, and limited-time oﬀer. The three
policies seek to encourage backers’ pledging in diﬀerent ways. Seeding directly interacts with the
pledging process by reducing the number of pledgers needed to reach the target and making the
project more promising for future arrivals. With feature upgrade, project creators oﬀer a superior
version of the product with the hope of attracting more backers. This upgraded product is oﬀered
to future arrivals, as well as those who have already pledged. On the other hand, limited-time
oﬀer seeks to exploit the cascade eﬀect in the pledging process by using promotional products to
encourage potential backers to pledge early. However, unlike feature upgrade, promotional products
are oﬀered only during the LTO period.
Our analysis provides useful guidance on whether, when, and how project creators should apply
these policies. We show that the potential beneﬁts of the three policies vanish when the remaining
time approaches either inﬁnity or zero. It implies that these policies would be most eﬀective in the
middle of the pledging process. This is also consistent with the contingent nature of these policies.
That is, project creators may want to “wait and see” and implement them only when the pledging
trajectory is unsatisfactory in the early stage of the campaign.
Our study serves as the ﬁrst step towards an understanding of the dynamics of crowdfunding
projects. Future research may consider other types of information uncertainty beyond the project’s
likelihood of success and may investigate their inﬂuence on the pledging dynamics. For instance,
one salient concern from backers is whether and when project creators will successfully deliver the
products (Mollick and Kuppuswamy 2014). This type of information asymmetry and uncertainty
may aﬀect backers’ pledging decisions even after the target is reached when the success uncertainty
is resolved. To assure backers, it might be beneﬁcial for the creators to deposit part of the funding
beforehand to a trustworthy third-party, as a way to signal the quality of their products. On the
empirical side, whether and to what extent backers take into account the probability of the ﬁnal
product’s delivery needs to be veriﬁed with real data. In fact, the signiﬁcance of various eﬀects
may well depend on project characteristics, and thus empirical analysis can oﬀer useful guidance
on the choice of policies for project creators.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

27
References
Agrawal, AK, C Catalini, A Goldfarb. 2011. The geography of crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=1692661.
Alaei, S, A Malekian, M Mostagir. 2016. A dynamic model of crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=2737748.
Allon, G, V Babich. 2020.
Crowdsourcing and crowdfunding in the manufacturing and services sectors.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 22(1) 102–112.
Anand, KS, R Aron. 2003. Group buying on the web: A comparison mechanism of price-discovery. Manage-
ment Sci. 49(11) 1546–1562.
Bagnoli, M, BL Lipman. 1989.
Provision of public goods: Fully implementing the core through private
contributions. Rev. Econ. Stud. 56(4) 583–601.
Barnett, C. 2015.
Trends show crowdfunding to surpass VC in 2016.
Forbes.
http://www.forbes.
com/sites/chancebarnett/2015/06/09/trends-show-crowdfunding-to-surpass-vc-in-2016/
#603628e2444b.
Belleﬂamme, P, T Lambert, A Schiwienbacher. 2014.
Crowdfunding: Tapping the right crowd.
J. Bus.
Venturing 29(5) 585–609.
Besbes, O, DA Iancu, N Trichakis. 2018. Dynamic pricing under debt: Spiraling distortions and eﬃciency
losses. Management Sci. 64(10) 4572–4589.
Besbes, O, C Maglaras. 2012. Dynamic pricing with ﬁnancial milestones: Feedback-form policies. Manage-
ment Sci. 58(9) 1715–1731.
Bitran, G, R Caldentey. 2003. An overview of pricing models for revenue management. Manufacturing
Service Oper. Management 5(3) 203–229.
Burtch, G, D Gupta, P Martin. 2021. Referral timing and fundraising success in crowdfunding. Manufacturing
Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Chakraborty, S, R Swinney. 2018.
Designing rewards-based crowdfunding campaigns for strategic (but
distracted) contributors. ssrn.com/abstract=3240094.
Chakraborty, S, R Swinney. 2021. Signaling to the crowd: Private quality information and rewards-based
crowdfunding. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 23(1) 155–169.
Chen, R, C Li, Zhang RQ. 2010. Group buying mechanisms under quantity discounts. Working Paper.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

28
Chen, Y-J, T Dai, CG Korpeoglu, E K¨orpeo˘glu, O Sahin, CS Tang, S Xiao. 2020. OM Forum–Innovative
online platforms: Research opportunities. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 22(3) 430–445.
Dai, H, DJ Zhang. 2019. Prosocial goal pursuit in crowdfunding: Evidence from Kickstarter.com. J. of
Marketing Res. 56(3) 498–517.
Du, L, M Hu, J Wu. 2020. Sales eﬀort management under all-or-nothing constraint. ssrn.com/abstract=
3506499.
Elmaghraby, W, P Keskinocak. 2003. Dynamic pricing in the presence of inventory considerations: Research
overview, current practices, and future directions. Management Sci. 49(10) 1287–1309.
Hu, M, X Li, M Shi. 2015. Product and pricing decisions in crowdfunding. Marketing Sci. 34(3) 331–345.
Hu, M, M Shi, J Wu. 2013. Simultaneous vs. sequential group-buying mechanisms. Management Sci. 59(12)
2805–2822.
Jing, X, J Xie. 2011. Group buying: A new mechanism for selling through social interactions. Management
Sci. 57(8) 1354–1372.
Kuppuswamy, V, BL Bayus. 2013. Crowdfunding creative ideas: The dynamics of project backers in Kick-
starter. ssrn.com/abstract=2234765.
Levin, Y, J McGill, M Nediak. 2008. Risk in revenue management and dynamic pricing. Oper. Res. 56(2)
326–343.
Levin, Y, J McGill, M Nediak. 2009. Dynamic pricing in the presence of strategic consumers and oligopolistic
competition. Management Sci. 55(1) 32–46.
Li, Z, JA Duan. 2016.
Network Externalities in Collaborative Consumption: Theory, Experiment, and
Empirical Investigation of Crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=2506352.
Liu, Q, GJ van Ryzin. 2008. Strategic capacity rationing to induce early purchases. Management Sci. 54(6)
1115–1131.
Liu, Q, D Zhang. 2013.
Dynamic pricing competition with strategic customers under vertical product
diﬀerentiation. Management Sci. 59(1) 84–101.
Marinesi, S, K Girotra, S Netessine. 2018.
The operational advantages of threshold discounting oﬀers.
Management Sci. 64(6) 2690–2708.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

29
McGill, J, GJ van Ryzin. 1999. Revenue management: Research overview and prospects. Transportation
Sci. 33(2) 233–256.
Ming, L, TI Tunca. 2016.
Consumer equilibrium, pricing, and eﬃciency in group buying: Theory and
evidence. Working Paper.
Mollick, E. 2014. The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. J. Bus. Venturing 29(1) 1–16.
Mollick, E, V Kuppuswamy. 2014. After the campaign: Outcomes of crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=
2376997.
Roma, P, RR Chen, E Gal-Or. 2018. Reward-based crowdfunding campaigns: Informational value and access
to venture capital. Inform. Systems Res. 29(3) 679–697.
Su, X. 2007. Intertemporal pricing with strategic customer behavior. Management Sci. 53(5) 726–741.
Swinney, R, GP Cachon, S Netessine. 2011. Capacity investment timing by start-ups and established ﬁrms
in new markets. Management Sci. 57(4) 763–777.
Varian, HR. 1994. Sequential contributions to public goods. Journal of Public Economics 53(2) 165–186.
Wu, J, M Shi, M Hu. 2014. Threshold eﬀects in online group buying. Management Sci. 61(9) 2025–2040.
Zhang, D, WL Cooper. 2008. Managing clearance sales in the presence of strategic customers. Prod. Oper.
Management 17(4) 416–431.
Zhang, J, S Savin, S Veeraraghavan. 2018. Revenue management in crowdfunding. ssrn.com/abstract=
3065267.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

1
Online Appendix to
“Contingent Stimulus in Crowdfunding”
A.
Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1.
(i) Taking derivative of H(q) w.r.t. q, we have
dH(q)
dq
= c
θq2 f
1
θ

p + c ·
1
q −1

> 0.
(ii) Assumption 1(ii) is guaranteed by the fact that the support of the distribution F(·) is
unbounded.
(iii) We prove Assumption 1(iii) by contradiction. Taking derivative of H(αq)/H(q) w.r.t. q, we
have
d
dq
H(αq)
H(q)

= H(αq)
H(q)
"
c
θαq2
f( 1
θ(p + c( 1
αq −1)))
¯F( 1
θ(p + c( 1
αq −1))) −c
θq2
f( 1
θ(p + c( 1
q −1)))
¯F( 1
θ(p + c( 1
q −1)))
#
.
Suppose there exists a q′ such that
d
dq

H(αq′)
H(q′)

≤0, which implies that
f( 1
θ (p+c(
1
αq′ −1)))
¯
F ( 1
θ (p+c(
1
αq′ −1))) ≤
α ·
f( 1
θ (p+c( 1
q′ −1)))
¯
F ( 1
θ (p+c( 1
q′ −1))). Coupling with the IGFR property that
1
θ
h
p + c( 1
αq′ −1)
i f( 1
θ (p+c(
1
αq′ −1)))
¯
F ( 1
θ (p+c(
1
αq′ −1))) ≥
1
θ
h
p + c( 1
q′ −1)
i f( 1
θ (p+c( 1
q′ −1)))
¯
F ( 1
θ (p+c( 1
q′ −1))), we have p + c( 1
αq′ −1) ≥1
α
h
p + c( 1
q′ −1)
i
. A direct consequence of
the preceding inequality is that (p −c) ≥p−c
α , which contradicts with 0 < α < 1 and p > c. Thus,
we obtain the desired result.
□
Proof of Proposition 1.
Suppose that a backer arrives with time-to-go t > 0 and pledges needed
n ≥1. This focal backer would decide whether or not to pledge based on her expected project’s
success rate conditional on her pledging, i.e., Qt(n −1). Consider what happens in a small time
interval δ, and we have
Qt(n) = (1 −δλtH(Qt(n −1))) · Qt−δ(n) + δλtH(Qt(n −1)) · Qt−δ(n −1) + o(δ).
Rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we obtain Equation (2). With the boundary conditions,
the solution to Equation (2), which is an ordinary diﬀerential equation solved by induction, is
unique.
□
Proof of Theorem 1.
(i) We prove this by induction. First when n = 1, because Qt(0) = 1, it is
easy to verify that Qt(1) = 1 −exp
 −
R t
0 λsH(1)ds

is the unique solution of Equation (2). Hence
Qt(1) increases in t, and Qt(1) < Qt(0).
Now assume the statement is true for n −1 (n ≥2), then for n:
∂
∂t
h
Qt(n−1)−Qt(n)
i
= λt
h
H(Qt(n−2))(Qt(n −2) −Qt(n −1))−H(Qt(n−1))(Qt(n −1) −Qt(n))
i
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

2
Since Qt(n −2) −Qt(n −1) > 0,
∂
∂t
h
Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)]
i
> λtH(Qt(n −1))

Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)

.
Based on Gr¨onwall’s Inequality and the fact that Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)

t=0 = 0, we have Qt(n −1) −
Qt(n) > 0 for any t > 0. This also implies that ∂Qt(n)
∂t
> 0. Therefore the statement is also true for
n.
(ii) The inequality is equivalent to
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) ≤1 −e−¯λt. Consider the function e
¯λtQt(n). Taking
the derivative w.r.t. t, we have
∂(e
¯λtQt(n))
∂t
= ¯λe
¯λtQt(n) + e
¯λt ∂Qt(n)
∂t
≤¯λe
¯λtQt(n) + ¯λe
¯λt[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)] = ¯λe
¯λtQt(n −1),
where the inequality is due to ∂Qt(n)
∂t
> 0 and ∂Qt(n)
∂t
≤¯λ[Qt(n−1)−Qt(n)], as implied by Equation
(2). Integrating from 0 to t on both sides, we have
Qt(n) ≤
Z t
0
¯λe−¯λ(t−s)Qs(n −1)ds ≤¯λQt(n −1)
Z t
0
e−¯λ(t−s)ds = (1 −e−¯λt)Qt(n −1).
where the second inequality is due to the increasing monotonicity of Qt(n −1) in t as shown in
Theorem 1(i). Therefore, we conclude that
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) ≤1 −e−¯λt.
(iii) We will prove that
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) strictly increases in t and
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) increases in t by induction.
Consider ﬁrst when n = 1. Because Qt(1)
Qt(0) = Qt(1) and H(Qt(1))
H(Qt(0)) = H(Qt(1))
H(1)
, the monotonicity is guar-
anteed by part (i) and Assumption 1(i). Now assume that the monotonicity in t holds for n −1.
We next show that rt(n) ≡
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) strictly increases in t and ϕt(n) ≡
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) increases in t. First
from part (i), we observe that 0 < rt(n) < 1 for t > 0. Taking the derivative of rt(n) w.r.t. t, we
have
∂rt(n)
∂t
= λtH(Qt(n −1))[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)]
Qt(n −1)
−Qt(n)λtH(Qt(n −2))[Qt(n −2) −Qt(n −1)]
Q2
t(n −1)
= λt

H(Qt(n −1))

1 −
Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)

−
Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)H(Qt(n −2))
Qt(n −2)
Qt(n −1) −1

= λt
Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)Ht(Qt(n −2))
H(Qt(n −1))
H(Qt(n −2))
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−1

−
Qt(n −2)
Qt(n −1) −1

= λtrt(n)H(Qt(n −2))

ϕt(n −1)

1
rt(n) −1

−

1
rt(n −1) −1

.
Suppose that there exists some t1 such that
∂rt(n)
∂t

t=t1
≤0. Then, there must exist some t2 ∈
(0,t1) such that
∂rt(n)
∂t

t=t2
> 0. Otherwise, if
∂rt(n)
∂t
≤0 for all t < t1, then lim
t→0 rt(n) = 0 ≥rt1(n),
which contradicts with the fact that Qt(n) > 0. Due to the continuity of ∂rt(n)
∂t
, there exists some
t3 ∈[t2,t1), such that ∂rt(n)
∂t

t=t3
= 0. That is,
ϕt3(n −1)

1
rt3(n) −1

−

1
rt3(n −1) −1

= 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

3
Because ϕt(n −1) strictly increases in t and rt(n −1) increases in t, and rt(n) decreases in t
between [t3,t1], we have
ϕt1(n −1)

1
rt1(n) −1

−

1
rt1(n −1) −1

> ϕt3(n −1)

1
rt3(n) −1

−

1
rt3(n −1) −1

= 0,
which implies that
∂rt(n)
∂t
|t=t1 > 0. However, this contradicts with the preceding statement that
∂rt(n)
∂t
|t=t1 ≤0. Therefore, we conclude that ∂rt(n)
∂t
> 0 for any t > 0.
Next we show that
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) increases in t. For any t′ > t, we have
H(Qt′(n)) = H

Qt′(n)
Qt′(n −1)Qt′(n −1)

≥H

Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)Qt′(n −1)

,
where the inequality is due to the increasing monotonicity of
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) in t and Assumption 1(i).
Due to Assumption 1(iii) and Theorem 1(i), we have
H(Qt′(n))
H(Qt′(n −1)) ≥
H

Qt(n)
Qt(n−1)Qt′(n −1)

H(Qt′(n −1))
≥
H

Qt(n)
Qt(n−1)Qt(n −1)

H(Qt(n −1))
=
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n −1)).
We hence prove the increasing monotonicity of
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) in t.
For the monotonicity in n, because we have shown that ∂rt(n)
∂t
> 0 for any t > 0, ϕt(n−1)
 1
rt(n) −
1

−
 1
rt(n−1) −1

> 0 . Since ϕt(n−1) ≤1, we have rt(n) < rt(n−1), i.e.,
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) < Qt(n−1)
Qt(n−2). A direct
consequence is that
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) =
H

Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) Qt(n−1)

H(Qt(n−1))
<
H

Qt(n−1)
Qt(n−2) Qt(n−1)

H(Qt(n−1))
. Due to Assumption 1(iii)
and part (i), we have
H

Qt(n−1)
Qt(n−2)Qt(n −1)

H(Qt(n −1))
≤
H

Qt(n−1)
Qt(n−2)Qt(n −2)

H(Qt(n −2))
= H(Qt(n −1))
H(Qt(n −2)).
Therefore, we conclude that
H(Qt(n))
H(Qt(n−1)) ≤H(Qt(n−1))
H(Qt(n−2)) for any t > 0.
(iv) For any n ≥1, we have
Qt+h(n)
Qt(n) =
Qt+h(n)
Qt+h(n −1) · Qt+h(n −1)
Qt(n −1) · Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
> Qt+h(n −1)
Qt(n −1) ,
where the inequality is due to
Qt+h(n)
Qt+h(n−1) >
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) as shown in Theorem 1(iii). We thus obtain the
results.
□
Proof of Lemma 2.
(i) Taking derivative of Hθa(q)
Hθb(q) w.r.t. q, we have
∂
∂q
Hθa(q)
Hθb(q)

= Hθa(q)
Hθb(q)
c
q2
h 1
θa
f
  1
θa (p + c( 1
q −1))

¯F
  1
θa (p + c( 1
q −1))
 −1
θb
f
  1
θb (p + c( 1
q −1))

¯F
  1
θb (p + c( 1
q −1))

i
.
Because θa < θb and Assumption 1, we conclude that
∂
∂q

Hθa(q)
Hθb(q)

> 0. Thus, we obtain the
announced results.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

4
(ii) Taking derivative of Hpa(q)
Hpb(q) w.r.t. q, we have
∂
∂q
Hpa(q)
Hpb(q)

=
1
[Hpb(q)]2
"
c
θq2 f
1
θ

pa + c ·
1
q −1

¯F
1
θ

pb + c ·
1
q −1

−c
θq2 f
1
θ

pb + c ·
1
q −1

¯F
1
θ

pa + c ·
1
q −1
#
= Hpa(q)
Hpb(q)
c
θq2


f

1
θ
h
pa + c ·

1
q −1
i
¯F

1
θ
h
pa + c ·

1
q −1
i −
f

1
θ
h
pb + c ·

1
q −1
i
¯F

1
θ
h
pb + c ·

1
q −1
i

.
Due to pa > pb and that f(v)
¯
F (v) increases in v, we conclude that
∂
∂q

Hpa(q)
Hpb(q)

> 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 2.
Denote xt(n) = Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n) and γt(n) = Ha(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) . We ﬁrst prove that xt(n)
and γt(n) increase in t by induction. When n = 0, xt(0) = 1 and γt(0) = Ha(1)
Hb(1), and thus the
monotonicity holds trivially. Now suppose that the statement is true for n−1. Taking the derivative
of xt(n) w.r.t. t, we have
dxt(n)
dt
= λtHa(Qa
t (n −1))[Qa
t (n −1) −Qa
t (n)]
Qb
t(n)
−Qa
t (n)λtHb(Qb
t(n −1))[Qb
t(n −1) −Qb
t(n)]
[Qb
t(n)]2
= λt
Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n)

Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Qa
t (n −1)
Qa
t (n)
−1

−Hb(Qb
t(n −1))
Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)
−1

= λt

Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Qa
t (n −1)
Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)
−Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n)

−Hb(Qb
t(n −1))Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)
−1

= λtHa(Qa
t (n −1))Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)
·
Qa
t (n −1)
Qb
t(n −1) −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)
Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n) −Hb(Qb
t(n −1))
Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n)

1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)

= λtHa(Qa
t (n −1))Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)

xt(n −1) −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)xt(n) −
xt(n)
γt(n −1)

1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)

= λtHa(Qa
t (n −1))Qb
t(n −1)
Qb
t(n)

xt(n −1) −xt(n) −

1
γt(n −1) −1

1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n −1)

xt(n)

.
Denote L(t) = xt(n−1)−
h
1 +

1
γt(n−1) −1

1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1)
i
xt(n). Next we show that if there exists
some t1 such that L(t1) < 0, there must exist some t2 ∈(0,t1) such that L(t2) ≥0. Consider the
following two cases.
(1) lim
t→0 γt(n −1) = 0. Using L’ Hopital’s rule, we have
lim
t→0 xt(n) = lim
t→0
∂Qa
t (n)
∂t
∂Qb
t(n)
∂t
= lim
t→0
λtHa(Qa
t (n −1))(Qa
t (n −1) −Qa
t (n))
λtHb(Qb
t(n −1))(Qb
t(n −1) −Qb
t(n))
= lim
t→0 γt(n −1) ·
Qa
t (n −1)
h
1 −
Qa
t (n)
Qa
t (n−1)
i
Qb
t(n −1)
h
1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1)
i = 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

5
Suppose there exists some t1 > 0 such that
∂xt(n)
∂t
|t=t1 < 0. Then, there must exist some t2 ∈
(0,t1) such that ∂xt(n)
∂t
|t=t2 ≥0; otherwise xt(n) decreases within (0,t1], which implies that xt1 ≤
lim
t→0 xt(n) = 0. This contradicts with the fact that xt(n) > 0 for t > 0.
(2) lim
t→0 γt(n −1) > 0. Because of lim
t→0
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1) = 0 as shown in Theorem 1(ii), lim
t→0 L(t) = lim
t→0 xt(n −
1) −
xt(n)
γt(n−1). Again using L’ Hopital’s rule, we have
lim
t→0 L(t) = lim
t→0 xt(n −1) −lim
t→0
1
γt(n −1)
Ha(Qa
t (n −1)) · Qa
t (n −1)
h
1 −
Qa
t (n)
Qa
t (n−1)
i
Hb(Qb
t(n −1)) · Qb
t(n −1)
h
1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1)
i = 0.
Suppose there exists some t1 > 0 such that ∂xt(n)
∂t

t=t1
< 0, i.e., L(t1) < 0. Then, there must exist
some t2 ∈(0,t1) such that ∂xt(n)
∂t
|t=t2 ≥0; otherwise, xt(n) decreases within (0,t1]. Combined with
the results that xt(n −1), γt(n −1) and
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1) all increase in t, we have that L(t) increases in
(0,t1], which suggests that L(t1) ≥lim
t→0 L(t) = 0. This contradicts with the preceding argument that
L(t1) < 0.
Therefore, if there exists some t1 such that L(t1) < 0, there must exist a t2 ∈(0,t1) such that
L(t2) ≥0. Coupling with the continuity of L(t), there exists a t3 ∈[t2,t1) such that L(t3) = 0.
This implies that xt(n) strictly decreases within (t3,t1]. Combined with the results that xt(n −1),
γt(n −1) and
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1) all increase in t, we have that L(t) increases in (t3,t1], which suggests that
L(t1) ≥L(t3) = 0. This contradicts with the preceding argument that L(t1) < 0. Therefore, we
conclude that ∂xt(n)
∂t
≥0 for all t > 0.
Given that xt(n) increases in t, for any δ > 0, we have
Hb(Qa
t+δ(n))
Hb(Qb
t+δ(n)) = Hb  xt+δ(n)Qb
t+δ(n)

Hb(Qb
t+δ(n))
≥Hb  xt(n)Qb
t+δ(n)

Hb(Qb
t+δ(n))
≥Hb (xt(n)Qb
t(n))
Hb(Qb
t(n))
= Hb(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)),
where the second inequality is a result of Assumption 1(iii). Hence Hb(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) increases in t. Com-
bining with the assumption that Ha(q)
Hb(q) increases in q, we conclude that Ha(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) increases in t.
Next we prove that xt(n) and γt(n) decrease in n. Because xt(n) increases in t, we have L(t) =
xt(n −1) −xt(n) −

1
γt(n−1) −1

1 −
Qb
t(n)
Qb
t(n−1)

xt(n) > 0 for any t > 0. Coupling with the results
that γt(n −1) ≤1, xt(n) ≥0 and Theorem 1(i), we thus have that xt(n −1) > xt(n).
Given that Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n) decreases in n, we have
Ha(Qa
t (n))
Ha(Qb
t(n)) =
Ha 
Qa
t (n)
Qb
t(n)Qb
t(n)

Ha(Qb
t(n))
≤
Ha 
Qa
t (n−1)
Qb
t(n−1)Qb
t(n)

Ha(Qb
t(n))
≤
Ha 
Qa
t (n−1)
Qb
t(n−1)Qb
t(n −1)

Ha(Qb
t(n −1))
= Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Ha(Qb
t(n −1)),
where the second inequality is a result of Assumption 1(iii). Moreover,
Ha(Qb
t(n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) ≤Ha(Qb
t(n−1))
Hb(Qb
t(n−1))
because of the assumption that Ha(q)
Hb(q) increases in q. Therefore, we have
Ha(Qa
t (n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) = Ha(Qa
t (n))
Ha(Qb
t(n))
Ha(Qb
t(n))
Hb(Qb
t(n)) ≤Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Ha(Qb
t(n −1))
Ha(Qb
t(n −1))
Hb(Qb
t(n −1)) = Ha(Qa
t (n −1))
Hb(Qb
t(n −1)) .
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

6
We thus complete the proof.
□
For notational convenience, We denote Ht(n) ≡H(Qt(n −1)) in the following proofs.
Proof of Theorem 2.
Denote J s
t (n) as the optimal expected proﬁt at state (t,n) assuming that
the seeding stimulus has not been activated. We prove that τ s(n) is given by
τ s(n) = sup
n
t :Ht((n −n0)+) · Qt((n −n0 −1)+) −

Ht((n −n0)+) −Ht(n)

· Qt((n −n0)+)
≥Ht(n) J s
t (n −1)
G + B −R
o
.
(A.1)
Expected proﬁt J s
t (n) at state (t,n) is given by
• when n ≥1 and t ≤τ s(n), J s
t (n) = (G + B −R) · Qt((n −n0)+);
• when t > τ s(n), J s
t (n) is given by
∂Js
t (n)
∂t
= λtHt(n)[J s
t (n −1) −J s
t (n)],
(A.2)
with boundary conditions J s
τs(n)(n) = (G + B −R) · Qτs(n)((n −n0)+) and J s
t (0) = G + B.
Denote lt(n) ≡
Js
t (n)
Qt((n−n0)+). We add to the statement that lt(n) increases in t, and prove by
induction. When n ≤n0, the optimal expected proﬁt is given by J s
t (n) = (G + B) · Qt(n) + (G +
B −R) · (1 −Qt(n)). That is, the creator’s optimal policy is to hold oﬀuntil right before the
deadline, and to activate “seeding” if no backer pledges by then. It is not hard to verify that it is
the unique solution to the diﬀerential equation characterized by Equation (A.2). We thus conclude
that lt(n) = J s
t (n) increases in t for n ≤n0.
Assume that the statement is true for n −1, where n ≥n0 + 1. Next, we seek to derive J s
t (n)
by showing that the creator’s optimal policy is to “seed” immediately when t ≤τ s
t (n) and to hold
oﬀwhen t > τ s
t (n). We can rewrite the inequality within the curly brackets in Equation (A.1) as
follows.
1 +
Ht(n −n0)
Ht(n)
−1

1 −
Qt(n −n0)
Qt(n −n0 −1)

≥
J s
t (n −1)
(G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0 −1).
RHS of the inequality increases in t because lt(n −1) increases in t, while LHS decreases in t
due to Theorem 1(iii). Therefore, for any t ≤τ s(n), the inequality within the curly brackets in
Equation (A.1) holds; whereas the direction of the inequality is ﬂipped for any t > τ s(n).
Suppose there exists some t1 > τ s(n) such that the creator’s optimal policy is to activate the
seeding stimulus immediately, i.e., J s
t1(n) = (G+B −R)·Qt1(n −n0). Comparing the case without
activating the stimulus at time t1, we have
J s
t1(n) ≥λt1Ht1(n)δ · J s
t1−δ(n −1) + (1 −λt1Ht1(n)δ) · J s
t1−δ(n) + o(δ)
≥λt1Ht1(n)δ · J s
t1−δ(n −1) + (1 −λt1Ht1(n)δ) · (G + B −R) · Qt1−δ(n −n0) + o(δ).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

7
Plugging Qt1(n −n0) = (1 −λt1Ht1(n −n0)δ) · Qt1−δ(n −n0) + λt1Ht1(n −n0)δ · Qt1−δ(n −n0 −
1) + o(δ) into J s
t1(n) in the inequality above, rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we have
(G + B −R)
h
Ht1(n −n0)Qt1(n −n0 −1) −(Ht1(n −n0) −Ht1(n))Qt1(n −n0)
i
≥Ht1(n)J s
t1(n −1).
This contradicts with the fact that t1 > τ s(n). Therefore, the creator’s optimal policy is to hold
oﬀwhen t > τ s(n), i.e., J s
t (n) > (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0). Consider what happens in a small time
interval δ, we have
J s
t (n) = (1 −δλtHt(n)) · J s
t−δ(n) + δλtHt(n) · J s
t−δ(n −1) + o(δ).
Rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we obtain Equation (A.2).
We next show that the creator’s optimal policy is to “seed” immediately when t < τ s(n). Suppose
that there exists some t2 < τ s(n), such that J s
t (n) = (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0) for any t ≤t2, and
J s
t (n) > (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0) when t ∈(t2,t2 + h]. (Because J s
0(n) = 0 for any n > n0, we can
always ﬁnd some t2 such that J s
t (n) = (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0) for any t ≤t2.) Then, for any
t ∈(t2,t2 + h]
J s
t+δ(n) = (1 −λt+δHt2+δ(n)δ) · J s
t (n) + λt+δHt+δ(n)δ · J s
t (n −1) + o(δ).
Let δ →0, we obtain ∂Js
t (n)
∂t
= λtHt(n)[J s
t (n −1) −J s
t (n)] over interval (t2,t2 + h]. According to
Equation (A.1), J s
t (n −1) ≤G+B−R
Ht(n) [Ht(n −n0)Qt(n −n0 −1) −(Ht(n −n0) −Ht(n))Qt(n −n0)].
Also because J s
t (n) > (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0) when t ∈(t2,t2 + h], we have
∂Js
t (n)
∂t
< λt(G + B −R)[Ht(n −n0)Qt(n −n0 −1) −(Ht(n −n0) −Ht(n))Qt(n −n0) −Ht(n)Qt(n −n0)]
= λt(G + B −R) · Ht(n −n0)[Qt(n −n0 −1) −Qt(n −n0)].
However, we know from Equation (2) that
∂
∂t [(G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0)] = λt(G+B −R)·Ht(n−
n0)[Qt(n −n0 −1) −Qt(n −n0)]. Therefore,
∂
∂t [J s
t (n) −(G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0)] < 0 for any t ∈
(t2,t2 + h]. Since [J s
t (n) −(G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0)]

t=t2
= 0, we obtain that J s
t (n) < (G + B −R) ·
Qt(n −n0) when t ∈(t2,t2 + h]. This contradicts with the assumption we made earlier. Hence, the
creator’s optimal policy is to “seed” immediately for any t < τ s
t (n), i.e., J s
t (n) = (G + B −R) ·
Qt(n −n0) for any t < τ s(n).
Lastly, we show that lt(n) is an increasing function of t. This is obvious when t ≤τ s(n), as
Js
t (n)
Qt(n−n0) = G + B −R. When t > τ s(n), taking the derivative of lt(n) w.r.t. t, we have
∂lt(n)
∂t
= λtHt(n)[J s
t (n −1) −J s
t (n)]
Qt(n −n0)
−λtHt(n −n0)J s
t (n)[Qt(n −n0 −1) −Qt(n −n0)]
[Qt(n −n0)]2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

8
= λt

Ht(n)

J s
t (n −1)
Qt(n −n0 −1)
Qt(n −n0 −1)
Qt(n −n0)
−
J s
t (n)
Qt(n −n0)

−Ht(n −n0)
J s
t (n)
Qt(n −n0)
Qt(n −n0 −1)
Qt(n −n0)
−1

= λtHt(n)Qt(n −n0 −1)
Qt(n −n0)

lt(n −1) −lt(n)
Qt(n −n0)
Qt(n −n0 −1) −lt(n)Ht(n −n0)
Ht(n)

1 −
Qt(n −n0)
Qt(n −n0 −1)

= λtHt(n)Qt(n −n0 −1)
Qt(n −n0)

lt(n −1) −lt(n) −
Ht(n −n0)
Ht(n)
−1

1 −
Qt(n −n0)
Qt(n −n0 −1)

lt(n)

.
Notice that J s
t (n) > (G + B −R) · Qt(n −n0) when t > τ s(n), and thus lt(n) > G + B −R when
t > τ s(n). Suppose that there exists some t3 > τ s(n) such that ∂lt(n)
∂t

t=t3
< 0. Then, there must be
some t4 ∈(τ s(n),t3), such that ∂lt(n)
∂t |t=t4 ≥0; otherwise, ∂lt(n)
∂t
< 0 for any τs(n) < t ≤t3, leading
to lt3 < lτs(n)(n) = G + B −R, which contradicts with the result that lt(n) > (G + B −R) when
t > τ s(n).
Due to the continuity of ∂lt(n)
∂t , there exists some t5 ∈[t4,t3) such that ∂lt(n)
∂t

t=t5 = 0, and ∂lt(n)
∂t
< 0
on (t5,t3]. That is,
lt5(n −1) −lt5(n) −
Ht5(n −n0)
Ht5(n)
−1

1 −
Qt5(n −n0)
Qt5(n −n0 −1)

lt5(n) = 0.
According to Theorem 1(iii), Ht(n−1)
Ht(n)
decreases in t and
Qt(n−n0)
Qt(n−n0−1) increases in t. Coupling with
the result that lt(n) strictly decreases within (t5,t3], we have
lt3(n −1) −lt3(n) −
Ht3(n −n0)
Ht3(n)
−1

1 −
Qt3(n −n0)
Qt3(n −n0 −1)

lt3(n)
> lt5(n −1) −lt5(n) −
Ht5(n −1)
Ht5(n)
−1

1 −
Qt5(n −n0)
Qt5(n −n0 −1)

lt5(n) = 0.
This implies that ∂lt(n)
∂t

t=t3 > 0 and contradicts with our assumption that ∂lt(n)
∂t

t=t3 < 0. We thus
complete the proof.
□
Proof of Corollary 1.
(i) We prove by induction. When n = n0 + 1, it is straightforward that
τ s(n0 +1) ≥τ s(n0) = ··· = τ s(1) = 0. Now assume the statement is true for n−1, i.e., τ s(1) ≤··· ≤
τ s(n −1) for some n > n0. We prove τ s(n −1) ≤τ s(n) by showing that for any t < τ s(n −1), the
creator’s optimal action is not to activate the seeding stimulus at state (t,n). Suppose this is not
true, then t > τ s(n). From Equation (A.1), we have
Ht(n −n0)Qt(n −n0 −1) −(Ht(n −n0) −Ht(n))Qt(n −n0) < Ht(n) J s
t (n −1)
G + B −R.
Because t < τ s(n−1), J s
t (n−1) = (G+B−R)·Qt(n−n0−1). Plugging J s
t (n−1) into the inequality
above, we have
Ht(n −n0)Qt(n −n0 −1) −(Ht(n −n0) −Ht(n))Qt(n −n0) < Ht(n)Qt(n −n0 −1)
⇒(Ht(n −n0) −Ht(n))(Qt(n −n0 −1) −Qt(n −n0)) < 0.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

9
However, it contradicts with Theorem 1(i) and Assumption 1(i). We thus obtain the announced
results.
(ii) Denote Yt(n;B,R) = Js
t (n;B,R)
G+B−R . Here, we use the notation J s
t (n;B,R) ≡J s
t (n) to emphasize
the dependence of J s
t (n) on B and R. Similarly, we denote τ s(n;B,R) ≡τ s(n). We add to the state-
ment that Yt(n;B,R) decreases in B and increases in R, and prove by induction. For any n ≤n0, the
statement is obviously true since τ s(n;B,R) = 0 and Yt(n;B,R) = (G+B)·Qt(n)+(G+B−R)·(1−Qt(n))
G+B−R
=
1 + R·Qt(n)
G+B−R decreases in B and increases in R. Now suppose τ s(n;B1,R) ≥τ s(n;B2,R) and
Yt(n;B1,R) ≤Yt(n;B2,R), for any n ≤n0 and B1 > B2 ≥0. From Equation (A.1), for any t >
τ s(n + 1;B1,R),
1 +
Ht(n + 1 −n0)
Ht(n + 1)
−1

1 −
Qt(n + 1 −n0)
Qt(n + 1 −n0 −1)

<
Yt(n;B1,R)
Qt(n + 1 −n0) ≤
Yt(n;B2,R)
Qt(n + 1 −n0).
Therefore, τ s(n + 1;B,R) increases in B. Similarly we can show that τ s(n + 1;B,R) decreases
in R.
Now we show the monotonicity of Yt(n + 1;B,R) w.r.t B and R. For any t ≤τ s(n + 1;B2,R),
Yt(n + 1;B1,R) = Yt(n + 1;B2,R) = Qt(n + 1 −n0).
When t ∈(τ s(n+1;B2,R),τ s(n+1;B1,R)], Yt(n+1;B1,R) = Qt(n+1−n0) whereas the Yt(n+
1;B2,R) ≥Qt(n + 1 −n0) because of the deﬁnition of J s
t (n).
When t > τ s(n + 1;B1,R), Yt(n + 1;Bi,R) is the solution of
∂y
∂t = λtHt(n + 1)[Yt(n;Bi,R) −y],
with the boundary condition yτs(n+1;B1,R) = Yτs(n+1;B1,R)(n+1;Bi,R) where i = 1,2. Note that RHS
of the equation decreases in B based on the induction hypothesis of n. Coupling with the fact
that Yτs(n+1;B1,R)(n + 1;B1,R) ≤Yτs(n+1;B1,R)(n + 1;B2,R), Yt(n + 1;B,R) decreases in B when
t > τ s(n + 1;B1,R). In a similar fashion, we can show that Yt(n + 1;B,R) increases in R. We thus
obtain the announced results.
□
Proof of Theorem 3.
(i) Since J b
T,N = (G+B)·QT(N) and J s
T,N = J s
T(N), it is suﬃcient to show
that Qt(n)
Js
t (n) increases in t.
When n = 0, the statement is obvious as Qt(0) = 1 and J s
t (0) = G+B. Now assume that Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1)
weakly increases in t. In that case:
When t < τ s(n), J s
t (n) = (G+B −R)·Qt((n−n0)+). Therefore Qt(n)
Js
t (n) =
Qt(n)
(G+B−R)·Qt((n−n0)+). Accord-
ing to Theorem 1, it increases in t.
When t ≥τ s(n),
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
J s
t (n) = λtHt(n)[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)]
J s
t (n)
−Qt(n)
J s
t (n)
λtHt(n)[J s
t (n −1) −J s
t (n)]
J s
t (n)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

10
= λtHt(n)Qt(n)
J s
t (n)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−J s
t (n −1)
J s
t (n)

= λtHt(n)J s
t (n −1)
J s
t (n)
Qt(n −1)
J s
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J s
t (n)

.
When t = τ s(n), because J s
t (n) = (G + B −R) · Qt(n −1),
Qt(n −1)
J s
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J s
t (n) = Qt(n −1)
J s
t (n −1) −
Qt(n)
(G + B −R) · Qt(n −1).
Also, according to Equation (A.1), at t = τ s(n),
J s
t (n −1) = (G + B −R) ·
Ht(n −1)
Ht(n)
Qt(n −2) −
Ht(n −1)
Ht(n)
−1

Qt(n −1)

.
Hence,
Qt(n −1)
J s
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J s
t (n) =
1
G + B −R
Qt(n −1)
Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) Qt(n −2) −

Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) −1

Qt(n −1)
−
Qt(n)
(G + B −R) · Qt(n −1)
=
1
G + B −R
Qt(n)
Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) Qt(n −2) −

Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) −1

Qt(n −1)
·

G + B −R
Qt(n)
−
Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) Qt(n −2) −

Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) −1

Qt(n −1)
Qt(n −1)


=
1
G + B −R
Qt(n)
Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) Qt(n −2) −

Ht(n−1)
Ht(n) −1

Qt(n −1)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−1

−Ht(n −1)
Ht(n)
Qt(n −2)
Qt(n −1) −1

.
Recall that in the proof of Theorem 1, we have shown that for any t > 0,
Ht(n)
Ht(n−1)

Qt(n−1)
Qt(n) −1

−

Qt(n−2)
Qt(n−1) −1

> 0. Therefore Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n)

t=τs(n) > 0.
Suppose that there exists a t′ > τ s(n) such that Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n) < 0, then because of continuity,
there must exists a τ s(n) < t1 < t′ such that Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n)

t=t1
= 0 and Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n) < 0 when t ∈
(t1,t′). This also means that Qt(n)
Js
t (n) decreases in t over the interval. However, since Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) increases
in t, Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n) must be increasing in t within (t1,t′). This indicates Qt(n−1)
Js
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Js
t (n)

t=t′ ≥0,
which leads to contradiction. Therefore Qt(n)
Js
t (n) increases in t for any t > 0.
(ii) Note that J b
T,N ≤J s
T,N ≤(G + B) · QT((N −n0)+). Consequently, we have
0 ≤J s
T,N −J b
T,N ≤(G + B) ·

QT((N −n0)+) −QT(N)

.
Letting T →∞or T →0, we thus obtain the announced results.
□
Proof of Theorem 4.
We show that τ u(n) is given by
τ u(n) = sup

t : ˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n) ≥Ht(n) J u
t (n −1)
G + B −K

,
(A.3)
where J u
t (n) is the expected proﬁt at state (t,n). It is given by
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

11
• when t ≤τ u(n), J u
t (n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n);
• when t > τ u(n),
∂Ju
t (n)
∂t
= λtHt(n)[J u
t (n −1) −J u
t (n)],
(A.4)
with boundary conditions J u
τu(n)(n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n), and J u
t (0) = G + B.
First we show that if Ju
t (n−1)
˜
Qt(n−1) increases in t, then the creator would activate the stimulus if and
only if t ≤τ u(n). To see that, we can rewrite the inequality in the bracket in Equation (A.3) as
follows.
1 +
 ˜Ht(n)
Ht(n) −1
! 
1 −
˜Qt(n)
˜Qt(n −1)
!
≥
J u
t (n −1)
(G + B −K) ˜Qt(n −1)
.
According to Theorem 1(iii), LHS of the above inequality strictly decreases in t; while RHS
increases in t due to our induction hypothesis. Therefore, for any t < τ u(n), the inequality holds;
whereas the direction of the inequality is ﬂipped for any t > τ u(n).
Suppose that there exists some t1 > τ u(n), such that the creator’s optimal policy is to upgrade
immediately, i.e., J u
t1(n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt1(n). Then, we have
(G + B −K) ˜Qt1(n) > (1 −δλt1Ht1(n))J u
t1−δ(n) + δλt1Ht1(n)J u
t1−δ(n −1) + o(δ)
≥(1 −δλt1Ht1(n))(G + B −K) ˜Qt1−δ(n) + δλt1Ht1(n)J u
t1−δ(n −1) + o(δ).
Plugging ˜Qt1(n) = (1 −δλt1 ˜Ht1(n)) ˜Qt1−δ(n) + δλt1 ˜Ht1(n) ˜Qt1−δ(n −1) + o(δ) into the inequality
above, rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we have
˜Ht1(n) ˜Qt1(n −1) −

˜Ht1(n) −Ht1(n)

˜Qt1(n) ≥Ht1(n)J u
t1(n −1)
G + B −K
.
This contradicts with our assumption that t1 > τ u(n). Therefore, the creator would not upgrade
when t > τ u(n), i.e., J u
t (n) > (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n) for any t > τ u(n). Consider what happens in a
small time interval δ, we have
J u
t (n) = (1 −δλtHt(n))J u
t−δ(n) + δλtHt(n)J u
t−δ(n −1) + o(δ).
Rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we thus obtain Equation (A.4).
We next show that the creator’s optimal policy is to upgrade immediately when t < τ u(n).
Suppose that there exists some t2 < τ u(n), such that J u
t (n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n) for all t ≤t2, and
J u
t (n) > (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n) for t ∈(t2,t2 + δ]. Then, we have
(G + B −K) ˜Qt2+δ(n) < J u
t2+δ(n) = (1 −δλt2+δHt2+δ(n))J u
t2(n) + δλt2+δHt2+δ(n)J u
t2(n −1) + o(δ)
= (1 −δλt2+δHt2+δ(n))(G + B −K) ˜Qt2(n) + δλt1+δHt2+δ(n)J u
t2(n −1) + o(δ).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

12
Plugging ˜Qt2+δ(n) = (1−δλt2+δ ˜Ht2+δ(n)) ˜Qt2(n)+δλt2+δ ˜Ht2+δ(n) ˜Qt2(n−1)+o(δ) into the inequal-
ity above, rearranging and taking the limit as δ →0, we have
(G + B −K)
h
˜Ht2(n) ˜Qt2(n −1) −

˜Ht2(n) −Ht2(n)

˜Qt2(n)
i
≤Ht2(n)J u
t2(n −1).
This contradicts with the assumption that t2 < τ u(n). Therefore, the creator would upgrade
immediately when t < τ u(n), i.e., J u
t (n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n) for any t < τ u(n).
Therefore, to prove Theorem 4, it is suﬃcient to show that Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n) increases in t. We do this by
induction. For n = 0, the statement is obvious since Ju
t (0)
˜
Qt(0) = G + B.
Now assume that the statement is true for n −1, and consider the case n. It is trivial when
t ≤τ u(n) because
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n) = G + B −K. Consider next when t > τ u(n). Suppose that there exists
some t3 > τ u(n) such that
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n)

t=t3
< 0. Then, there must exist some t4 ∈(τ u(n),t3) such that
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n)

t=t4 ≥0; otherwise,
Ju
t3(n)
˜
Qt3(n) <
Ju
τu(n)(n)
˜
Qτu(n)(n) = G + B −K, which contradicts with the result that
J u
t (n) > (G + B −K) · ˜Qt(n) for any t > τ u(n). Due to the continuity of
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n), there exists some
t5 ∈[t4,t3), such that
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n)

t=t5
= 0. That is,
∂
∂t
J u
t (n)
˜Qt(n)

t=t5
= λt5Ht5(n)

J u
t5(n −1) −J u
t5(n)

˜Qt5(n)
−
λt5 ˜Ht5(n)J u
t5(n)
h
˜Qt5(n −1) −˜Qt5(n)
i
[ ˜Qt5(n)]2
= λt5Ht5(n)
˜Qt5(n −1)
˜Qt5(n)
"
J u
t5(n −1)
˜Qt5(n −1)
−J u
t5(n)
˜Qt5(n)
−
 ˜Ht5(n)
Ht5(n) −1
! 
1 −
˜Qt5(n)
˜Qt5(n −1)
!
J u
t5(n)
˜Qt5(n)
#
= 0.
Because
˜
Qt(n)
˜
Qt(n−1) increases in t,
˜
Ht(n)
Ht(n) decreases in t as shown in Theorem 1(iii), and the induction
hypothesis that Ju
t (n−1)
˜
Qt(n−1) increases in t, we have
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n)

t=t3
≥0, which contradicts with the assump-
tion that
∂
∂t
Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n)

t=t3
< 0. Therefore, Ju
t (n)
˜
Qt(n) increases in t for any t > τ u(n), and we thus complete
the proof.
□
Proof of Corollary 2.
(i) Suppose that there exists an n, such that τ u(n) < τ u(n −1). For any
t ∈(τ u(n),τ u(n −1)), J u
t (n −1) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n −1). Using the deﬁnition of τ u(n), we have
(G + B −K)
h
˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n)
i
< Ht(n)J u
t (n −1)
⇒( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n))( ˜Qt(n −1) −˜Qt(n)) < 0.
This contradicts with Theorem 1(i) and Assumption 1(i). We thus obtain the announced results.
(ii) Denote Zt(n;B,K) = Ju
t (n;B,R)
G+B−K . Here, we use the notation J u
t (n;B,R) ≡J u
t (n) to emphasize
the dependence of J u
t (n) on B and K. Similarly, we denote τ u(n;B,K) ≡τ u(n). Note that Equation
(A.3) can be rewritten as:
τ u(n;B,K) = sup
n
t : ˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n) ≥Ht(n)Zt(n −1;B,K)
o
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

13
Only the RHS of the above inequality depends on B and K. Thus, τ u(n;B,K) increases in B
and decreases in K if and only if Zt(n −1;B,K) decreases in B and increases in K. We prove the
monotonicity of Zt(n;B,K) w.r.t. B and K for any n ≥0 by induction.
First when n = 0, Zt(0;B,K) =
G+B
G+B−K . The statement is obvious. Now suppose it is true for
any m ≤n −1. This implies that τ u(m;B,K) increases in B and decreases in K for any m ≤n.
Thus, we have τ u(n;B1,K) > τ u(n;B2,K) for any B1 > B2 ≥0. Consider the following cases w.r.t.
t:
When t ≤τ u(n;B2,K), creators of both projects would upgrade project features immediately.
Hence Zt(n;B1,K) = Zt(n;B2,K) = ˜Qt(n).
When τ u(n;B2,K) < t ≤τ u(n;B1,K), only the project with a long-term proﬁt of B1 would use
the stimulus. Therefore, Zt(n;B1,K) = ˜Qt(n) whereas Zt(n;B2,K) ≥˜Qt(n) = Zt(n;B1,K).
When t > τ u(n;B1,K), neither projects activates the stimulus policy. For i = 1,2, Zt(n;Bi,K)
is the solution of
dz
dt = λtHt(n)(Zt(n −1;Bi,K) −z),
with boundary condition z(τ u(n;B1,K)) = Zτu(n;B1,K)(n,Bi,K). RHS of the above equation
decreases in B1. Coupling with the inequality Zτu(n;B1,K)(n,B1,K) ≤Zτu(n;B1,K)(n,B2,K), we have
Zt(n;B1,K) ≤Zt(n;B2,K).
In a similar fashion, we can show that Zt(n;B,K) increases in K. This completes the proof.
□
Proof of Theorem 5.
(i) Since J b
t (n) = (G + B) · Qt(n). It is equivalent to show that
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n)
increases in t.
When n = 0, the statement is obvious as Qt(n) = 1 and J u
t (n) = G + B. Now assume that it’s
true for n −1. Then for n:
When t < τ u(n), J u
t (n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n). Hence Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) =
1
G+B−K
Qt(n)
˜
Qt(n). According to Proposi-
tion 2, Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) increases in t.
When t ≥τ u(n),
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
J u
t (n) = λtHt(n)[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)]
J u
t (n)
−Qt(n)
J u
t (n)
λtHt(n)[J u
t (n −1) −J u
t (n)]
J u
t (n)
= λtHt(n)Qt(n)
J u
t (n)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−J u
t (n −1)
J u
t (n)

= λtHt(n)J u
t (n −1)
J u
t (n)
Qt(n −1)
J u
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J u
t (n)

.
At t = τ u(n), because J u
t (n) = (G + B −K) ˜Qt(n),
Qt(n −1)
J u
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J u
t (n) = Qt(n −1)
J u
t (n −1) −
Qt(n)
(G + B −K) ˜Qt(n)
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

14
Also according to Equation (A.3), J u
t (n −1) = G+B−K
Ht(n) [ ˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n)]
at t = τ u(n). Hence,
Qt(n −1)
J u
t (n −1) −Qt(n)
J u
t (n) =
Ht(n) · Qt(n −1)
(G + B −K)
h
˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n)
i −
Qt(n)
(G + B −K) ˜Qt(n)
=
1
G + B −K

Ht(n)Qt(n −1)
˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n)
−Qt(n)
˜Qt(n)

=
1
G + B −K
Qt(n)
˜Ht(n) ˜Qt(n −1) −( ˜Ht(n) −Ht(n)) ˜Qt(n)
"
Ht(n)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−1

−˜Ht(n)
 ˜Qt(n −1)
˜Qt(n)
−1
!#
.
In the proof of Proposition 2, we have shown that for any t > 0, Ht(n)

Qt(n−1)
Qt(n) −1

−
˜Ht(n)
 ˜
Qt(n−1)
˜
Qt(n) −1

> 0. Therefore,
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n)

t=τu(n) > 0. Suppose there exists some t′ > τ u(n) such
that
Qt(n−1)
Ju
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) < 0, then according to the continuity of the functions, there must exist
some τ u(n) < t0 < t′, such that
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n)

t=t0
= 0 and
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) < 0 in the interval (t0,t′]. However,
since
Qt(n−1)
Ju
t (n−1) increases in t,
Qt(n−1)
Ju
t (n−1) −Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) must strictly increase in the interval (t0,t′], implying
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n)

t=t′ > 0. This leads to contradiction. Therefore,
∂
∂t
Qt(n)
Ju
t (n) ≥0 for any t > 0.
(ii) Following a similar approach as the proof for Theorem 3(ii), we can show that lim
T →∞J u
T,N −
J b
T,N = lim
T →0J u
T,N −J b
T,N = 0 for any N ≥1.
□
Proof of Theorem 6.
Denote At(n) the optimal expected proﬁt at state (t,n) assuming that the
creator has not ended LTO yet. The optimal expected proﬁt over the course of the entire pledging
process is denoted by J l
t(n). We show that τ l(n) is given by
τ l(n) = sup
n
t : At(n) ≥[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n)
o
,
(A.5)
where At(n) is the solution of
∂At(n)
∂t
= λt ˆHt(n)

J l
t(n −1) −At(n)

,
(A.6)
with boundary conditions A0(n) = 0 for any n ≥1, and At(0) = G + B −Nk.
Expected proﬁt J l
t(n) at state (t,n) is given by
J l
t(n) =
(
At(n),
if t < τ l(n)
[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n),
if t ≥τ l(n) .
Denote dt(n) = At(n)
Qt(n). We add to the statement that dt(n) decreases in t and prove by induction.
It’s trivial when n = 0 because dt(0) = At(0)
Qt(0) = G + B −Nk. Suppose that the statement is true for
n −1. Taking the derivative of dt(n) w.r.t. t, we have
∂dt(n)
∂t
= λt ˆHt(n)[J l
t(n −1) −At(n)]
Qt(n)
−λtHt(n)At(n)[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)]
[Qt(n)]2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

15
= λt

ˆHt(n)
 J l
t(n −1)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−At(n)
Qt(n)

−Ht(n)At(n)
Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
−1

= λt ˆHt(n)Qt(n −1)
Qt(n)
"
J l
t(n −1)
Qt(n −1) −
"
1 −
 
1 −Ht(n)
ˆHt(n)
!
1 −
Qt(n)
Qt(n −1)
#
dt(n)
#
.
Taking the limit as t →0 and using L’Hopital’s rule, we have
lim
t→0 dt(n) = lim
t→0
λt ˆHt(n)[J l
t(n −1) −At(n)]
λtHt(n)[Qt(n −1) −Qt(n)] = lim
t→0
ˆHt(n)
Ht(n)
J l
t(n −1)
Qt(n −1).
By the induction hypothesis, we know that Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) decreases in t since J l
t(n−1) is equal to either
At(n −1) or [G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n −1). From Theorem 1(iii),
ˆ
Ht(n)
Ht(n) decreases in t. Therefore
lim
t→0 dt(n) = lim
t→0
ˆ
Ht(n)
Ht(n)
Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) exists. Next we show that, if there exists some t1 such that ∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t1
>
0, there must be some t2 ∈(0,t1) such that ∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t2
< 0. Consider the following two cases.
(1) lim
t→0 dt(n) = ∞. If there exists a t1 such that ∂dt(n)
∂t
|t=t1 > 0, then there must exist a t2 ∈(0,t1)
such that ∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t2 ≤0; Otherwise dt1 ≥lim
t→0 dt(n) = ∞, which is impossible.
(2) lim
t→0 dt(n) < ∞. This implies that lim
t→0
Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) < ∞and lim
t→0
Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n) > 0. Let S(t) = Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) −
h
1 −

1 −Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n)

1 −
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1)
i
dt(n). Because lim
t→0 1 −

1 −Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n)

1 −
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1)

= lim
t→0
Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n) > 0 and
lim
t→0 dt(n) = lim
t→0
ˆ
Ht(n)
Ht(n)
Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) < ∞, we have lim
t→0 S(t) = 0.
Recall that ∂dt(n)
∂t
= λt ˆHt(n) Qt(n−1)
Qt(n) ·S(t). Suppose there exists a t1 such that ∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t1
> 0, then
there must exist a t2 ∈(0,t1) such that
∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t2
< 0; Otherwise, dt(n) increases within [0,t1].
Coupling with the results that Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n) and
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) both increase in t, we conclude that S(t) decreases
in t. A direct consequence is that S(t1) ≤S(0) = 0, which contradicts with the assumption that
∂dt(n)
∂t
> 0.
Consequently, if there exists a t1 such that ∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t1 > 0, there must exist a t2 ∈[0,t1) such that
∂dt(n)
∂t

t=t2 ≤0. Due to the continuity of
∂dt(n)
∂t
, there exists some t3 ∈[t2,t1) such that S(t3) = 0,
and S(t) > 0 for any t ∈(t3,t1]. However, because dt(n), Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n) and
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) increase in t, and Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1)
decreases in t for any t ∈(t3,t1), S(t) should decrease in t, which contradicts with the preceding
result. Therefore, dt(n) must decrease in t for any t > 0. Moreover, because
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1) strictly increases
in t, S(t) ̸= 0 for any t. Therefore, for any t > 0, S(t) < 0 and dt(n) strictly decreases in t. As a
result, At(n) > [G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n) for any t < τ l(n), and the direction of the inequality is
ﬂipped for any t > τ l(n).
Next we show that the creator’s optimal policy is to end the limited-time oﬀer if and only if
t > τ l(n). Suppose that there exists some t4 < τ l(n), such that the creator’s optimal decision is to
end the limited-time oﬀer immediately, i.e., J l
t4(n) = [G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt4(n). Then, we have
[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt4(n)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

16
> λt4 ˆHt4(n)δJ l
t4−δ(n −1) + (1 −λt4 ˆHt4(n)δ)J l
t4−δ(n) + o(δ)
≥λt4 ˆHt4(n)δJ l
t4−δ(n −1) +

1 −λt4 ˆHt4(n)δ

At4−δ(n) + o(δ) = At4(n) + o(δ),
which contradicts with t4 < τ l(n). Therefore, the creator would not end the limited-time oﬀer for
any t ≤τ l(n). Consider what happens in a small time interval δ, we have
J l
t(n) = (1 −δλt ˆHt(n))J l
t−δ(n) + δλt ˆHt(n)J l
t−δ(n −1) + o(δ).
Rearranging, taking the limit as δ →0, and replacing J l
t(n) with At(n), we thus have
∂At(n)
∂t
= λt ˆHt(n)

J l
t(n −1) −At(n)

.
Suppose that there exists some t5 ≥τ l(n) such that J l
t(n) = [G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n) for any
t ≤t5 but J l
t(n) > [G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt(n) for any t ∈(t5,t5 + δ]. (Because J l
τl(n) = Aτl(n)(n) =
[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qτl(n)(n), we can always ﬁnd such t5 ≥τ l(n).) Thus, we have
[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt5+δ(n)
< λt5+δ ˆHt5+δ(n)δJ l
t5(n −1) +

1 −λt5+δ ˆHt5+δ(n)δ

J l
t5(n) + o(δ)
= λt5+δ ˆHt5+δ(n)δJ l
t5(n −1) +

1 −λt5+δ ˆHt5+δ(n)δ

[G + B −(N −n)k] · Qt5(n) + o(δ).
Plugging Qt5+δ(n) = λt5+δHt5+δ(n)δQt5(n −1) + (1 −λt5+δHt5+δ(n)δ)Qt5(n) + o(δ) into the
inequality above, rearranging, and taking the limit as δ →0, we have
[G + B −(N −n)k] ·

Ht5(n)Qt5(n −1) + ( ˆHt5(n) −Ht5(n))Qt5(n)

≤ˆHt5(n)J l
t5(n −1).
Because that S(t) = Jl
t(n−1)
Qt(n−1) −
h
1 −

1 −Ht(n)
ˆ
Ht(n)

1 −
Qt(n)
Qt(n−1)
i
dt(n) < 0 for any t, we have
ˆHt5(n)J l
t5(n −1) <
h
Ht5(n)Qt5(n −1) + ( ˆHt5(n) −Ht5(n))Qt5(n)
i
dt5(n).
Combining the preceding two inequalities, we have that dt5(n) =
At5(n)
Qt5(n) > G + B −(N −n)k,
which contradicts with t5 > τ l(n). Therefore, the creator’s optimal policy is to end the limited-time
oﬀer for any t > τ l(n), i.e., J l
t(n) = [G + B −(N −n)k]·Qt(n) for any t > τ l(n). We thus obtain the
announced results.
□
Proof of Corollary 3.
Denote
Wt(n;B,k) =
At(n)
G+B−(N−n)k.
We
prove
by
induction
that
Wt(n;B,k) increases in B and decreases in k. When n = 0, this statement is trivial as Wt(0;B,k) =
1. Now suppose it is true for n −1 and consider the case n:
∂Wt(n;B,k)
∂t
= λt ˆHt(n)

J l
t(n −1)
G + B −(N −n + 1)k
G + B −(N −n + 1)k
G + B −(N −n)k
−Wt(n;B,k)

,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962

17
with boundary condition W0(n;B,k) = 0 for any n > 0. Since J l
t(n −1) = max{At(n −1),[G + B −
(N −n + 1)k]Qt(n −1)},
Jl
t(n−1)
G+B−(N−n+1)k increases in B and decreases in k based on the induction
hypothesis for n −1. It is also obvious that
G+B−(N−n+1)k
G+B−(N−n)k
increases in B and decreases in k.
Therefore, the RHS of the equation above increases in B and decreases in k, which implies that
Wt(n;B,k) increases in B and decreases in k. We thus proved the statement for n.
Denote τ l(n;B,k) ≡τ l(n) to emphasize the dependence of τ l(n) on B and k. From Equa-
tion (A.5), we have τ l(n;B,k) = sup{t : Wt(n;B,k) ≥Qt(n)}. Consider any B1 > B2. For any
t ≤τ l(n;B2,k), we have Wt(n;B1,k) ≥Wt(n;B2,k) ≥Qt(n). Therefore, τ l(n;B1,k) ≥τ l(n;B2,k).
Similarly we can show that τ l(n;B,k) decreases in k. We thus obtain the announced result.
□
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925962