TITLE: Reducing Industrial Water Consumption: The Impact of Organizational Learning
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478231224929
---

Amrou Awaysheh* 
Kelley School of Business 
Indiana University 
Indianapolis, IN, USA 
Sriram Narayanan 
Broad College of Business 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing, MI, USA 
Brian Jacobs 
Graziadio Business School 
Pepperdine University 
Malibu, CA, USA 
* corresponding author awaysheh@iu.edu
Reducing Industrial Water Consumption: The Impact of Organizational 
Learning 
Abstract 
Using factory-level data from a large multinational manufacturer, we examine the effects of both 
organizational experience and knowledge transfer on an increasingly critical environmental performance 
measure, the consumption of water required for manufacturing. We estimate the direct effects on water 
consumption from in-factory cumulative production experience, and the vicarious learning from peer 
factories in the same product category. We consider vicarious learning from three potential sources: 
observation of peer factories’ cumulative production experience; and benchmarking of water consumption 
performance with the best and worst performing peer factories. For each learning channel, we test for the 
moderating effects of water scarcity and geographic proximity. We find that factories learn to reduce their 
water consumption from their own experience but at a greater rate in water scarce locations. Although we 
find that factories learn significantly from observing the cumulative production experience of peer factories, 
this effect does not hold in water scarce locations or across geographic regions. We document that learning 
effects from observing others’ experience are quite distinct from learning effects by benchmarking others’ 
performance. We find vicarious learning effects from benchmarking the best performing peer factories 
result in significant reductions in water consumption, and this effect is greater when the factory is in a water 
scarce location, and when benchmarking other regions rather than within the same region. Finally, we find 
less significant vicarious learning from observing the worst performing factories. 
Keywords: Water consumption; Water scarcity; Learning Curves; Experience Curves; Vicarious Learning; 
Sustainability 
1. Introduction
Industrial water consumption is an environmental and societal issue of increasingly critical importance but 
it has not been well-studied (McCall et al. 2021, Cole et al. 2023). Although historically not highly 
prioritized by many managers because of its availability and low cost, water is now often the source 
of 
_________________________________________________________________________
This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as:
Awaysheh, A., Narayanan, S., & Jacobs, B. W. (2024). Reducing Industrial Water Consumption: The Impact of Organizational Learning. Production and 
Operations Management, 33(1), 225–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478231224929

 
Page 2 of 32 
 
conflicts due to the competing needs between businesses and society for this finite resource. The growing 
challenge of global water conflicts and scarcity is highlighted by the decision of the UN General Assembly 
to launch the Water Action Decade 2018-2028 to focus on sustainable development and management of 
water resources (UN 2017). Goal 6.4 of the UN Sustainable Development Goal specifically advocates for 
increased water-use efficiency across all sectors (UN 2022). Reducing industrial water consumption has 
become a societal, and increasingly a corporate, priority. Despite this, the academic literature on reducing 
industrial water consumption is scarce, particularly from an operations management perspective. Since 
operations managers are responsible for the efficiency of process inputs, including water, this lack of 
attention in the literature is surprising. 
The key to reducing industrial water consumption is improvement in efficiency, using less water per 
unit of production. Given that organizational learning is a key means to improving efficiency (e.g., Yeung 
et al. 2007), it should enable reductions in water consumption. Further, learning results primarily from 
either experience (i.e., learning by doing) or from observation (i.e., learning from others) (Levitt and March 
1988). Accordingly, we consider the impact of both types of learning on improving water efficiency. 
Experiential learning accrues from the direct experience of the organization. Observational learning (a.k.a. 
vicarious learning) is a result of observation of others’ experience, behavior, or performance. 
In this paper, we use a panel data set from a large multinational manufacturer in the Consumer Packaged 
Goods (CPG) industry to examine the relationship between organizational learning and reductions in water 
consumption per unit of production at the factory level. This manufacturer (hereafter referred to as Large 
Manufacturing Company (LMC) to preserve their anonymity) owns and operates over 250 factories around 
the globe. The data set is ideal for our research purposes because all the factories share common monitoring 
equipment and reporting requirements, ensuring measurement equivalence across the sample. The factories 
also share the same corporate culture, mandates, hierarchy, and history, obviating the need to control for 
the effects of those potentially influential constructs. 
Although all manufacturing organizations gain experience from cumulative production, and they all 
have opportunities to observe the experience and performance of others, not all organizations effectively 
learn from those experiences and observations (Argote et al. 2021). If they did, all organizations would 
improve their water conservation performance commensurately, and there would be no need to focus on 
industrial water conservation. Further, organizational learning is not automatic and requires active 
management to translate experiences and observations into performance improvement (e.g., Lapré and 
Nembhard 2010). LMC actively pursues several industrial water conservation strategies including the 
deployment of an extensive water usage monitoring system at each factory, coupled with regular reporting, 
data sharing, and ranking across factories. We use this unique data set to consider whether LMC’s actions 
effectively leverage the factory’s experiential learning (their cumulative production experience) to improve 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 3 of 32 
 
its water efficiency. We also consider the factories’ vicarious learning by three observing the: (a) cumulative 
production experience of related factories; (b) water efficiency performance of the best performing (or 
benchmark) factories; and (c) water efficiency performance of the worst performing factories. 
For each of the aforementioned learning channels, we consider the potential moderating effects of water 
scarcity. Recent and future growth in demand, coupled with increasing supply variability due to climate 
change, are combining to increase the scarcity and value of water. It is estimated that at least one-quarter 
of the global population is subject to water scarcity (Hofste et al. 2019). At factories in water scarce 
locations, workers and managers might be more motivated to learn how to reduce water consumption. It is 
unclear whether such motivation effects apply equally to all learning channels. For vicarious learning, we 
also consider the potential moderating effects of geographic differences by examining the learning effects 
from related factories in the same geographic region, and from related factories in other geographic regions. 
Our work contributes to the extant literature in several ways. First, it is among the few operations 
management studies to focus on water as a critical process input for manufacturing, despite calls for work 
on emerging environmental issues (Plambeck and Toktay 2013; Van Wassenhove 2019). An exception is 
Muthulingam et al. (2022) who study the impact of water scarcity on the volume of toxic releases by 
manufacturing firms. Rothenberg et al. (2001) consider water consumption in their study of US and 
Japanese automakers, finding that lean firms use less water, and that water consumption is negatively 
correlated with its price. To our knowledge, this study is one of the few to focus on water conservation in 
manufacturing from the standpoint of organizational learning. In so doing, we hope to bring more research 
attention to water as an increasingly important measure of environmental performance. 
Second, by considering whether factories concurrently learn from multiple learning channels, we gain 
insights into organizational learning theory on the relative merits of experiential versus vicarious learning. 
To our knowledge, all of these learning channels have not been investigated collectively in a cohesive 
manner within a sustainability setting, or otherwise. By doing so, we can learn both the absolute and relative 
contributions of different learning channels on water efficiency improvement. We hope to provide 
managers and researchers with a better understanding of the important role that organizational learning 
plays in the conservation of this critical resource. From such awareness, managers might be able to devise 
more effective schemes for their firms to reduce water consumption. 
Third, we add to the vicarious learning literature by examining whether the learning effects from 
observing other’s experience is different from observing other’s performance. Specifically, we compare the 
effects of vicarious learning from observing other’s strong performance or success (i.e., learning what to 
do), versus learning from observing other’s poor performance or failure (i.e., learning what not to do). 
Fourth, we consider the important role of water scarcity as a moderator of both experiential and 
vicarious learning effects. As stated by Muthulingam et al. (2022, p. 2784): “…hardly any research explores 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 4 of 32 
 
whether resource scarcity affects manufacturing activity…” Our inclusion of water scarcity adds to the 
emerging research stream on effects of natural resource scarcity. We study water scarcity effects by 
comparing whether factories in water scarce locations learn at different rates than factories in non water 
scarce locations. Although one might expect increased learning rates in locations subject to scarcity, we 
find this is not always the case, highlighting the need for considering resource scarcity in learning. 
Last, we examine the potential moderating role of geographic differences on the vicarious learning 
from observing others. It is unsettled in the literature as to whether geographically proximate units learn 
better from each other than geographically distant units. We examine this by comparing whether factories 
learn from observing related factories within their geographic region, or from observing related factories in 
other regions. In examining the implications of geographic proximity across different types of vicarious 
learning, we provide additional empirical evidence for its role in organizational learning theory, and give 
managers insights into the effectiveness of location strategies and organizational communication. We now 
briefly develop our hypotheses. 
2. Literature Review and Hypothesis Development 
2.1 Experiential learning 
Learning by doing is the concept that organizations can realize performance improvement from increased 
direct experience. In manufacturing contexts, it is common in the literature to employ cumulative 
production to measure organizational experience. As factories produce more of the same product, the unit 
cost of production generally decreases at a decreasing rate. This pattern that relates cumulative production 
experience with unit production cost is known as a learning curve in the case of individuals and is sometimes 
known as an experience curve in the case of organizations. The literature on learning curves is extensive. 
See Argote (2012) and Argote et al. (2021) for a brief history of this research dating back to the 1930s, and 
Glock et al. (2019) for a review of this literature in the context of operations management. 
The mechanisms by which cumulative experience translates into improved performance are varied. As 
explained by Levitt and March (1988), most organizational learning from direct cumulative experience 
results from improvement in skills. Argote (2012) expands that to describe three main causes that lead to 
such improvements: 1) increases in the efficiency of individual employees; 2) advancement in 
organizational structures and routines; and 3) modifications in technology. These can be due to specific 
factors, including enhanced proficiency of labor, management, and engineering; improvements in material 
flows; specialization and a better division of labor; streamlined layouts; etc. (Epple et al. 1991). 
Researchers have empirically studied the relationship between cumulative experience and other 
operational outcomes across several domains including software development productivity (Boh et al. 2007, 
Narayanan et al. 2009), banking (Staats and Gino 2012), customer dissatisfaction (Lapré and Tsikriktis 
2006), quality performance (Lapré et al. 2000), and healthcare (e.g., Pisano et al. 2001, KC and Staats 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 5 of 32 
 
2012). All of these studies find that organizations can acquire knowledge from direct experience and 
employ that knowledge to improve their operational performance. Within operations management, Glock 
et al. (2019) find the most common applications of learning curves are for machine scheduling. They note 
that studies of learning curves in sustainable operations are largely missing from the literature. 
One study that applies experience curves with environmental performance as the outcome is by Chen 
and Chang (2010). In this paper, the authors study organizational learning within the Taiwan EPA in regard 
to reduction of municipal solid waste using 11 annual data points. We build upon this work by applying 
experience curves to a much larger data set with an alternate measure of environmental performance, the 
reduction of industrial water consumption. It is important to study experiential learning within this realm 
for the following theoretical reasons. 
Prior studies suggest that experiential learning is not automatic. Argote et al. (2021) explain that if 
learning curves were automatic, the performance of both poor performing units and good performing units 
would converge as they gain experience. Instead, learning rates vary widely across organizations (Lapré 
and Nembhard 2010). Active management is needed to enable the organization to learn from its experience. 
Such actions can include: hiring and retaining appropriate personnel; providing proper incentives; 
advocating employee empowerment; improving access to expert resources; conducting on-the-job and/or 
formal training; developing and updating standard operating procedures; acquiring better equipment; etc. 
Conversely, managers can also impede learning with their actions/inactions. Lapré et al. (2000) identify 
issues such as dynamic complexity, ambiguity, misperceptions, and poor reasoning that can disrupt 
learning. Accordingly, this study examines experiential learning in the context of factory water 
consumption to determine whether management actions are sufficient to enable such learning. 
Overall, combining the link between learning and improvement in environmental performance in the 
literature, and the accepted role of direct cumulative experience in learning, we expect that learning curves 
are good descriptors of the relationship between cumulative experience and environmental performance, 
assuming that management actions are sufficient to enable learning. Therefore, we posit: 
H1a. Learning from increased cumulative production experience will result in decreased factory water 
consumption. 
2.1.1 The role of water scarcity in experiential learning 
Recent and projected future growth in demand due to increasing population and industrialization, coupled 
with increasing supply variability due to climate change, are combining to increase both the value and 
scarcity of water. Cole et al. (2023) provide a literature review of the operational and contextual risks that 
water scarcity is imposing on businesses. 
Of course, scarcity is not a condition unique to water or more generally, natural resources. Instead, it 
can occur in any input or commodity whenever resources are low relative to needs (Shah et al. 2015). Since 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 6 of 32 
 
environmental performance measures are mostly outputs (e.g., greenhouse gases, toxic emissions), they are 
typically not subject to scarcity. However, water is an input subject to scarcity, making it somewhat unique 
amongst environmental performance measures. Shah et al. (2012) note that scarcity captures the attention 
of those affected, creating a “scarcity mindset” where people focus on meeting their short-term needs 
relative to the scarcity, sometimes even at the expense of longer-term issues. When faced with scarcity, 
individuals tend to focus internally and discount external information (Shah et al. 2015). 
Scarcity has been considered in the context of natural resources required for manufacturing (e.g., Bell 
et al. 2012, Kalaitzi et al. 2018) but little research has been done in the context of water scarcity in 
manufacturing. An exception is Muthulingam et al. (2022) who study the relationship between water 
scarcity and toxic emissions in Texas factories. They find that many factories undertake technical and input 
modifications to their manufacturing processes when faced with water scarcity. They also find that only 
those factories most exposed to drought conditions are likely to reduce their toxic emissions to water. 
Thus, it is likely that when factories are located in water scarce locations, the scarcity captures their 
attention and focuses their efforts on water conservation. Since scarcity often leads to an internal focus, it 
is to be expected that factories will focus more on their internal operations and cumulative experience, 
enhancing the learning effects of cumulative experience. Therefore, we posit: 
H1b. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from increased cumulative production 
experience is moderated by water scarcity at the factory location. 
2.2 Vicarious learning from others’ experience 
Beyond direct learning from production, we consider vicarious learning. It is important for experiential and 
vicarious learning to be examined together as Bresman (2010) finds that learning from the experience of 
others is only effective for those who can first learn from their own experience. Vicarious learning is akin 
to absorptive capacity, the ability to recognize, evaluate, assimilate, apply, and exploit external information 
(Cohen and Levinthal 1990). The two underlying principles of absorptive capacity are that learning is 
cumulative, and learning is enhanced if the topic is related to what is already known. 
In discussing vicarious learning, Argote (2012) notes that organizations not only learn from their own 
direct experience, but also learn from the experience of others. The mechanisms for transferring knowledge 
between organizational units include training, communications, information and document sharing, and 
personnel transfers. Similarities in people, technology, and structure enhance the effectiveness of such 
knowledge transfers. Those similarities are likely greater between units of the same parent organization. 
This aligns with the arguments of Tushman (1977) that the boundaries separating the subdivisions within a 
single organization are fewer than those between independent organizations, facilitating knowledge 
transfer. As evidence, Darr et al. (1995) find that units learn from the cumulative experience of other units 
owned by the same entity but not from the cumulative experience of related units owned by others. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 7 of 32 
 
Beyond similarities in people, technology, and structure, salience of outcomes is an important factor 
for knowledge transfer. In their study of inter-organizational imitation, Haunschild and Miner (1997) argue 
that outcome salience will increase imitation of outcomes. Similarly, Boh et al. (2007) find that experience 
in related systems results in significant learning gains, whereas experience in unrelated systems has no 
significant effect. Schilling et al. (2003) also find that learning from related tasks is highly beneficial 
compared to learning from unrelated tasks. These effects are likely stronger in an organizational context. 
More specifically, in a manufacturing context, the most salient outcomes to factories should be those of 
other factories producing similar products by employing similar processes. 
Transferring knowledge from one group to another is not easy or automatic and can be difficult, even 
within an organization. Such difficulty in transferring information is labeled as “stickiness” by Von Hippel 
(1994). It can be exacerbated by: the lack of absorptive capacity in the recipient of the knowledge; causal 
ambiguity in the success of the practice to be imitated; and a distant relationship between the sender and 
receiver of the knowledge (Szulanski 1996). We expect those exacerbating factors should be minimal for 
similar units within the same organization. In the context of LMC, corporate management promotes cross-
factory learning by hosting periodic cross-factory meetings, and encouraging cross-factory peer visits. In 
addition to common corporate resources, many LMC factories share common suppliers and consultants. 
Overall, extant literature supports that learning from the experience of others is enhanced by the 
relatedness of the tasks to be learned, and shared corporate relationships. Therefore, we posit: 
H2a. Learning from observing the cumulative production experience of factory peers will result in 
decreased factory water consumption. 
2.2.1 The role of water scarcity in vicarious learning 
As noted in section 2.2, Bresman (2010) finds that experiential learning enables vicarious learning. Drawing 
from our prior argument that factories in water scarce locations learn more from their cumulative experience 
than factories in non water scarce locations, it is also likely that these same factories can also learn more 
vicariously from other factories. This is consistent with the principles of absorptive capacity which posits 
that firms with greater absorptive capacity better leverage external knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal 1990). 
It is also likely that external vicarious learning helps teams improve their routines (Bresman 2013). 
These routines are more likely to be institutionalized since factories in water scarce locations are likely not 
able to change the nature of their water availability. Accordingly, when these factories learn from other 
counterparts, they may also deploy this knowledge better through routinization. Therefore, we hypothesize: 
H2b. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the cumulative production 
experience of factory peers is moderated by water scarcity at the factory location. 
2.2.2 The role of geographic proximity in vicarious learning 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 8 of 32 
 
A factor potentially moderating the effectiveness of vicarious learning is the geographic proximity of other 
facilities. As Darr et al. (1995) note, geographically proximate units are more likely to have personal ties 
and more frequent meetings, relative to units that are geographically distant. Staats (2012) demonstrates 
that team familiarity gained by working in the same location is more impactful than that gained by team 
collaborating in different locations. Myles-Shaver and Flyer (2000) explain that geographically proximate 
firms can benefit from the positive externalities that come from clustering of like firms. These include easier 
access to technology, training, human capital, and common suppliers. Cluster theorists posit that knowledge 
sharing is enhanced by both formal and informal mechanisms that are more commonly found amongst firms 
that are geographically close (Enright 1995). Myles-Shaver and Flyer (2000) also note that in competitive 
situations, quicker knowledge transfer can potentially disadvantage leading firms by enabling the 
improvement of follower firms. Conversely, if the goal is to speed up the dissemination of knowledge, as 
it would be for units in a superordinate relationship, geographic proximity should aid in that effort. 
Edmonson et al. (2003) finds that if knowledge is tacit, interpersonal interatctions are necessary for 
knowledge transfer, and these are more common when learners are geographically proximate. 
However, other researchers suggest that the role of geographic proximity might be overstated. As 
Malmberg (1997) explains, globalization is eroding the advantages of previously localized factors of 
production. Lublinski (2003) considers whether physical distance is still relevant in today’s globalized 
world where knowledge can travel quickly and freely. In studing German aerospace firms, he finds that the 
advantages of proximity on knowledge transfer are weak at best. Similarly, Ganesan et al. (2005) find that 
inter-firm new product development activity is more a function of relational ties than shared geographic 
location. Darr and Kurtzberg (2000) find that similarity of strategy is more significant to knowledge transfer 
than similarity in location. However, Cramton (2001) finds that the completeness and accuracy of 
knowledge transfer is hampered by distance despite the availability of electronic communications. 
Although the balance of the literature seems to predict a negative effect of geographic separation on 
knowledge transfer, the results remains unsettled. Thus, to consider whether geographic proximity 
significantly affects the knowledge transfer between units, we posit: 
H2c. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the cumulative production 
experience of factory peers is moderated by their geographic proximity. 
2.3 Vicarious learning from best performers 
Haunschild and Miner (1997) explain that a major form of interorganizational imitation is outcome-based; 
i.e., organizations imitate practices of other organizations that appear to have good outcomes. As Levitt and 
March (1988) and Huber (1991) explain, vicarious learning (learning from others) follows the framework 
of institutional theory (DiMaggio and Powell 1983) with coercive, mimetic, and normative pressures to 
learn. For a given organizational unit, coercion to learn from others might stem from upper management 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 9 of 32 
 
expectations to adopt best practices from peer units either within or outside the corporate organization. 
Mimetic pressure to learn from others could result from the unit leadership’s observation of other units 
successfully achieving goals. When leaders discover that their organization has inferior performance 
relative to peer organizations, they are motivated to seek out the higher-performing organizations and adopt 
their best practices. Mimicking the practices of more successful units is a common method to improve one’s 
own performance. Normative pressures, which are driven by professional standards or networks, might 
result from industry or corporate gatherings where best practices are observed. 
Availability of information regarding others’ good outcomes has been shown to improve self-
performance. Netessine and Yakubovich (2012) provide three conditions for performance information to 
be effective for learning; it must: 1) provide specific information on productivity levels; 2) identify top 
performers who in turn share their best practices; and 3) account for fluctuations over time by reporting at 
regular frequencies. Song et al. (2018) find that public disclosure of other workers’ performance helps to 
boost the productivity of individual coworkers. The mechanism they propose is that public disclosure of 
performance permits others to observe and identify the top-performing worker, enabling the identification, 
validation, and adoption of their best practices. Further, they find that productivity improvement is not 
instantaneous since it takes time to adapt and modify established work routines. Lount and Wilk (2014) 
find that performance disclosure can also result in improved group-level performance. 
In the sustainable operations literature, Mani and Muthulingam (2019) argue that organizational units 
can improve their environmental performance by observing the success of others’ environmental inspection 
performance, both inter-firm and intra-firm. They define success as confirmation from inspectors that the 
organizational unit is complying with environmental regulations. 
The literature suggests that organizations can learn from observing the performance of others, 
particularly from successful performance. As with learning from observing the experience of others (see 
discussion for H2a above), learning from observing the performance of others should be enhanced by task 
similarity, common corporate structures, and outcome salience, all of which are common among factory 
peers. To determine whether water scarcity and the proximity of geographic location between factories 
moderates learning from others’ superior performance, we offer the following set of hypotheses: 
H3a. Learning from observing the difference in water consumption between a factory and its best-
performing factory peer will result in decreased factory water consumption. 
H3b. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the difference in water 
consumption between a factory and its best-performing factory peer is moderated by water scarcity 
at the factory location. 
H3b. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the difference in water 
consumption between a factory and its best-performing factory peer is moderated by geographic 
proximity. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 10 of 32 
 
2.4 Vicarious learning from worst performers 
The learning from others’ performance that we have discussed thus far is based on imitating the best 
performing factory peer, or success of others; i.e., learning what to do. But the literature suggests it might 
be as valuable, or perhaps even more so, to learn from others’ inferior performance or failures; i.e., learning 
what not to do (Argote et al. 2021). Bresman (2013) refers to such as learning as “imitation by not doing.” 
Denrell (2003) explains that relying solely on observing others’ successes creates sampling bias toward 
risky practices. Risky practices tend to pay off with either success or failure. If failures are not sampled, the 
observer’s conclusion might be that the risky practices are related only to success. Thus, Denrell (2003) 
advocates that observing poor outcomes or failures, in addition to success, will reduce sampling bias. 
Madsen and Desai (2010) suggest that vicarious learning from observing others’ failures or poor 
performance might be more influential than learning from observing others’ success or superior 
performance. They argue that this is because many organizations have similar knowledge bases; others’ 
successes thus might confirm the adequacy of the observer’s similar knowledge base while others’ failures 
could raise questions about it. They also suggest that information about failures might be more accessible 
and less guarded than information about successes, particularly for competing firms. 
In a study that provides support for the arguments of Madsen and Desai (2010), Mani and Muthulingam 
(2019) estimate the learning effects on unconventional natural gas well operators that result from 
observation of other nearby well operators with environmental inspections by regulators. Processes across 
well operators are almost identical, and the salience of outcomes (fines for environmental violations) is 
high. They find that well operators do not learn from successful inspections, but only from failed inspections 
with detected violations. Further, learning is greater when inspection violations are more severe, resulting 
in fines and penalties. This suggests that learning from observing poor performers can be more impactful 
than learning from observing best performers. 
Another factor that could motivate learning from observation of poor performance is the phenomenon 
of “last-place aversion” (Kuziemko et al. 2014). The authors posit that ordinal rank matters differently 
depending on position; for those near the lowest rank, any potential drops create greater disutility and hence 
greater incentive to avoid a drop in rank. 
To examine whether water scarcity and the proximity of geographic location between factories also 
enhances learning from others’ inferior performance, we offer the following set of hypotheses: 
H4a. Learning from observing the difference in water consumption between a factory and its worst-
performing factory peer will result in decreased factory water consumption. 
H4b. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the difference in water 
consumption between a factory and its worst-performing factory peer is moderated by water 
scarcity at the factory location. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 11 of 32 
 
H4c. The effect of learning on factory water consumption from observing the difference in water 
consumption between a factory and its worst-performing factory peer is moderated by geographic 
proximity. 
3. Sample and Methodology 
3.1 Sample 
Our sample comprises monthly water usage data for the factories of a large manufacturing Fortune 500 
company (LMC). LMC has over 250 manufacturing facilities globally. LMC is in the CPG industry; its 
products are sold worldwide in various retail outlets. LMC’s sustainability performance is good; LMC 
senior managers spend significant time discussing and emphasizing the importance of sustainability. 
Corporate managers enacted policies to enhance the firm’s performance in sustainability generally as well 
as industrial water conservation. Within LMC’s organizational structure, a factory manager is responsible 
for managing their respective factory site and they report to supervisors in both their geographic region and 
their specific product category. Consistent with corporate priorities, factory managers are expected to focus 
not only on understanding their factory’s manufacturing performance but also its environmental 
performance, and improving it. 
Our measure of water consumption is generated at the factory site level and indicates the total water 
consumed on-site. Factory personnel record the metrics and send them monthly to corporate headquarters, 
where they are stored in a database. A corporate headquarters team is responsible for checking the data, 
managing the database, and compiling performance reports. The headquarters team performs spot checks 
to ensure data integrity since the database information generates the firm’s balanced scorecard and 
sustainability reporting. Finally, external auditors examine the database and check it against factory records, 
bills, and receipts as part of the audit. 
Monthly reports are generated from the database and are available to corporate and factory 
management; these reports compare performance across sites. From the reports, each factory can understand 
its own performance as well as how that performance compares to other factories. 
LMC employs a matrixed managerial structure to organize the factories baed on product category and 
geographic region. Product categories consist of 12 groupings of products that are similar in both product 
characteristics and processing requirements. All factories within a product category, regardless of region, 
report primarily to a globally responsible manager. Geographic regions comprise eight areas; all factories 
within the region also report to a manager responsible for all product categories in a specific region. Thus, 
in LMC’s matrixed structure, factory managers report to both a category manager and a regional manager. 
As explained in the development of our hypotheses (see section 2.2), vicarious learning should be strongest 
between factories producing similar products using similar processes, as would be expected by factories in 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 12 of 32 
 
the same product category. Thus, the management structure of LMC enables vicarious learning within 
product categories both in the same region and across regions. 
The available monthly data begins with the commencement of the LMC corporate water-monitoring 
program; the data covers nine years (108 months). For our main analyses, we impose an inclusion criterion 
that factories must be in operation for at least one year, i.e.; we exclude factories in operation for a short 
period. This reduces our sample by 12 factories and a total of 120 factory-month observations. Since 
factories can experience periodic shutdowns for maintenance and/or changeovers, we also carefully check 
the data for any factory shutdowns and drop data in months where production was minuscule or zero in the 
months of a shutdown or close to a shutdown. Next, the data was further constrained to retain only product 
category-region combinations with at least three factories within a product category and region. This 
enables comparison of a factory in a region and specific category with at least two other factories in the 
same region and category. Finally, we perform alternate data exclusion schemes as robustness checks to 
check the sensitivity of our results. Robustness checks are described in section 4.2. 
The final data set contains 20,066 factory-month observations, and 43 product category-region 
combinations that have at least three factories. Although there are 96 potential category-region 
combinations (12x8), not every region contains every product category type. There are 248 unique factories 
within the 43 category-region combinations. The mean (median) number of factories in a specific product 
category-region combination is 6.1 (5.0), with 14 factories in the largest combination and three factories in 
the smallest combination. For the 12 product categories in our sample, the mean (median) number of 
factories is 21.4 (20.5) with 49 factories in the largest product category and three factories in the smallest 
product category. The average factory has 5.1 peers within its region, and 15.3 peers in other regions. 
3.2 Variables 
Given that learning curves are an exponential relationship between cumulative experience and the variable 
of interest, we log both the dependent and independent variables to permit linear regression (as in Boh et 
al. 2007 and Lapré et al. 2000). This permits us to decompose the learning coefficient into components 
representing the experiential and vicarious learning processes . All cumulative measures begin at t=0, the 
first month in our sample, when LMC’s water monitoring and reporting commenced. To test our 
hypotheses, we define our dependent, independent, and control variables as follows: 
3.2.1 Dependent variable 
We operationalize the dependent variable Water Consumption (Ln(𝑌)𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡+1 ) as the natural log of Y, the 
total cubic meters of water consumption per metric ton of production, for focal factory i, in region r, product 
category k, at monthly time period t+1. 
3.2.2 Independent variables 
To test H1a, we define our measure of cumulative production at the focal factory as: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 13 of 32 
 
Cumulative Production Focal Factory (Ln 𝐶𝑃_𝑂𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡): the natural log of the running cumulative total 
production (in metric tons) for focal factory i, in region r, product category k, and month t. 
H1b, H2b, H3b, and H4b consider the moderating effects of water scarcity on the focal factories’ 
learning. To test the effects of water scarcity, we obtain factory classification data from LMC. LMC 
designates each factory site as either water scarce or non water scarce based upon World Resources Institute 
(WRI) assessments for the watersheds where each LMC factory is located (https://www.wri.org/aqueduct). 
Since scarcity is time-invariant, we conduct our analyses by creating a variable labeled as: 
Scarcityi: a 0/1 dummy variable designating whether factory i is located in a water scarce watershed with 
the value 1, and 0 otherwise. To test our hypotheses, we interact Scarcity with each learning channel. 
H2a considers the vicarious learning effects from observing factory peers’ experience. To test this, we 
define the independent variable: 
Cumulative Production All Others (Ln CPki’t): the natural log of the running cumulative total production 
(in metric tons) of all factories in the focal category k other than focal factory i, in month t. 
H2c considers whether geographic proximity moderates the vicarious learning effects from observing 
others’ experience. We operationalize geographic proximity in a dichotomous manner – whether peer 
factories are located within the same geographic region or in other geographic regions. We do this to mimic 
the organizational structure of LMC. Specifically, if we find that same-region effects have a different impact 
than other-regions effects, it informs regional and corporate managers where to increase or decrease 
management efforts and initiatives within regions and/or across regions. To test for the moderating effects 
of geographic proximity, we define two measures to divide others’ cumulative experience by region: 
Cumulative Production Within Region (Ln 𝐶𝑃_𝑆𝑅𝑟𝑘𝑖′𝑡): the natural log of the cumulative total production 
(in metric tons) of factories in focal region r, the focal product category k, for all factories other than focal 
factory i, in month t. 
Cumulative Production Other Regions (Ln 𝐶𝑃_𝐷𝑅𝑟′𝑘𝑡): the natural log of the cumulative total production 
(in metric tons) of factories in regions other than focal region r, focal product category k, in month t. 
We note that if we were to sum the above three independent variables (CP_Orkit, CP_SRrki’t, and 
CP_DRr’kt), the result would be the total global cumulative production for LMC in product category k and 
month t. We also note that we only consider vicarious learning from factories in the same product category 
k (both within the same region and in other regions) since we expect vicarious learning to be strongest 
between factories producing similar products with similar processes since they are comparable. 
To test H3a, H3b, and H3c regarding learning effects from observation of the best performing factory 
peers, we measure the difference in performance between the focal factory i at month t and its best 
performing peer in the immediately preceding month t-1. For robustness, we later consider longer preceding 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 14 of 32 
 
periods (see section 4.2). H3a considers the vicarious learning effects from observing the focal factory’s 
best performing factory peer. To test this, we define the independent variable: 
Benchmark Deviation (Best) All Others (Ln DEV_Bestkit): the natural log of the performance deviation of 
the focal factory i at month t from the best performing factory in all regions in the same product category 
k, and month t-1. 
DEV_Bestkit = Ykit – min{Yki’t-1} 
where DEV_Bestkit = 0 if focal factory i is the best performer in its product category k 
To test H3c, we again capture the effects both within region and in other geographic regions. We define 
the following two measures: 
Benchmark Deviation (Best) Within Region (Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡_𝑆𝑅𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡): the natural log of the performance 
deviation of the focal factory i at month t from the best performing factory in the same region r, product 
category k, and month t-1. The variable is operationalized as: 
DEV_Best_SRrkit = Yrkit – min{Yrki’t-1} 
where DEV_Best_SRrkit = 0 if focal factory i is the best performer in its region r 
Benchmark Deviation (Best) Other Regions (Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡_𝐷𝑅𝑟′𝑘𝑡): the natural log of the performance 
deviation of the focal factory i at month t from the best performing factory in regions other than r, product 
category k, and month t-1. The variable is operationalized as: 
DEV_Best_DRr’kit = Yrkit – min{Yr’kt-1} 
where DEV_Best_DRr’kit = 0 if focal factory i is the best performer in regions other than r 
As defined, if focal factory i is outperforming its best performing peer, the value of these variables will 
be zero, indicating the focal factory has little to learn from observing the best performing peers. That is not 
to say that best performers cannot learn from other sources including experiential learning from their own 
performance, vicarious learning from observing others’ experience or observing poor performers, or from 
external knowledge sources. A greater value for these three variables indicates worse performance for the 
focal factory relative to the best performing benchmark, and consequently greater learning opportunities 
from observing the best performers. 
H4a, H4b, and H4c consider the learning effects from observation of the focal factory’s worst 
performing peers. To test this, we measure the difference in performance between the focal factory at month 
t and its worst performing peer in the immediately preceding month t-1. H4a considers the vicarious 
learning effects from observing the focal factory’s worst performing factory peer. To test this, we define 
the independent variable: 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) All Others (Ln DEV_Worstkit): the natural log of the performance deviation 
of the focal factory i at month t from the worst performing factory in all regions in the same product category 
k, and month t-1. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 15 of 32 
 
DEV_Worstkit = max{Yki’t-1} – Ykit 
where DEV_Worstkit = 0 if focal factory i is the worst performer in its product category k 
To capture the effects both within and across geographic regions (H4c), we again define two measures, 
similar to the measures comparing focal factories to the best performers: 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Within Region (Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑆𝑅𝑟𝑘𝑖′𝑡): the natural log of the performance 
deviation of the focal factory i at month t from the worst performing factory in the same region r, product 
category k, and month t-1. The variable is operationalized as: 
DEV_Worst_SRrkit = max{Yrki’t-1} – Yrkit 
where DEV_Worst_SRrkit = 0 if focal factory i is the worst performer in its region r 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Other Regions (Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝐷𝑅𝑟′𝑘𝑡): the natural log of the performance 
deviation of the focal factory i at month t from the worst performing factory in regions other than r, product 
category k, and month t-1. The variable is operationalized as: 
DEV_Worst_DRr’kit = Yrkit – min{Yr’kt-1} 
where DEV_Worst_DRr’kit = 0 if focal factory i is the worst performer in regions other than r 
As defined, if focal factory i is underperforming its worst performing peer, the value of these variables 
will be zero, indicating the focal factory has little to learn from observing other poor performers. A small 
positive value indicates near-worst performance, providing greater incentive to improve due to last-place 
aversion. Greater positive values for these two variables indicates better performance relative to the worst 
performing benchmark, and consequently less learning from poor performing peers. 
3.2.3 Control variables 
Since vicarious learning from others can be a function of how many other factories there are to observe, we 
add controls for the number of factories other than focal factory i. 
Number of Other Factories Within Region (𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠_𝑆𝑅𝑟𝑘𝑖′𝑡): the number of factories in region r, product 
category k, other than focal factory i, and month t. 
Number of Factories Other Regions (𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠_𝐷𝑅𝑟′𝑘𝑡): the number of factories in regions other than r, 
product category k, and month t. 
Given that the magnitudes of reduction in water consumption are likely related to how much water the 
focal factory consumes (i.e., the largest water users can reduce their consumption the most), we control for 
each factory’s cumulative water consumption. 
Cumulative Water Consumption Focal Factory (Ln 𝐶𝑊_𝑂𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡): the natural log of the running cumulative 
total water consumption (in cubic meters) for factory i in region r, product category k, and month t. 
Similarly, the magnitude of a factory’s wastewater discharges is potentially related to the water 
consumption of the focal factory. Hence, we control for each factory’s wastewater discharges: 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 16 of 32 
 
Wastewater Focal Factory (CODrkit): the total wastewater discharge (in cubic meters) for factory i in region 
r, product category k, and month t. 
As mentioned in our development of H1a (section 2.1), deployment of lean philosophy should aid 
factories in their industrial water conservation efforts. Hussain and Wahab (2018) discuss the important ties 
between lean manufacturing and water efficiency. LMC instituted a voluntary lean development initiative 
during our sample frame. About 21% of our sample factories participated, and the average participating 
factory had 13.4 months of experience. To control for lean influences, we define: 
Lean Experience (Leanrkit): the number of months since beginning the voluntary lean development program 
for factory i in region r, product category k, and month t. Leanrkit = 0 for factories that either did not 
participate or had not yet begun participation at month t. 
To control for temporal effects and to help mitigate against omitted variables, we add dummy variables 
for both the year of factory production, and the month of factory production. In addition, we estimate a 
factory fixed effects model to account for factory-specific time invariant factors. 
 3.3 Empirical strategy 
Our data contains both cross-sectional and time series elements. Accordingly, we use a panel regression 
approach that accounts for both cross-sectional and time series data. Since factory production is known to 
be serially correlated, we use a fixed-effects estimator to account for factory-specific aspects, the 
XTREGAR command in STATA 15. This approach is necessitated by the long production time series for 
several factories in the data. Specifically, out of the 248 unique factories, 179 factories have 100 or more 
months of data. The fixed-effects estimator approach can accommodate the unbalanced nature of panel data 
(Baltagi and Wu 1999). Our empirical specification is of the following form: 
Ln(𝑌)rk𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛼0 + 𝛽2Ln 𝐶𝑃_𝑂𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽3Ln 𝐶𝑃𝑘𝑖′𝑡
+ 𝛽4 Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑘𝑖′𝑡+ 𝛽5Ln 𝐷𝐸𝑉_𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑘𝑖′𝑡+ 𝛽6𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠_𝑆𝑅𝑟𝑘𝑖′𝑡
+ 𝛽7𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠_𝐷𝑅𝑟′𝑘𝑡+ 𝛽8Ln 𝐶𝑊_𝑂𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽9𝐶𝑂𝐷𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽10𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑡+ 𝜶𝒊+ 𝝀𝒕
+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (1) 
Further, the disturbance term is modeled as first order auto-correlated: 
𝜀𝑖𝑡= 𝜌𝜀𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝜃𝑖𝑡 (2) 
Our modeling of a first order serial correlation in the data is consistent with traditional studies on production 
planning that typically assume similar first order auto-correlation (e.g., Klenow 1998). 
Consistent with our variable notation, the subscript i in (1) and (2) represents the focal factory and the 
subscript t denotes the time period. 𝜶𝒊 is the vector of fixed effects corresponding to factories. Finally, 𝝀𝒕 
are time specific fixed effects for both year and month of production. 
4. Results 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 17 of 32 
 
Table 1 provides the correlation matrix and descriptive statistics for our variables. As mentioned, we have 
an unbalanced panel with up to 20,066 factory-month observations. The average factory has 81 monthly 
observations. We next present our main results, followed by our robustness checks. 
4.1 Main results 
Table 2 provides the results of the regression analyses for four different models. Model 2.1 includes the 
control variables only. Model 2.2 adds the independent variables Cumulative Production Focal Factory, 
Cumulative Production All Others, Benchmark Deviation (Best) All Others, and Benchmark Deviation 
(Worst) All Others as tests of H1a, H2a, H3a, and H4a, respectively. In model 2.3, we add the interactions 
of Scarcity with each of our independent variables to test H1b, H2b, H3b, and H4b. The main effect of 
Scarcity cannot be included in our regressions since it is perfectly collinear with time-invariant factory fixed 
effects. In model 2.4, we substitute the Within Region and Other Regions measures in lieu of the three All 
Others measures to test the moderation hypotheses of geographic proxximity (H2c, H3c, and H4c). 
We first consider the main effect of each learning channel by examining the results of model 2.2. Our 
first hypothesis (H1a) states that increased cumulative productive experience for the focal factory should 
result in reduced water consumption. As seen in models 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4, the coefficient of Cumulative 
Production Focal Factory is consistently negative and significant. For model 2.2, β = −0.166 (p<0.01). 
This provides strong support for H1a, affirming that water consumption is subject to experiential learning 
effects as a consequence of LMC’s management actions. 
In H2a, we posit that vicarious learning from the observation of increased cumulative production of 
other factories in the same product category will result in reduced focal factory water consumption. For all 
factory peers, we see in model 2.2 that the coefficient of Cumulative Production All Others is negative and 
significant (β = −0.036; p<0.05), providing support for H2a. 
H3a argues that vicarious learning from observing differences in water consumption between a factory 
and its best performing factory peer will result in reduced water consumption for the focal factory. For all 
factory peers, we see in model 2.2 that the coefficient of Benchmark Deviation (Best) All Others is negative 
and significant (β = −0.171; p<0.01), providing support for H3a. 
H4a predicts that vicarious learning from the differences in water consumption between a factory and 
its worst performing factory peer will reduce factory water consumption. We note that, unlike our other 
independent variables, an increasing value for the three Benchmark Deviation (Worst) variables indicates 
less opportunity for learning. Thus, positive coefficients indicate less learning for better performers (greater 
values of Benchmark Deviation (Worst)), and greater learning for worse performers (lesser values of 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)). We see in model 2.2 that the coefficient of Benchmark Deviation (Worst) 
All Others is positive and significant (β = 0.006; p<0.05), providing support for H4a. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 18 of 32 
 
Next, we consider the moderating effects of water scarcity on our results by examining the results of 
model 2.3 in Table 2. For the moderating effect of water scarcity on experiential learning (H1b), we see 
that the main effect of Cumulative Production Focal Factory remains significantly negative and the 
interaction coefficient is also negative and significant (β = −0.114; p<0.05), indicating that although the 
average LMC factory learns from its experience (supporting H1a), factories in water scarce locations learn 
from their experience at a faster rate than factories in non water scarce locations. This empirical evidence 
of a significant moderating effect supports H1b. 
Examining the moderating effect of water scarcity on vicarious learning from observing others’ 
experience (H2b), the main effect of Cumulative Production All Others in model 2.3 remains significantly 
negative but the interaction coefficient is positive and significant (β = 0.065; p<0.05). Although the 
moderation is significant, it is in an unexpected direction, suggesting that factories in water scarce locations 
learn from observing others’ experience at a slower rate than factories in non water scarce locations. 
H3b posits that water scarcity moderates the vicarious learning from observing differences in water 
consumption between a factory and its best performing factory peer. We see in model 2.3 that the main 
effect of Benchmark Deviation (Best) All Others remains significantly negative, and the interaction 
coefficient is also significantly negative (β = −0.060; p<0.01), indicating that factories in water scarce 
locations learn from observing others’ best performance at a faster rate than factories in non water scarce 
locations. This provides support for H3b. 
For the moderating effect of water scarcity on vicarious learning from observing differences in water 
consumption between a factory and its worst performing peer (H4b), model 2.3 results show that although 
the main effect of Benchmark Deviation (Worst) All Others remains significant and positive, the interaction 
coefficient is insignificant. The empirical evidence fails to support H4b. 
Last, we consider the moderating effects of geographic proximity (H2c, H3c, and H4c). For learning 
from observing the experience of factory peers in the same region, we see in model 2.4 that the coefficient 
of Cumulative Production Within Region is negative and significant (β = −0.096; p<0.01). For factory peers 
in other regions, we do not see a significant effect for Cumulative Production Other Regions in model 2.3. 
We also conduct a Wald test to examine the difference in coefficients between Within Region and Other 
Regions. Results suggest a significant difference across these coefficients (F = 3.920; p <0.05), confirming 
that focal factories learn from observing the experience of similar peers within region but not in other 
regions. This provides support for H2c, affirming that geographic proximity moderates the vicarious 
learning effects from observing others’ experience on the focal factory’s water consumption, and that the 
learning rate is faster when observing others’ experience within the same region. 
 For Benchmark Deviation (Best) Within Region, we see in model 2.4 that for factory peers in the same 
region, the coefficient is significantly negative (β = −0.058; p<0.01). The negative coefficient is interpreted 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 19 of 32 
 
as decreasing water consumption in the increasing gap between the focal factory and its best performing 
factory peer in the same region. For best performing factory peers in other regions, we also see a 
significantly negative coefficient for Benchmark Deviation (Best) Other Regions in model 2.4 (β = −0.104; 
p<0.01). We conduct a Wald test to examine whether Benchmark Deviation (Best) Within Region is 
significantly different from Benchmark Deviation (Best) Other Regions. The coefficients are significantly 
different (F = 5.080; p<0.05), suggesting that factories improve significantly more when benchmarking 
against factories in other regions rather than benchmarking within region. Although both the Within Region 
and Other Regions coefficients are significantly negative, the significant difference in their magnitudes 
provides evidence of moderation by geographic region, supporting H3b. 
Considering Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Within Region in model 2.4, the coefficient for factory peers 
within the same region is significantly positive (β = 0.006, p<0.05). The results are similar for factory peers 
in other regions; the coefficient for Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Other Regions in model 2.4 is also 
significantly positive (β = 0.005, p<0.10). A Wald test of the difference between the coefficients is 
insignificant (F = 0.040, p>0.10). The similarity of these two results (Within Region and Other Regions) 
fails to support H4b. Together with the main effects observed in model 2.2, these results suggest that 
vicarious learning from observing worst performers is not as impactful as benchmarking best performers. 
Regarding the control variables, the impacts of Cumulative Water Consumption Focal Factory, Number 
of Other Factories Within Region, Wastewater Focal Factory, and Lean Experience Focal Factory are 
significant across all the regression models, confirming the importance of controlling for these effects when 
estimating reductions in water consumption. Number of Factories Other Regions does not have a significant 
effect on the dependent variable. 
Although endogeneity is a concern in any empirical study, several features of our dataset and measures 
taken by us help address it in our research context. First, measurement error can result from imprecise 
variables and/or sample selection bias. Using secondary data that is audited by LMC alleviates measurement 
concerns, and our inclusion of the entire population of LMC factories with sufficient data alleviates sample 
selection bias. Second, we mitigate against endogeneity from omitted variables by including appropriate 
control variables, and fixed effects for factories, years, and months. Our sample factories are also restricted 
to one corporation with common culture, management structure, procedures, strategies, etc. Although 
omitted variables can never be ruled out in analyses such as ours, we believe they are not a serious concern 
in this analysis. Third, the potential for simultaneity or reverse causality is minimal due to the well-known 
directional relationship between cumulative experience and operating performance, not vice-versa. Further, 
we are assured by LMC management that production allocation decisions are not influenced by industrial 
water conservation performance, but rather by market demand forecasts. Finally, there is a temporal lag 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 20 of 32 
 
that is established within the context of learning that also alleviates concerns due to simultaneity, as in other 
recent studies that document learning effects (e.g., Staats and Gino 2012). 
4.2 Robustness checks 
We perform several robustness checks. For brevity, we only briefly describe the checks and results in this 
section. Full descriptions and results are available in an online appendix. As our first robustness check, 
rather than a single period lag to compute performance differences (Benchmark Deviation (Best) and 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)), we examine a window of best and worst performance in the three months 
prior to the focal month for both the same region and different regions. Table A1 presents the results of 
these regressions. The coefficients for Benchmark Deviation (Best) remain significantly negative. However, 
the coefficients for Benchmark Deviation (Worst) are no longer significant. It seems that the relatively weak 
results we found for Benchmark Deviation (Worst) in our main analyses are not persistent. 
As our next robustness check, we drop all factories that are not in operation for the full nine years of 
the sample frame. This results in a semi-balanced panel with a substantially reduced number of observations 
As seen in Table A2, the results are similar to the main results presented in Table 2, with no changes in the 
directionality of the independent variables. 
Finally, we use the full data of all factories, adding factories that were in operation even for short 
periods of time (less than the minimum 12-month requirement for our main analyses). This results in an 
unbalanced panel with a greater number of observations. These results are documented in Table A3. Again, 
the results are substantively similar to the main results presented in Table 2, with no changes in the 
directionality of the independent variables. 
We also reran our analyses with an alternate control variable, Number of Other Factories All Others as 
a substitute for Number of Other Factories Within Region and Number of Other Factories Other Regions. 
The results are substantively similar to our main results. Overall, these checks suggest that our results are 
stable and robust to substantial changes in the operationalization of the Benchmark Deviation (Best) and 
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) variables, and to alternate constructions of the sample frame. 
5. Discussion and Implications 
In this section, we discuss our results in the context of theory and the extant literature. 
5.1 Experiential learning 
The strong results we find in all models and robustness checks for the direct effect of Cumulative 
Production Focal Factory support H1a and confirm the important role that experiential learning can play 
in improving environmental performance. The significant effect of learning by doing at the factory level is 
good news for those interested in promoting sustainable operations, but it is important to note that learning 
does not automatically follow from cumulative experience. It is likely that organizations with extensive 
production process experience have water consumption levels that are stagnant or even increasing. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 21 of 32 
 
To provide evidence on the relative rarity of improvements in water consumption, we analyze data for 
all firms in the CPG industry within the TruCost database during our sample frame of 2008 through 2016. 
As our dependent variable, we use the firm-level data item “Water Direct plus Purchased (cubic meters)” 
from TruCost. For our independent variable, we use the firm-level cumulative Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) 
as a proxy for cumulative production. We obtain COGS data from the Compustat North America and 
Compustat Global databases. Since COGS is reported in currency, we inflation-adjust the figures by 
country-year using the OECD Producer Price Index where 2015 has an index of 100. To estimate the 
exponential relationship of the typical learning curve, we use a log-log transformation as in equation (1). 
For LMC, the focal company in our manuscript, the log-log regression model is highly significant (F = 
71.32, Adjusted R2=0.898). The coefficient for cumulative COGS is also highly significant and negative (β 
= –0.169, p<0.001). As further support for our finding that LMC factories experienced significant learning 
curves 2008-2016 subsequent to the initiation of their factory water monitoring and conservation program, 
this confirms that LMC (in aggregate) also experienced a significant learning curve. 
Within the TruCost data, there are 411 other manufacturers within the GICS segments Consumer 
Discretionary and Consumer Staples (excluding manufacturers of durable goods) with at least three years 
of data 2008-2016. We perform log-log regressions on each of the 411 firms. For these firms, we find that 
the coefficients for cumulative COGS are: (a) positive and significant (p<0.05): 96 firms (23.4%); (b) 
Positive but insignificant: 128 firms (31.1%); (c) Negative but insignificant: 127 firms (30.9%); and (d) 
Negative and significant (p<0.05): 60 firms (14.6%). This means that about 62% of CPG firms experienced 
no significant change in water consumption, and over 23% of firms actually experienced increased water 
consumption during our sample frame. Less than 15% can claim significant reductions. This is despite all 
firms gaining cumulative production experience during this time period. The relative rarity of significant 
reductions in water consumption adds credence to our claim that LMC’s management action of instituting 
a water monitoring and conservation program was the significant causal factor. Our work provides evidence 
that not only should learning curves apply, but that they do apply at LMC.The documented learning effects 
that we find in LMC’s factories suggest internal practices promote organizational learning with respect to 
the environmental performance. Such learning is availed provided managers put sufficient measures in 
place to promote experiential learning, as in LMC. 
5.2 Vicarious learning 
Our study not only documents learning by doing, but also focuses on learning from others. Few studies 
within the sustainability learning literature have considered vicarious learning, and fewer still have 
considered both experiential learning and vicarious learning together in the same context. In this regard, we 
first considered whether factories could learn from observing the cumulative experience of other factories. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 22 of 32 
 
For Cumulative Production All Others, we find the effect is significantly negative (H2a). As discussed 
in hypothesis development, transferring knowledge between organizational units requires training, 
communications, information sharing, and personnel transfers. Similarities between the organization units 
enhance the effectiveness of knowledge transfers. Further, the similarity and significance of the coefficients 
for Cumulative Production Focal Factory and Cumulative Production All Others suggest that experiential 
learning and vicarious learning are complements in improving environmental performance. 
In addition to examining vicarious learning from observing others’ experience, we also consider the 
learning effects of observing others’ performance. In documenting the learning from observing the 
environmental performance of others, our study contributes to recent learning papers in sustainability such 
as Mani and Muthulingam (2019). Since vicarious learning benefits can come both from successes and 
failures (Denrell 2003, Madsen and Desai 2010), we also consider directionality as in Mani and 
Muthulingam (2019). In our setting, vicarious learning can come from observing other entities, in particular 
the best performers and worst performers. In H3a, we examine the effects of benchmarking the best 
performers. The coefficients of Benchmark Deviation (Best) are significantly negative in all models. The 
negative coefficients indicate that the greater the gap between the focal factory and the best performing 
factory, the greater the reduction in water consumption, supporting H3a. One reason this relationship likely 
holds is the ease with which factories can identify the top performers on a regular basis (Netessine and 
Yakubovich 2012). As Song et al. (2018) explains, regular public disclosure of top performers permits 
others to observe them and identify/adopt their best practices through better performance feedback. 
Further, the strongly significant results for Benchmark Deviation (Best) suggest that learning from 
benchmarking accrues in addition to the other learning processes we consider – experiential learning, and 
vicarious learning from observing other’s experience. Thus, management efforts to promote all three 
learning processes may increase the overall benefits organizations can gain in environmental performance. 
The last category of vicarious learning that we examine is the observation of worst performing peers. 
Despite the literature that argues for this effect (e.g., Denrell 2003, Madsen and Desai 2010), we only find 
limited support for its significance. The coefficient of Benchmark Deviation (Worst) All Others is 
significantly positive in our main results (Table 2), providing some support for H4a, but the coefficients are 
lesser in magnitude than those for Benchmark Deviation (Best) All Others, and they are not persistent in all 
the robustness checks. As Kuziemko et al. (2014) explains, last-place aversion should be motivation for 
near-worst units to improve. Although it is commonly understood that no one enjoys last-place, the disutility 
associated with it is likely influenced by organizational culture and norms. 
5.3 The role of water scarcity 
We test whether scarcity moderates both experiential learning and vicarious learning. To aid in 
interpretation of the interaction between water scarcity and the independent variables that represent the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 23 of 32 
 
various learning channels, Figure 1 presents interaction plots. We first examine experiential learning. As 
Table 2 (model 2.3) presents, both the main effect of Cum Production Focal Factory and the interaction 
effect between Cum Production Focal Factory and Scarcity are significantly negative. As seen in Figure 
1a, water consumption of factories in both water scarce and non water scarce locations is decreasing as their 
own cumulative experience increases. However, the rate of reduction is steeper for factories in water scarce 
locations. This lends support to our arguments for H1b, that water scarcity increases the attention and focus 
of factories on water conservation, resulting in increased learning from their cumulative experience. We 
note that in their study of the relationship between water scarcity and toxic emissions, Muthulingam et al. 
(2022) explain their assumption that water scarcity results in reduced consumption, but they are unable to 
observe it directly in their data. Our work provides important empirical evidence that water scarcity does 
indeed reduce industrial water consumption. 
For vicarious learning from observing others’ experience, results from model 2.3 reveal a significantly 
negative main effect of Cum Production All Others but a significantly positive effect of the interaction 
between Cum Production All Others and Scarcity. Figure 1b depicts a decreasing relationship between 
water consumption and others’ experience for factories in non water scarce locations. However, factories 
in water scarce locations appear to gain no learning benefit as others’ experience increases. Although this 
is a significant moderating effect, the directionality is counter to the expections outlined in the development 
of H2b. In section 2.2.1, we argued that the increases in experiential learning due to water scarcity should 
spillover into vicarious learning from others’ experience but this does not seem to be the case. Our 
conjecture is that this is due to the tacit nature of the knowledge embedded in others’ experience. For 
factories in water scarce locations, the effort and resources required to transfer this tacit knowledge appear 
to be beyond the factory’s capacity. 
Regarding vicarious learning from observing others’ best performance, the results presented in Table 2 
(model 2.3) show that both the main effect of Benchmark Deviation (Best) and its interaction effect with 
Scarcity are significantly negative. As illustrated in Figure 1c, factories in both water scarce and non water 
scarce locations demonstrate decreasing water consumption as the distance from the benchmark distance 
increases, but the rate of reduction is steeper for factories in water scarce locations. This aligns with our 
arguments in section 2.2.1. 
An interesting contrast between our results for vicarious learning effects from observing others’ 
experience versus observing others’ performance is the differing role of water scarcity. For observation of 
others’ cumulative experience, we find evidence of learning only in non water scarce locations, not in water 
scarce locations. This is likely because learning from others’ cumulative performance can be more 
challenging to observe since factory production is likely focused on their own output. Learning from others’ 
experience requires observation of the entire scope of that experience at multiple factories over time. For 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 24 of 32 
 
factories in water scarce locations, their resources (including management attention), are more likely 
focused on the immediate problem of water scarcity. The wide scope of other factories’ experience is 
difficult to codify, limiting its transferability. Further, a great deal of knowledge contained within others’ 
experience is probably tacit. 
Last, we find no significant moderating effects of water scarcity on vicarious learning from observing 
others’ worst performance, failing to support H4b. Given that the main effect of learning from observing 
others’ worst performance is marginal and not persistent, the lack of a moderating effect is unsurprising. 
A seemingly plausible alternative explanation for the effects of water scarcity is water cost. For most 
commodities, cost is increasing in scarcity. If the correlation between scarcity and cost is great, cost might 
be the actual moderator rather than scarcity. To examine this possibility, we obtain water cost data from 
LMC for the factories at the beginning of our sample frame (2008). We note that cost data is only available 
from LMC for 178 of our 248 sample factories. All local currencies were converted into USD. We find that 
water scarcity is not correlated with cost in our sample (ρ = 0.031, p>0.10). The somewhat surprising lack 
of correlation between water scarcity and cost in our sample is due to water often being subsidized in water 
scarce regions both to attract/retain industry and to maintain low water costs for consumers. As Hoekstra 
(2014) notes, both water and water scarcity remain largely unpriced in many regions. The lack of correlation 
between scarcity and price is a somewhat unique characteristic of water. This not only increases our 
confidence that scarcity is a true moderator of industrial water conservation learning effects, but it also 
highlights the importance of research in the under-studied context of water. 
5.4 The role of geographic proximity 
Given the unsettled relationship between geographic proximity and knowledge transfer in the literature, we 
hypothesize and test whether geographic proximity moderates the vicarious learning from observing others’ 
experience, best performance, and worst performance. We first consider learning from observing others’ 
experience. As seen in model 2.4, the effects of Cumulative Production Within Region and Cumulative 
Production Other Regions differ in their significance and magnitude, supporting H2c that geographic 
proximity moderates the effects of learning from observing others’ experience. The results suggests that 
vicarious learning from observing others’ experience is strongly influenced by geographic proximity. Our 
finding of significant vicarious learning effects only within the region lends support to cluster theorists, 
who argue that knowledge-sharing mechanisms are most commonly found amongst geographically 
proximate entities (c.f., Darr et al. 1995; Myles-Shaver and Flyer 2000). 
For vicarious learning via observation of best performing factories, we find that significant learning 
occurs both within region and from other regions. This suggests that factories find it easier to exchange 
benchmark information of others’ performance, rather than others’ cumulative experience. The best 
performers constitute a small number of factories, perhaps only one within a region or a few across all 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 25 of 32 
 
regions. Limited focal factory resources can thus be focused on a small number of other factories, reducing 
the effect of geography. Best performance is often attributed to specific best practices, knowledge of which 
is likely explicit and thus easier to transfer between distant factories. Our findings provide support not only 
for the importance of identifying and communicating best performers as a means to increase vicarious 
learning across the organization, but that geographic distance is not a constraint to such learning. 
As with water scarcity, an interesting contrast between our results for vicarious learning effects from 
observing others’ experience versus observing others’ performance is the differing role of geographic 
proximity. For observation of others’ cumulative experience, we find evidence of learning only within 
region, not from other regions. As explained in section 5.3, this is likely due to the tacit nature of others’ 
experience. Given limited factory resources, it is likely that observation of experience will be rationed to 
the most proximate facilities. The directionality and significance for Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Within 
Region and Benchmark Deviation (Worst) Other Regions are also not consistent across our robustness 
checks, failing to support the moderating effects of geographic proximity (H4c). Taken together, these 
results suggest that the factories in our data do not benefit much from observation of worst performers. 
In summary, our results imply that: 1) experiential learning is important, provided sufficient 
management actions are expended to promote it, and it is particularly important for factories in water scarce 
locations; 2) learning from observing others’ experience is only effective for factories in non water scarce 
locations, and for geographically proximate units; 3) learning from benchmarking best performers is 
effective for all factories but especially so for factories in water scarce locations, and when benchmarking 
best performers in other regions; and 4) learning from observing worst performers has limited beneficial 
learning effects that are not moderated by either water scarcity nor geographic proximity. 
6. Conclusion 
In this paper, we employ a unique propriety data set comprising monthly production and water consumption 
of 248 unique factories over nine years. Using panel regression methods, we provide evidence of significant 
experiential learning and vicarious learning. Our study distinguishes between vicarious learning processes 
by considering observing others’ experience, benchmarking best performers, and benchmarking worst 
performers. We find that factories learn from all four learning channels concurrently, although the empirical 
support for learning from benchmarking worst performers is limited. It is important to note that the different 
learning effects appear to be complementary and not substitutive. Our results also suggest that vicarious 
learning is moderated by both water scarcity and the factory’s geographic location. 
Despite our contributions, our work is not without limitations. The construction of our dataset does not 
permit us to empirically test specific factory-level mechanisms responsible for heterogenous rates of 
learning across the factories in our sample. Examining and testing factory-level mechanisms would require 
significantly different types of data, but would undoubtedly yield interesting results. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 26 of 32 
 
Although our data set permits us to measure factory-level performance in a global context, and is ideal 
for our research purposes because the factories share common equipment, reporting, and corporate culture, 
it is from only one corporation. To the extent that the results are due to the corporation’s management 
structure, culture, mission, or strategy, our results might not be representative of other factories or 
corporations. It is likely that learning opportunities for factories are more readily available and accessible 
from their corporate peers, in comparison to factories from other corporations. Replication with a different 
set of factories would extend the generalizability of our findings. Finally, our focus in this paper is strictly 
on intra-firm learning. External or inter-firm learning opportunities might also be influential. Future 
research that combines both intra-firm and inter-firm learning processes can add to the organizational 
learning literature. 
 
References 
Argote, L. 2012. Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining and Transferring Knowledge., 2nd ed. 
Springer Science & Business Media, New York. 
Argote, L., S. Lee, J. Park. 2021. Organizational learning processes and outcomes: Major findings and 
future research directions. Management Science 67(9): 5399-5429. 
Baltagi, B.H., P.W. Wu. 1999. Unequally spaced panel data regressions with AR (1) disturbances. 
Econometric Theory 15(6): 814-823. 
Bell, J.E., C.W. Autry, D.A. Mollenkopf, L.M. Thornton. 2012. A natural resource typology: Theoretical 
foundations and strategic implications for supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics 
33(2): 158-166. 
Boh, W.F., S.A. Slaughter, J.A. Espinosa. 2007. Learning from experience in software development: A 
multilevel analysis. Management Science 53(8): 1315-1331. 
Bresman, H., 2010. External learning activities and team performance: A multimethod field study. 
Organization Science 21(1): 81-96. 
Bresman, H., 2013. Changing routines: A process model of vicarious group learning in pharmaceutical 
R&D. Academy of Management Journal 56(1): 35-61. 
Busch, T., V.H. Hoffman. 2011. How hot is your bottom line? Linking carbon and financial performance. 
Business & Society 50(2): 233-265. 
Chen, Y-T., D-S. Chang. 2010. Diffusion effect and learning effect: An examination on MSW recycling. 
Journal of Cleaner Production 18(5): 496-503. 
Cohen, W.M., D.A. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128-152. 
Cole, D., S. Narayanan, E. Connors, M. Tewari, K. Onda. 2023. Water stress: Opportunities for supply 
chain research. Forthcoming in Production and Operations Management. 
Cramton, C.D. 2001. The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences for dispersed collaboration. 
Organization Science 12(3): 346-371. 
Darr, E.D., L. Argote, D. Epple. 1995. The acquisition, transfer, and depreciation of knowledge in service 
organizations: Productivity in franchises. Management Science 41(11): 1750-1762. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 27 of 32 
 
Darr, E.D., T.R. Kurtzberg. 2000. An investigation of partner similarity dimensions on knowledge 
transfer. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 82(1): 28-44. 
Denrell, J. 2003. Vicarious learning, undersampling of failure, and the myths of management. 
Organization Science 14(3): 227-243. 
DiMaggio, P.J., W.W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective 
rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review 48(2): 147-160. 
Edmonson, A.C., A.B. Winslow, R.M.J. Bohmer, G.P. Pisano. 2003. Learning how and learning what: 
Effects of tacit and codified knowledge on performance improvement following technology adoption. 
Decision Sciences 34(2): 197-223. 
Enright, M.J. 1995. Organization and coordination in geographically concentrated industries. In 
Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of Enterprise. University 
of Chicago Press, 103-146. 
Epple, D., L. Argote, L., R. Devadas. 1991. Organizational learning curves: A method for investigating 
intra-plant transfer of knowledge acquired through learning by doing. Organization Science 2(1): 58-
70. 
Ganesan, S., A.J. Malter, A.J., A. Rindfleisch. 2005. Does distance still matter? Geographic proximity 
and new product development. Journal of Marketing 69(4): 44-60. 
Glock, C.H., E.H. Grosse, M.Y. Jaber, T.L. Smunt. 2019. Applications of learning curves in production 
and operations management: A systematic literature review. Computers & Industrial Engineering 
131: 422-441. 
Haunschild, P.R., A.S. Miner. 1997. Modes of interorganizational imitation: The effects of outcome 
salience and uncertainty. Administrative Science Quarterly 42(3): 472-500. 
Hoekstra, A.Y., 2014. Water scarcity challenges to business. Nature Climate Change 4(5): 318-320. 
Hofste, R.W., P. Reig, L. Schleifer. 2019. 17 countries, home to one-quarter of the world’s population, 
face extremely high water stress. Available at: wri.org/insights; accessed 27 Mar 2023. 
Huber, G.P. 1991. Organizational learning: The contributing processes and the literatures. Organization 
Science 2(1): 88-115. 
Hussain, T., A. Wahab. 2018. A critical review of the current water conservation practices in textile wet 
processing. Journal of Cleaner Production 198: 806-819. 
Kalaitzi, D., A. Matopoulos, M. Bourlakis, W. Tate. 2018. Supply chain strategies in an era of natural 
resource scarcity. International Journal of Operations and Production Management 38(3): 784-809. 
KC, D., B.R. Staats. 2012. Accumulating a portfolio of experience: The effect of focal and related 
experience on surgeon performance. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 14(4): 618-
633. 
Klenow, P.J. 1998. Learning curves and the cyclical behavior of manufacturing industries. Review of 
Economic Dynamics 1(2): 531-550. 
Kuziemko, I., R.W. Buell, T. Reich, M.I. Norton. 2014. “Last-place aversion”: Evidence and 
redistributive implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1): 105-149. 
Lapré, M.A., A.S. Mukherjee, L.N. Van Wassenhove. 2000. Behind the learning curve: Linking learning 
activities to waste reduction. Management Science 46(5): 597-611. 
Lapré, M.A., I.M. Nembhard. 2010. Inside the Organizational Learning Curve: Understanding the 
Organizational Learning Process. Vol. 10, Now Publishers Inc. 
Lapré, M.A., N. Tsikriktsis. 2006. Organizational learning curves for customer dissatisfaction: 
Heterogeneity across airlines. Management Science 52(3): 352-366. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 28 of 32 
 
Levitt, B., J.G. March. 1988. Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology 14(1): 319-338. 
Lount, R.B., S.L. Wilk. 2014. Working harder or hardly working? Posting performance eliminates social 
loafing and promotes social laboring in workgroups. Management Science 60(5): 1098–1106. 
Lublinski, A.E. 2003. Does geographic proximity matter? Evidence from clustered and non-clustered 
aeronautic firms in Germany. Regional Studies 37(5): 453-467. 
Madsen, P.M., V. Desai. 2010. Failing to learn? The effects of failure and success on organizational 
learning in the global orbital launch vehicle industry. Academy of Management Journal 53(3): 451-
476. 
Malmberg, A. 1997. Industrial geography: Location and learning. Progress in Human Geography 21(4): 
573-582. 
Mani, V., S. Muthulingam. 2019. Does learning from inspections affect environmental performance? 
Evidence from unconventional well development in Pennsylvania. Manufacturing & Service 
Operations Management 21(1): 177-197. 
Matsumura, E.M., R. Prakash, S.C. Vera-Munoz. 2014. Firm-value effects of carbon emissions and 
carbon disclosures. Accounting Review 89(2): 695-724. 
McCall, J., P. Rao, S.G. Gonzalez, S. Nimbalkar, S. Das, S. Supekar, J. Cresko. 2021. US manufacturing 
water use data and estimates: Current state, limitations, and future needs for supporting 
manufacturing research and development. ACS ES&T Water 1(10): 2186-2196. 
Muthulingam, S., S. Dhanorkar, C.J. Corbett. 2022. Does water scarcity affect environmental 
performance? Evidence from manufacturing facilities in Texas. Management Science 68(4): 2785-
2805 
Myles-Shaver, J., F. Flyer. 2000. Agglomeration economies, firm heterogeneity, and foreign direct 
investment in the United States. Strategic Management Journal 21(12): 1175-1193. 
Narayanan, S., S. Balasubramanian, S., J.M. Swaminathan. 2009. A matter of balance: Specialization, 
task variety, and individual learning in a software maintenance environment. Management Science 
55(11): 1861-1876. 
Netessine, S., V. Yakubovich. 2012. The Darwinian workplace. Harvard Business Review 90(5): 25–28. 
Patterson, S. 2019. Lowville had lots of water. Then string cheese came. Wall Street Journal, A1, June 
06, 2019. 
Pisano, G.P., R.M. Bohmer, A.C. Edmondson. 2001. Organizational differences in rates of learning: 
Evidence from the adoption of minimally invasive cardiac surgery. Management Science 47(6): 752-
768. 
Plambeck, E.L., L.B. Toktay. 2013. Introduction to the special issue on the environment. Manufacturing 
& Service Operations Management 15(4): 523-526. 
Rothenberg, S., F.K. Pil, J. Maxwell. 2001. Lean, green, and the quest for superior environmental 
performance. Production and Operations Management 10(3): 228-243. 
Schilling, M.A., P. Vidal, R.E. Ployhart, A. Marangoni. 2003. Learning by doing something else: 
Variation, relatedness, and the learning curve. Management Science 49(1): 39-56. 
Shah, A.K.. S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir. 2012. Some consequences of having too little. Science 338(6107): 
682-685. 
Shah, A.K., E. Shafir, S. Mullainathan. 2015. Scarcity frames value. Psychological Science 26(4): 402-
412. 
Song, H., A.L. Tucker, K.L. Murrell, D.R. Vinson. 2018. Closing the productivity gap: Improving worker 
productivity through public relative performance feedback and validation of best practices. 
Management Science 64(6): 2628-2649. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 29 of 32 
 
Staats, B.R. 2012. Unpacking team familiarity: The effects of geographic location and hierarchical role. 
Production and Operations Management 21(3): 619-635. 
Staats, B.R., F. Gino. 2012. Specialization and variety in repetitive tasks: Evidence from a Japanese bank. 
Management Science 58(6): 1141-1159. 
Szulanski, G. 1996. Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within the 
firm. Strategic Management Journal 17(S2): 27-43. 
Tushman, M.L. 1977. Special boundary roles in the innovation process. Administrative Science Quarterly 
22: 587-605. 
UN. 2017. United Nations Secretary-General’s Plan: Water Action Decade 2018-2028. Available at: 
https://wateractiondecade.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/UN-SG-Action-Plan_Water-Action-
Decade-web.pdf; accessed 6 Aug 2020. 
UN. 2022. United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Available at: 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/water-and-sanitation/; accessed 2 May 2022. 
Van Wassenhove, L.N. 2019. Sustainable innovation: Pushing the boundaries of traditional operations 
management. Production and Operations Management 28(12): 2930-2945. 
Von Hippel, E. 1994. “Sticky information” and the locus of problem solving: Implications for innovation. 
Management Science 40(4): 429-439. 
Yeung, A.C., K.H. Lai, R.W. Yee. 2007. Organizational learning, innovativeness, and organizational 
performance: A qualitative investigation. International Journal of Production Research 45(11): 2459-
2477. 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 30 of 32 
 
Table 1. Descriptive statistics for the dependent, independent, and control variables. 
 
 
 
 
Mean
Overall Between
Within
DV
Water Consumption - Focal Factory
1.10
0.78
0.70
0.28
Cumulative Production - Focal Factory
11.51
1.79
1.54
1.03
Scarcity
0.39
0.49
0.49
0.00
Cumulative Production - All Others
18.50
1.94
1.23
1.69
Cumulative Production - Within Region
16.63
2.12
1.41
1.71
Cumulative Production - Other Regions
18.25
1.96
1.27
1.69
Benchmark Deviation (Best) - All Others
0.96
0.81
0.73
0.31
Benchmark Deviation (Best) - Within Region
0.80
0.85
0.76
0.35
Benchmark Deviation (Best) - Other Regions
0.91
0.83
0.74
0.33
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) - All Others
2.65
1.22
1.06
0.65
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) - Within Region
1.48
1.26
1.13
0.61
Benchmark Deviation (Worst) - Other Regions
2.26
1.29
1.17
0.62
Number of Other Factories - Within Region
6.71
3.48
3.44
0.76
Number of Factories - Other Regions
23.82
10.60
10.20
2.01
Cumulative Water Consumption - Focal Factory
12.09
1.96
1.82
0.92
Wastewater - Focal Factory
0.47
0.73
0.68
0.29
Lean Experience - Focal Factory
0.64
3.64
1.72
3.18
Controls
Variable
Standard Deviations
IV's
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 31 of 32 
 
Table 2. Main results from panel regressions for the learning effects of direct cumulative production 
experience, observation of others' cumulative production experience, and observation of others' 
water use performance. The dependent variable is the focal factories' water use per ton of 
production. All factories were in operation at least 12 months during the 2008-2016 sample 
frame. The Benchmark Deviation variables compare other factories’ performance one month 
prior. 
 
 
Hypothesis
Cumulative Production
H1a
-0.166 ***
-0.132 ***
-0.145 ***
Focal Factory
(0.036)
(0.041)
(0.037)
Cum Production Focal Factory
H1b
-0.114 **
x Scarcity
(0.053)
Cumulative Production
H2a
-0.036 **
-0.064 ***
All Others
(0.018)
(0.02)
Cum Production All Others
H2b
0.065 **
x Scarcity
(0.030)
Cumulative Production
-0.096 ***
Within Region
(0.037)
Cumulative Production
0.029
Other Regions
(0.030)
Benchmark Deviation (Best)
H3a
-0.171 ***
-0.146 ***
All Others
(0.006)
(0.008)
Benchmark Deviation (Best)
H3b
-0.060 ***
x Scarcity
(0.012)
Benchmark Deviation (Best)
-0.058 ***
Within Region
(0.010)
Benchmark Deviation (Best)
-0.104 ***
Other Regions
(0.011)
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)
H4a
0.006 **
0.007 **
All Others
(0.003)
(0.003)
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)
H4b
-0.004
x Scarcity
(0.006)
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)
0.006 **
Within Region
(0.003)
Benchmark Deviation (Worst)
0.005 *
Other Regions
(0.003)
Number of Other Factories
0.009 *
0.012 **
0.011 **
0.015 ***
Within Region
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Number of Factories
-0.001
0.000
0.000
-0.001
Other Regions
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Cumulative Water Consumption
0.134 ***
0.323 ***
0.338 ***
0.327 ***
Focal Factory
(0.008)
(0.031)
(0.031)
(0.032)
Wastewater
0.015 ***
0.013 ***
0.013 ***
0.013 ***
Focal Factory
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Lean Experience
-0.003 **
-0.003 **
-0.004 **
-0.003 *
Focal Factory
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Constant
-0.359 ***
-0.002
-0.028 *
0.004
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)
248
247
247
247
20,066
19,704
19,704
19,547
-10,918
-11,882
-11,896
-11,862
Notes:
H4c
Fixed effects for Factory, Year, and Month included; Standard errors in parentheses; Two-tailed tests: * p < 
0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
Model 2.4
Model 2.2
H2c
H3c
Model 2.1
Variable
Number of Factories
Factory-Month Observations (N)
AIC
Controls
Model 2.3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847

 
Page 32 of 32 
 
 
Figure 1. The effects on focal factory water use per ton of production, from the interaction of water 
scarcity and: a) cumulative production, focal factory; b) cumulative production, all others; and c) 
benchmark deviation (best), all others. All effects are shown with 95% confidence intervals. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4725847