TITLE: Customer Service Operations: A Gatekeeper Framework
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478251326426
---

Customer Service Operations: A Gatekeeper Framework
Maqbool Dada (Corresponding Author)
Carey Business School
Johns Hopkins University
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD, 21202
(765) 427-0751
dada@jhu.edu
Brett Hathaway
Marriott School of Business
Brigham Young University
730 TNRB
Provo, UT, 84602
(801) 837-0474
brett hathaway@byu.edu
Evgeny Kagan
Carey Business School
Johns Hopkins University
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD, 21202
(734) 604-7152
ekagan@jhu.edu
arXiv:2602.13998v1 [cs.HC] 15 Feb 2026

Production and Operations Management
Customer Service Operations: A Gatekeeper Framework
Maqbool Dada
Carey Business School, Johns Hopkins University
Brett Hathaway
Marriott Business School, Brigham Young University
Evgeny Kagan
Carey Business School, Johns Hopkins University
Abstract: Customer service has evolved beyond in-person visits and phone calls to include live chat, AI chatbots and
social media, among other contact options. Service providers typically refer to these contact modalities as “channels”.
Within each channel, customer service agents are tasked with managing and resolving a stream of inbound service
requests. Each request involves milestones where the agent must decide whether to keep assisting the customer or to
transfer them to a more skilled – and often costlier – provider. To understand how this request resolution process should be
managed, we develop a model in which each channel is represented as a gatekeeper system and characterize the structure
of the optimal request resolution policy. We then turn to the broader question of the firm’s customer service design, which
includes the strategic problem of which channels to deploy, the tactical questions of at what level to staff the live-agent
channel and to what extent to train an AI chatbot, and the operational question of how to control the live-agent chan-
nel. Examining the interplay between strategic, tactical, and operational decisions through numerical methods, we show,
among other insights, that service quality can be improved, rather than diminished, by chatbot implementation.
Key words: Gatekeepers, Service Design, AI Chatbots, Dynamic Programming
History: Received: May 2024; accepted: January 2025 by Michael Pinedo after one revision.
1
Introduction
The customer service channels available today vary along many dimensions, including synchronicity
(immediate interaction with a chatbot or live agent vs. delayed resolution via email or social media), modal-
ity (text-based vs. voice), and the type of service provider (ranging from self-service options like FAQs
to live human agents to AI-driven chatbots). Digital channels, particularly chatbots and social media, have
seen a significant increase in adoption, with reports indicating a double-digit adoption increase from 2018 to
2020 (Salesforce 2020). These channels often meet the increased customer expectations for fast and flexible
support, while helping reduce call volumes and lower operational costs. At the same time, customers may
resent dealing with an automated technology unable to provide a more personal service experience (Aircall
2023). This tension presents firms with several strategic and operational challenges, as they seek to leverage
the cost savings offered by service automation while maintaining high levels of customer satisfaction and
loyalty.
1

Figure 1
Typical Customer Service Desk Architecture Implemented by BlackBeltHelp
To better understand how multiple channels are managed in the customer service setting, we approached
BlackBeltHelp, a third-party provider of customer service solutions for the higher education sector. We
interviewed BlackBeltHelp executives and engineers in November 2022. The following insights emerged
from our conversations:
• Multichannel architecture: Different BlackBeltHelp clients choose different channel architectures.
Some clients opt only for live channels. Other clients opt for a mix of live and AI-driven channels.
BlackBeltHelp even reported at least one client who opted only for the chatbot channel. The client
chooses which of these channels to offer and BlackBeltHelp provides the necessary training, staffing,
and software development to integrate the channels in one platform. A representation of a two-channel
architecture commonly implemented by BlackBeltHelp is shown in Figure 1.
• Gatekeeper layers: Customer request resolution is rarely a one-shot process – correctly identifying
the type of request and attempting to resolve it is an iterative process that involves milestones or steps
codified by the client. While BlackBeltHelp is able to handle the majority of customer requests, a
subset of them are ultimately routed to the client (dubbed “expert” in Figure 1). Thus, BlackBeltHelp
employees and chatbots almost invariably serve as gatekeepers to the expert workers at the client
organization.
• Chatbot channel has a unique performance and cost structure: Clients are increasingly choosing
to include an AI chatbot channel into their architecture. For a fixed development cost (plus minimal
maintenance costs), the bot is capable of handling a virtually unlimited number of customer inquiries.
Rather than paying by resolved request, clients only pay for software engineers to train the chatbot.
Training the chatbot involves feeding it selected types of requests from a question database, beginning
with the most frequently encountered inquiries and gradually incorporating more complex or less
common scenarios.
2

Our interactions with BlackBeltHelp suggest a complex range of configurations for designing customer
service – which channels to offer, and how to staff, manage and integrate them. Our study focuses on
developing an analytical framework to address these questions. In particular, we examine the strategic-level
question of the overall system architecture (What is the right mix of channels?), the tactical-level question
of what capacity to provide each channel (How many live agents to provide and how much to spend on
chatbot training), as well as the operational-level question of within-channel service design (When and how
should transfers be performed?).
While the first two questions follow directly from our interactions with BlackBeltHelp and other customer
service providers, the issues related to within-channel service design (transfer policies) are less well-defined.
To better understand these issues, and the related trade-offs, we conducted an online survey of customer
attitudes towards transfers in customer service. The key takeaways of the survey are that both presence and
the type of transfer matters. Specifically, the survey data suggest that customers prefer more personalized
transfers (often referred to as “warm transfers” in industry), where the transferring agent provides context
and passes on the relevant information to the receiving (expert) agent before leaving the call. Conversely,
customers have a strong aversion to the more common “cold transfer”, where the customer is transferred
without any context or personalization. Indeed, the preference for “warm transfers” holds even when such
transfers result in longer waiting times. See the electronic companion for survey details.
The insights from the survey motivate our operational control problem of optimal gatekeeping, i.e., the
question of optimal transfer decisions within a single channel of the service architecture. In §3 we charac-
terize service resolution as a sequential S-attempt process. Each of the S resolution attempts has its own pro-
cessing time and success probability. At the end of an attempt, if the customer issue has not been resolved,
the agent handling the request chooses one of three actions: 1) continue to the next attempt, 2) warm trans-
fer, wherein the agent accompanies the customer and facilitates the transition to the next channel, or 3) cold
transfer, wherein the agent drops the customer into the next channel.
The firm’s objective is to determine optimal resolution policies for the above problem, while account-
ing for congestion. Specifically, we consider customer traffic (upstream congestion) and expert availability
(downstream congestion). Further, channels may have limited operating hours. To account for these factors,
we formulate the decision problem as a finite-horizon stochastic dynamic program. The solution to this
problem includes a carefully specified set of terminal conditions formulated in §4 that make the optimal
resolution policy stationary, thereby accommodating both 24/7 operations and finite work shifts. Station-
arity is then exploited to further structure the optimal policy, which is shown to depend on congestion and
resolution attempt.
In §5, we explore heuristic solutions and present model extensions. We begin with numerical experiments
that restrict the policy search to threshold policies, which have the advantage of being computationally
efficient and can be found in polynomial time. We also identify a simple sufficient condition—related to
3

the shortest-processing-time (SPT) rule—for threshold policy optimality. We then incorporate queueing
dynamics into the model by introducing a finite waiting room. Although the policy space expands consid-
erably with this addition, we find that a heuristic policy of transferring customers when the waiting room
reaches half capacity achieves near-optimal performance across a range of arrival intensities.
In §6 we turn to the broader problem of examining how the optimal operational control decisions interplay
with the tactical and strategic customer service design questions faced by the firm. In particular, the firm’s
customer service design problem consists of the following components:
Strategic: Which gatekeeper channels (human, AI chatbot, both) to offer?
Tactical: How should these channels be staffed and/or trained? How much should be spent on AI
development?
Operational: What are the optimal resolution policies within each channel?
To solve this joint problem, we first re-examine the gatekeeping problem when a chatbot, rather than a live
agent, acts as a gatekeeper. Chatbot systems have a unique cost structure (fixed costs of development, rather
than variable costs of staffing), face virtually no upstream congestion, and their actions are more limited
compared to human gatekeepers, all of which significantly simplifies the problem. We then characterize
the effects of the channel architecture, staffing, chatbot training and resolution policies on service quality,
which in turn determine customer demand (arrivals to each channel) as a response to the channel-specific
performance measures announced by the firm.
We conclude by presenting numerical examples of the optimal customer service design over various chat-
bot training cost and agent wage scenarios. Unsurprisingly, different combinations of chatbot training costs
and live-agent wages can lead to different channel architectures being optimal: live-agent-only, chatbot-
only, or both. There are also important interactions between optimal chatbot training, staffing levels and
resolution policy. In particular, the introduction of a chatbot channel may not necessarily result in reduced
staffing but may change the optimal live-agent resolution policy to one that delivers higher quality service.
More broadly, our model demonstrates that when choosing how to implement AI chatbot technology, man-
agers should consider not only the implications for staffing but also the more indirect consequences for
service policies within each channel.
Our work makes three key contributions. First, we develop a comprehensive model of optimal gatekeep-
ing. While gatekeepers are becoming a more prevalent lens for studying service and healthcare systems
(Shumsky and Pinker 2003, Freeman et al. 2017, Hathaway et al. 2023), optimal gatekeeper behavior
remains understudied. Our results bridge an important gap in theoretical development in this area. Second,
we comprehensively examine the firm’s customer service design problem, which includes channel selection,
automated channel investment, channel staffing, and within-channel resolution policies. While components
of this problem have been studied in isolation (Shumsky and Pinker 2003, Hasija et al. 2005, Gao and Su
2018, Feldman et al. 2023, Kagan et al. 2023), this is the first attempt (that we are aware of) to integrate
4

them within a single framework. Third, we examine the role of chatbots within a broader service operations
framework. As chatbot adoption continues to rise (Cohen 2018, Sheehan et al. 2020, Senawi et al. 2023), it
is becoming increasingly important to develop analytical approaches to better understand their value (and
limitations) in customer service.
2
Overview and Related Literature
2.1
Overview
At a high level, the firm’s customer service strategy includes choosing which service channels to offer,
at what levels to staff any live channels (such as phone and live chat), to what extent to develop any
automated/self-service channels (such as FAQs and AI chatbots), and what resolution policies to implement
(such as how long to attempt to resolve a given customer issue and when and how to transfer customers
within and across channels). If we restrict our attention to two focal channels, a live-agent channel and a
chatbot channel, and denote their profit contributions by πagent and πbot, then the firm’s profit-maximization
problem is given by:
max
kagent,Dagent,pbot
succ
πagent(kagent,Dagent,λagent(kagent,Dagent, pbot
succ)) + πbot(pbot
succ,λbot(kagent,Dagent, pbot
succ)),
(1)
where kagent is the live-agent staffing level, λagent and λbot are the arrival rates to each channel, Dagent is the
live-agent resolution policy, and pbot
succ is the chatbot success probability the firm has trained the bot up to.
Note that the firm may choose to staff no live agents (kagent = 0,Dagent = 0) or not to employ a chatbot
(pbot
succ = 0). Also note that because the bot can process a virtually unlimited number of requests, no staffing
decision is required for the bot channel. Hence, the firm selects the optimal channels, the staffing and
capability levels (kagent,pbot
succ), and how these channels should operate (Dagent). Utility-maximizing customers
observe these choices and respond by choosing which channel (if any) to join, with their collective decisions
determining λagent and λbot.
In the remainder of §2 we review research related to this problem. In §3 we introduce the operational
problem of optimally setting Dagent, i.e., the resolution policy for a channel staffed by a single live agent.
In §4 we characterize the structure of the optimal policy for this problem. In §5 we examine heuristic
solutions and extend the operational model to allow for queueing dynamics and multiple live agents. In
§6 we show how the problem differs for the bot, i.e., how the firm should set pbot
succ, examine the problem
from the customer perspective by characterizing λagent and λbot, and conclude with a numerical example that
illustrates that the firm should jointly choose kagent,Dagent, and pbot
succ while accounting for customer response
to those choices.
5

2.2
Related Research
Channel Architecture
Optimal channel mix problems have been studied in the retail context, where the integration of physical
and digital channels has become common practice (Brynjolfsson et al. 2013, Gao and Su 2017, Gallino
and Moreno 2019). Multichannel strategies are especially common in the food service industry, where
congestion plays a central role (Gao and Su 2018, Feldman et al. 2023). Multichannel environments have
also been studied in marketing with a focus on understanding customer experiences in different channels
(Ansari et al. 2008, Lund and Marinova 2014, Lemon and Verhoef 2016). No studies that we are aware of
focus specifically on channel selection in the customer service domain.
Resolution Process
The resolution policies and training levels (Dagent, pbot
succ) set the protocols for managing incoming customer
requests; in particular, how much time and effort the agent (or chatbot) should spend on each request, and
how and when requests should be transferred to an expert. Each channel therefore acts as a gatekeeper sys-
tem (Shumsky and Pinker 2003, Hasija et al. 2005, Lee et al. 2012), in which simple requests are handled
by lower-cost workers (or chatbots), while more complex tasks are reserved for higher-cost specialists or
experts. Hathaway et al. (2023) examine experimentally whether gatekeepers correctly incorporate incen-
tives to cold transfer while accounting for upstream congestion present in such systems. Freeman et al.
(2017) and Batt and Terwiesch (2017) study work-sharing behaviors in healthcare. Also related are Alizamir
et al. (2013) and Kremer and de V´ericourt (2023), who examine optimal stopping in sequential diagnostic
processes under congestion, and Sun et al. (2022), who study optimal triage under congestion. Our gate-
keeping model differs from the existing research in that we (a) expand the action set to include multiple
types of transfers, and (b) incorporate upstream and downstream congestion.
Channel Joining Behavior
In §6 we model channel demand, λagent and λbot, as an endogenous response to the firm’s service offering.
Our work is therefore related to the literature on optimal routing models that incorporate customer decisions
(Armony and Maglaras 2004, De V´ericourt and Zhou 2005, Gans and Zhou 2007), as well as to the behav-
ioral literature on queue joining (Naor 1969, Kremer and Debo 2016, Allon and Kremer 2018). Gatekeeper
systems, i.e., systems in which customers are frequently transferred, may make the wait more uncertain
as well as more fragmented, both of which may reduce channel uptake (Leclerc et al. 1995, Kumar and
Dada 2021). Abrupt transitions within service experiences, which are more likely in gatekeeper systems,
may be particularly memorable and can negatively affect customer satisfaction and channel uptake (Lee
2008, Das Gupta et al. 2016). Our model of customer channel joining behavior explicitly accounts for such
factors.
6

AI Chatbots in Customer Service
While AI-driven chatbots are becoming increasingly capable of solving complex problems, there remain
significant barriers to their adoption in customer service. A key barrier is that chatbot interactions often
result in a transfer, necessitating a complete restart of the service process with a human provider (Kagan
et al. 2023). Our model will refer to such transfers as cold transfers, as opposed to more seamless and
personalized warm transfers, which chatbots are typically unable to provide (Senawi et al. 2023), and
which customers prefer over cold transfers. Separately, customers may dislike interactions with an algo-
rithmic (rather than human) service provider, and that may reduce their willingness to use the chatbot
option (Dietvorst et al. 2015, Luo et al. 2019, Sheehan et al. 2020, Kagan et al. 2023). Attitudes regarding
algorithms are incorporated into our model of customer preferences via a technology aversion parameter,
affecting channel demands λagent and λbot in (1).
Related Dynamic Programming Analyses
Our model of the gatekeeper resolution process is most closely related to Shumsky and Pinker (2003), who
also model a single gatekeeper responding to a stream of incoming customers (patients). They focus on the
question of optimal compensation structure, which, for practical reasons, is typically time- and congestion-
state-invariant within a shift. Therefore, they use the average reward criterion (Puterman 2014), which
assumes stationarity and significantly simplifies analysis. Because we are less interested in compensation
and because modern technology enables agents to have high visibility into traffic and system congestion, we
explicitly model congestion (both upstream and downstream) and time remaining in the shift. This allows
us to develop more textured insights into optimal gatekeeper behavior.
Since agents work in finite shifts (which can be quite short due to the part-time nature of the work),
our model requires careful specification of the terminal conditions in the dynamic program. The appro-
priate choice of terminal conditions is thus a critical technical aspect of our model. A theoretically sound
remedy for finite-horizon representation of such Markov decision processes is provided by Veinott (1966),
who developed the “buy-back” assumption in inventory models. Under this assumption, the finite-horizon
problem exhibits the same localized behavior as its infinite-horizon counterpart. Applications of Veinott’s
approach can be found in the state-dependent inventory model of Xu et al. (2017) and the fishing stocks
management model of Lovejoy (1988). We follow the Veinott approach and carefully specify a set of
state-dependent linear terminal conditions, which accommodates both finite-horizon settings, such as shift
operations, and round-the-clock settings, such as service call centers.
3
Live-Agent Model
In this section we focus on the live-agent channel and develop a dynamic programming model for how the
firm should set the resolution policy for this channel (Dagent in (1)). This channel is staffed by a number
7

of agents who are trained to follow the same protocol determined by the firm. The admission control is
organized such that each agent receives an equitable load, making the system scalable in the number of
agents. Hence, it is convenient to simply model the channel as a single representative live agent receiving
a stream of incoming customer requests. (In §6 we will discuss a multiserver extension of the model.) The
agent receives a flat payment and acts in the interest of the firm. The agent can be an internal employee, a
worker in an outsourced call center, or can be employed by a third-party provider such as BlackBeltHelp
(§1).
The key service process decision facing the firm is to determine, given current congestion patterns, how
long the agent should continue working with each customer, and when and how that customer should be
transferred to an expert service provider. The trade-off from the firm’s perspective is between allowing its
agents to spend more time with each customer, leading to fewer transfers and higher quality service, vs.
instructing its gatekeepers to transfer earlier (and do so in a cost-effective manner).
3.1
Resolution Process
The agent operates in a shift of T discrete periods and is paid at a rate of cwage per period. At the beginning
of each period t = 1,··· ,T, a customer arrives with probability q. If the agent is busy, since there is no
waiting room, the customer is not admitted and leaves the system. If the agent is idle, has just successfully
resolved a request, or just transferred a request, then the customer is admitted for service and service starts
at t + 1. If admitted, the customer remains in the system until their issue is resolved successfully. The firm
receives revenue of r for each admitted customer when the customer issue is resolved and the transaction
is closed. Note that our dynamics are consistent with a queuing system with blocking and no reneging; in
§5.2 we extend the model to include a finite waiting room.
For each admitted customer, as in Alizamir et al. (2013) and Kremer and de V´ericourt (2023), the agent
sequentially executes solutions from a pre-ordered list determined by the firm, until either the issue is
resolved or the customer is transferred. Specifically, the resolution process is represented by an ordered
list of potential solutions s ∈{1,2,...,S}, where each attempt s is characterized by its handling time, τs,
and the conditional probability that it resolves the request, ρs, which depends on the number of previously
unsuccessful attempts (since the order cannot be changed by the agent). Without loss of generality, one of
the S attempts is guaranteed to resolve the request so that ρS = 1. The focal decision of the firm is how many
attempts the agent will make before transferring the customer to the expert. In particular, upon completion
of attempt s, one of two outcomes may occur: (1) attempt s resolves the request or (2) attempt s does not
resolve the request and the agent follows the firm’s resolution policy by performing one of three actions:
Continue: The agent makes the next attempt (s + 1). This expends τs+1 time units, and resolves the request
with probability ρs+1.
8

Warm Transfer: The agent warm transfers the customer to an expert. In practice, this may include intro-
ducing the customer to the expert, providing context, or passing on any relevant customer information to
avoid repetition. A warm transfer costs the firm cw for expert compensation, where cw represents a transfer
payment to a different division of the same firm where the expert is employed, or a fee to the third party that
employs the expert. The duration of the warm transfer depends on whether an expert is immediately avail-
able to receive the customer. In each period, an expert is available (A = 1) with probability a and unavailable
(A = 0) with probability 1 −a. Once the warm transfer begins, the agent expends τw periods performing
the transfer. Following the warm transfer, the agent remains idle if there is no arrival (Q = 0), or begins
handling a new request if there is an arrival (Q = 1).
Cold Transfer: The agent cold transfers the customer to an expert, who resolves the request. A cold transfer
costs the firm cc for expert compensation, where cc > cw since the agent simply drops the customer into the
expert queue, requiring the expert to spend more time with the customer. If there is no arrival (Q = 0), the
agent is idle until another request arrives; otherwise, there is an arrival (Q = 1) and the agent immediately
begins handling a new request.
For each request the decision repeats until it is either resolved or transferred to the expert. After each
resolved (or transferred) request, the agent begins serving the next customer as soon as one becomes avail-
able. Both congestion states (Q and A) are observable. Thus, the key trade-off at each decision point is
whether, given current congestion, to dedicate more agent time to the focal customer to increase the chances
of resolving their request, or to process a higher volume of customers by referring them to the expert,
thereby freeing up agent capacity.
3.2
Dynamic Programming (DP) Formulation
To formulate the DP for the above problem, we need to define the state of the system in period t = 1,··· ,T.
To that end, let X ∈{0i,0w,1,2,··· ,S} denote the agent’s status, where X ∈{1,2,··· ,S} indicates that the
agent just finished attempt s, X = 0i indicates an auxiliary state in which the agent was idle in the previous
period waiting for a new request to process, and X = 0w indicates the other auxiliary state in which the
agent has initiated a warm transfer but was waiting with the customer in the previous period because no
expert was available to receive the customer. Thus, the state of the system is fully specified by the 3-tuple
(X,Q,A). At time t, the objective is to choose the action that maximizes expected net revenue over time t
to T, exclusive of the “sunk” agent wage, which need not be considered. Denote the optimal value function
at t = 1,··· ,T by Vt(X,Q,A), and the terminal value vector by VT+1(X,Q,A).
Before writing the value function for each of the 4(S + 2) states, we make two observations. First, if the
agent was idle waiting for a new request to arrive in the previous period (X = 0i), then the availability of
the expert is irrelevant since the agent will either continue to be idle (if Q = 0) or begin working on the first
9

attempt of a new request (if Q = 1). Hence, the value function does not depend on A and can be conveniently
denoted by Vt(0i,Q,−). Second, if the agent has initiated a warm transfer and was waiting for an expert to
become available (X = 0w), then the presence of an arrival is irrelevant since the agent will either continue
to wait for the expert (if A = 0) or begin handing the request off to the expert (if A = 1). Hence, the value
function does not depend on Q and can be conveniently denoted by Vt(0w,−,A).
These simplifications allow us to write the value function for t = 1,··· ,T as follows:
Vt(X,Q,A) =



























(1 −q)Vt+1(0i,0,−) + qVt+1(0i,1,−),
if X = 0i,Q = 0, (2.1)
(1 −q)(1 −a)Vt+τ1(1,0,0) + q(1 −a)Vt+τ1(1,1,0) + ···
(1 −q)aVt+τ1(1,0,1) + qaVt+τ1(1,1,1),
if X = 0i,Q = 1, (2.2)
(1 −a)Vt+1(0w,−,0) + aVt+1(0w,−,1),
if X = 0w,A = 0, (2.3)
(1 −q)Vt+τw(0i,0,−) + qVt+τw(0i,1,−),
if X = 0w,A = 1, (2.4)
ρX(r +Vt(0i,Q,−)) + (1 −ρX)

max{Nt(X),···
−(cw −r) +Vt(0w,−,A),−(cc −r) +Vt(0i,Q,−)}

,
if 1 ≤X < S,
(2.5)
r +Vt(0i,Q,A),
if X = S,
(2.6)
where Nt(X) in (2.5) is the value-to-go for making attempt X +1 (continuing) after attempt X fails in period
t. This is given by
Nt(X) = (1 −q)(1 −a)Vt+τX+1(X + 1,0,0) + q(1 −a)Vt+τX+1(X + 1,1,0) + ···
(1 −q)aVt+τX+1(X + 1,0,1) + qaVt+τX+1(X + 1,1,1).
(3)
In (3) each of the four terms on the right side of the inequality is the probability of being in a given conges-
tion state (Q,A) after completing attempt X + 1, multiplied by the value-to-go of being in that congestion
state upon completion.
Equation (2.1) assures that if the agent was idle during period t because there was no arrival, the agent
begins period t +1 idle, whereas (2.2) assures that if there was an arrival, the agent began service. Equation
(2.3) assures that if the agent was idle during period t waiting for an expert, the agent begins period t + 1
idle, whereas (2.4) assures that if the expert became available, the agent spends τw periods performing the
handoff and is idle at the beginning of period t + τw. Equation (2.6) guarantees that if the final potential
solution was attempted (X = S), the firm received revenue r, and the agent moved to the next customer as
soon as one became available.
The key trade-off is shown in (2.5). In this case, with (conditional) probability ρX, attempt X = s resolves
the request, the firm receives the revenue r and the firm instructs the agent on how to proceed optimally.
With complementary probability 1−ρX, attempt X = s did not resolve the request. So, to maximize expected
future value, the agent must either make the next attempt X + 1 (the first argument of the max operator),
warm transfer and incur the warm transfer cost of cw (the second argument), or transfer the request and
incur the cold transfer cost of cc (the third argument). Note that in all cases, the firm eventually receives
10

Figure 2
Value-To-Go After Failed Attempt X For Each Action And Congestion State (Q,A)
revenue r from the customer. Finally, we note that in our formulation, the agent may take an action that
results in t exceeding T. We handle this in our specification of VT+1(X,Q,A) (the terminal conditions),
whose discussion we defer as they play a critical role in characterizing the structure of the optimal policy.
The essence of the problem is captured intuitively by Figure 2, in which circles represent random nodes
and squares represent decision nodes. The agent has just failed to resolve the request after making attempt
X. The state is defined by downstream congestion (A) and the presence of an arriving customer (Q). For
each (Q,A) combination, one of the three actions is optimal: 1) continuing, resulting in the value-to-go of
Nt(X), 2) warm transferring, resulting in a net revenue of r −cw, and 3) cold transferring, resulting in a net
revenue of r −cc, with either transfer option leading to a transition to a new state.
Several observations are in order. First, because Q and A are time-independent, Nt(X) depends only on
X, i.e., how many unsuccessful attempts have been completed. Thus, the value of continuing is constant
across the congestion states. Second, to visualize upstream congestion, we highlight instances where Q = 1
in blue and instances where Q = 0 in red. When comparing the top two decisions ((Q = 0,A = 0) and
(Q = 1,A = 0)), the only difference between the value-to-go for each action is that it is greater for cold
transferring when Q = 1 than when Q = 0, because cold transferring when there is no arrival leads to
nonproductive idle time. The same holds when comparing the bottom two decisions. Third, to visualize
downstream congestion, we highlight instances where A = 1 in blue and instances where A = 0 in red.
Analogous to upstream congestion, when comparing congestion in the first and third decisions, the only
difference between the value-to-go for each action is that it is greater for warm transferring when A = 1
than when A = 0, because when there is no expert available, warm transferring requires the agent to wait
11

idly until one becomes available. The same holds when comparing the second and fourth decisions. We use
these observations to derive local properties that help simplify the structure of the optimal policy.
4
Policy Analysis
In this section we use the above dynamic programming formulation to provide structure to the optimal
resolution policy. We first derive local properties that substantially reduce the number of admissible decision
rules. We then propose a set of terminal conditions that make the optimal policy stationary over time.
Finally, we identify optimal policy structure under stationarity.
4.1
Local Properties
The dynamic program in (2.1) - (2.6) generates a large number of candidate policies. Since there are four
possible states, each with a choice of three actions, at each X and t, the strategy space consists of 34 = 81
possible action vectors. Ordinarily, such a large number of possible policies would be daunting, even if the
problem were stationary. Fortunately, we are able to reduce complexity by finding a set of dominance rules
that eliminate all but 11 of the 81 decision rule vectors. The proof of this and the following two theorems
are in the electronic companion.
THEOREM 1A If in period t, under a given A it is optimal to warm transfer when there is an arrival
(Q = 1), then it is also optimal to warm transfer when there is no arrival (Q = 0). If in period t, under a
given A it is optimal for the agent to continue when there is an arrival (Q = 1), then it is also optimal to
continue when there is no arrival (Q = 0).
THEOREM 1B If in period t, under a given Q it is optimal to cold transfer when an expert is available
(A = 1), then it is also optimal to cold transfer when no expert is available (A = 0). If in period t, under a
given Q it is optimal for the agent to continue when an expert is available (A = 1), then it is also optimal to
continue when no expert is available (A = 0).
Theorem 1A relies on the fact that neither the payoff of warm transferring nor the payoff of making the next
attempt depends on the presence of an arrival (Q), and the payoff of cold transferring is lower when there is
no arrival (Q = 0). Analogously, Theorem 1B relies on the fact that neither the payoff of cold transferring
nor the payoff of making the next attempt depends on current expert availability (A), and the payoff of warm
transferring is lower when no expert is available (A = 0).
Table 1 lists the admissible decision rules that remain after eliminating those that do not satisfy the
dominance conditions in Theorems 1A and 1B. The first rule is C(ontinue), which is to continue with the
next attempt irrespective of congestion state (Q,A). The next four are H(ybrid) rules, in which (depending
on the state) the agent may continue, warm transfer, or cold transfer. The final six are T(ransfer) rules, in
which (depending on the state) the agent always transfers (where the mode depends on the state). From the
12

customer perspective (which we will discuss in §6) the rules also map to service quality. For example, rule
C is the pure single-channel strategy (concierge service) as the customer remains with the agent for the next
attempt, regardless of congestion. In contrast, rules T1 through T5 correspond to lower service quality and
transfer the customer, with the transfer mode depending on the state. Among the T rules, T5 is the rule with
the lowest service quality, as the customer is always cold transferred, regardless of state.
Table 1
Admissible Decision Rules
State:
(Q = 0,A = 0)
(Q = 1,A = 0)
(Q = 0,A = 1)
(Q = 1,A = 1)
Label
C
Continue
Continue
Continue
Continue
H1
Continue
Continue
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
H2
Continue
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
H3
Continue
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Transfer
H4
Continue
Cold Transfer
Continue
Cold Transfer
T1
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
T2
Warm Transfer
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
T3w
Cold Transfer
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Warm Transfer
T3c
Warm Transfer
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Cold Transfer
T4
Cold Transfer
Cold Transfer
Warm Transfer
Cold Transfer
T5
Cold Transfer
Cold Transfer
Cold Transfer
Cold Transfer
lowest service quality
highest service quality
4.2
Terminal Conditions and Stationarity
While there are many ways to specify terminal conditions, we tailor them such that the policy is stationary
over T, making the optimal policy independent of the amount of time left in the agent’s shift. This allows
us to characterize both finite-horizon shifts and 24/7 operations using the same policy. In particular, the
dynamic program (agent shift) terminates at the last decision epoch before taking the optimal action would
otherwise result in t exceeding T. If the agent is idle at this last decision epoch, the shift terminates at T and
the oncoming agent proceeds at T + 1. If the agent has just finished an unsuccessful attempt at or before T,
then the agent hands off the request to the oncoming agent, who starts the new shift and continues to handle
the request optimally. Thus, as we show below, we specify the conditions such that the optimal actions of
the agents are consistent throughout the shifts.
Let G(X,Q,A) be a constant used in defining the value function under the optimal stationary policy at
state (X,Q,A). Since there are four congestion states for X ∈{1,2,··· ,S} and we effectively collapse the
four congestion states into two each for X = 0i in (2.1) and for X = 0w in (2.4), there are 4S + 2 + 2 =
4S +4 = 4(S +1) constants to be specified, which we refer to as the terminal conditions. Also, let R∗be the
revenue (net of agent and expert costs) per unit time under the optimal stationary policy. Then we define the
solution to the dynamic program as
Vt(X,Q,A) = R∗(T + 1 −t) + G(X,Q,A)
(4)
The term R∗(T + 1 −t) is the pro-rated payment for the time remaining in the program, and the constant
captures the expected incremental value of being in a given congestion state (Q,A), given the agent’s current
13

status (X). In the proof of Theorem 2 below we specify the conditions necessary to induce stationarity, and
refer to them as Type F conditions, since they are affine functions of R∗. This leads us to the following:
THEOREM 2 Under terminal conditions of Type F the optimal resolution policy is stationary, i.e., the
optimal decision rule after a given failed attempt does not depend on t.
The economic meaning of these terminal conditions is as follows. For a given t, the value of (4) increases
in the number of failed attempts. This is because the request is getting closer to successful resolution.
Moreover, for each X, G(X,Q,A) is lowest for (Q = 0,A = 0) and highest for (Q = 1,A = 1). This is because
there is potential value in the presence of an arrival (since the agent may immediately begin processing a
request) and potential value in an expert being available (since the agent may immediately begin performing
a warm transfer). Also, the difference between G(0i,1,−) and G(0i,0,−) is R∗/q, the incremental expected
opportunity cost of waiting for the next customer to arrive. Analogously, the difference between G(0w,−,1)
and G(0w,−,0) is R∗/a, the incremental expected opportunity cost of waiting for the expert to become
available. This allows us to price out the incremental value of congestion, leading to the structural results
next.
4.3
Optimal Policy Under Stationarity
Here we use the terminal conditions formulated in the proof of Theorem 2 to reduce the number of admissi-
ble decision rules for a given problem instance from 11 down to 3 or 4. The key is identifying when a cold
transfer is preferred to a warm transfer for a given (Q,A). As in the proof of Theorem 3, we proceed by
substituting the terminal conditions in (4) into the transfer arguments of the max operator in (2.5). Then, a
cold transfer is preferred to a warm transfer for a given (Q,A) if
G(0i,Q,−) −G(0w,−,A) ≥cc −cw.
Furthermore, substituting in G(0i,Q,−) and G(0w,−,A) from the proof of Theorem 2 yields
R∗[τw −1 + (1 −A)/a + Q/q] ≥cc −cw.
Adding and subtracting 1/q to the left-hand side and simplifying yields
R∗[τw + (1 −q)/q + (1 −A)/a] −R∗[(1 −Q)/q] ≥cc −cw.
In the inequalities above, the right-hand side is the incremental savings from performing a warm transfer
over a cold transfer (recall that cw < cc as the expert requires less time to resolve a warm transfer). For a
cold transfer to be preferred, these savings must exceed the foregone opportunity cost that a warm transfer
induces relative to a cold transfer. This is given by the profit-adjusted difference between the first and second
terms in brackets on the left-hand side. The first term in brackets is the expected time before the agent
14

will recommence service after a warm transfer, and the second term is the analogous expected time after a
cold transfer. This intuitive condition can be rearranged to show that a warm transfer is preferred to a cold
transfer when the optimal profit R∗is greater than
R∗≥(cc −cw)/[τw −1 + (1 −A)/a + Q/a] ≡R (Q,A).
These intuitive insights are formalized in Theorem 3 below.
THEOREM 3a For a given (Q,A) and any X, there exists a positive constant R (Q,A) such that when
R∗< R (Q,A), a warm transfer is preferred to a cold transfer; otherwise, R∗≥R (Q,A), and a cold transfer
is preferred to a warm transfer.
THEOREM 3b R∗is such that 0 ≤R (1,0) ≤R (1,1) ≤R (0,0) ≤R (0,1), if 1/q ≤1/a; otherwise,
0 ≤R (1,0) ≤R (0,0) ≤R (1,1) ≤R (0,1).
THEOREM 3c For a given problem instance, in an optimal resolution policy there are only up to four
admissible decision rules: the continue rule, one or two of the four hybrid rules, and one of the six transfer
rules.
An implication of Theorem 3a is that for each congestion state (Q,A), if the problem is not resolved at
attempt X, the agent has two actions: continue or transfer to an expert; if transferring, then for every X, the
transfer mode (cold transfer or warm transfer) is the same. In this sense, the choice is binary, but which
of these actions is optimal may depend on (Q,A). However, Theorem 3a is sufficient to provide further
structure since the constants R (Q,A) can be ordered as in Theorem 3b; this ordering depends on the relative
values of q and a. Thus, for a given problem instance, there are five cases defined by ranges where R∗may
lie relative to the four R (Q,A) constants. Each range has a different set of preferred (more economical)
transfer methods across the congestion states (Q,A). Finally, Theorem 3c follows by determining, for each
range, which of the 11 decision rules derived from Theorem 1 (listed in Table 1) are potentially optimal
under stationarity by admitting only the rules where, for each (Q,A), the optimal action is either continue or
to transfer the customer under the method that is more economical in that range. To elaborate on Theorem
3, we include Table 2. For ease of exposition, we only present the case where 1/q > 1/a.
Table 2a provides the ranges, with the value of R∗increasing from left to right. Table 2b lists the preferred
transfer method for each congestion state. For example, in Case 1, R∗is sufficiently low such that it is
more economical to warm transfer the customer, regardless of congestion state. However, in Case 2, R∗
is sufficiently high such that it is more economical to cold transfer if there is an arrival and there is no
expert available (Q = 1,A = 0), but sufficiently low such that it is more economical to warm transfer in
the remaining congestion states. More generally, when R∗is low, the revenue losses due to the inability to
serve new arrivals are low. However, as R∗increases, these revenue losses increase relative to the costs of
15

Table 2
Ranges, Preferred Transfer Method, and Admissible Decision Rules Over Cases of R∗(1/q > 1/a)
Table 2a: Ranges
Case
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3w
Case 4
Case 5
R∗
R∗< R (1,0) R (1,0) ≤R∗< R (1,1) R (1,1) ≤R∗< R (0,0) R (0,0) ≤R∗< R (0,1) R (0,1) ≤R∗
Table 2b: Preferred Transfer Method
Q
A
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3w
Case 4
Case 5
0
0
Warm
Warm
Cold
Cold
Cold
1
0
Warm
Cold
Cold
Cold
Cold
0
1
Warm
Warm
Warm
Warm
Cold
1
1
Warm
Warm
Warm
Cold
Cold
Table 2c: Admissible Decision Rules
Label
Rule
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3w
Case 4
Case 5
C
[n,n,n,n]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
H1
[n,n,w,w]
✓
✓
✓
H2
[n,c,w,w]
✓
✓
H3
[n,c,w,c]
✓
H4
[n,c,n,c]
✓
✓
T1
[w,w,w,w]
✓
T2
[w,c,w,w]
✓
T3w
[c,c,w,w]
✓
T4
[c,c,w,c]
✓
T5
[c,c,c,c]
✓
n = continue, w = warm transfer, c = cold transfer
cold transfers, resulting in cold transferring becoming increasingly preferred. At the extreme, in Case 5 it is
more economical to cold transfer in all states.
Finally, given the preferred transfer type, we can construct Table 2c, where we indicate, by range, which
decision rules are admissible. We highlight the two corner cases. Case 1 contains problem scenarios where
the firm’s optimal resolution policy is to provide the most personalized service possible. So, after a given
failure, the admissible transfer rule is T1, in which the agent must perform a warm transfer, regardless of Q
and A, and the admissible hybrid rule is H1, wherein the agent performs a warm transfer if there is expert
availability (A = 1). At the other extreme is Case 5, where the firm provides the least-personalized service,
concentrating on throughput instead. In this case, the only admissible transfer rule is T5, wherein the agent
must cold transfer the customer, regardless of Q and A, and the only admissible hybrid rule is H4, wherein
the agent cold transfers contingent on the presence of an arrival (Q = 1). One consequence of Theorem 3 is
that in any problem instance the number of admissible policies is limited to three or four. While insightful,
this structural result leaves issues of fast running times unresolved. As discussed in the next section, to
develop fast algorithms, we propose using a threshold policy as a heuristic.
5
Heuristics
In this section we extend our modeling in two ways. We first evaluate system performance under an intuitive
threshold policy that further reduces policy complexity; we find that the heuristic approach performs quite
well and is optimal under a sufficiency condition which has a shortest processing time interpretation. We
then extend our analysis to include a waiting room whose operationalization we show under a two-attempt
16

model without the warm transfer option. This allows us to draw additional insights into policy performance
under queueing dynamics.
5.1
Threshold Policy Heuristic
While our structural analysis has reduced the optimal policy search to a manageable number of decision
rules, the number of admissible policies still grows exponentially in S. As a polynomial-time alternative to
the optimal algorithm, we examined performance using a threshold policy. A policy has a threshold structure
when, for a given (Q,A), if the policy is to transfer after failed attempt X, then it would also be to transfer
for all subsequent failed attempts. Intuitively, under a threshold policy, the decision-making sequence for
a given request is: for a given congestion state, continue until a specified number of attempts; thereafter,
perform the transfer type specified for that congestion state. From a practical standpoint, this would allow
for easy management communication of the policy structure and eliminate the burden of retaining a decision
rule for each attempt/congestion-state combination.
In EC.2 we measure the performance of threshold policies as a heuristic solution for 1,200,000 randomly
generated problem instances, each for S = 3, S = 4, S = 5, and S = 6. Table 3 summarizes the relevant
performance measures from our analysis.
Table 3
Performance Measures of Threshold Policy Heuristic
Number of Potential Solutions (S)
Performance Measure
S = 3
S = 4
S = 5
S = 6
% Instances Threshold Optimal
97.46%
96.58%
96.02%
95.62%
Average Optimality Gap
0.005%
0.006%
0.006%
0.005%
Maximum Optimality Gap
1.888%
1.818%
1.634%
1.575%
In over 95% of the instances, a threshold policy is optimal, with an average optimality gap of no greater
than 0.006%. Notably, while the fraction of instances where a threshold policy is optimal is decreasing in
S, the optimality gap remains stable; this is because the optimality gap in instances where a threshold pol-
icy was not optimal is decreasing in S. Additionally, worst-case performance measured by the maximum
optimality gap decreases in S, suggesting that the threshold heuristic performance improves as the computa-
tional burden for finding the optimal policy increases. Overall, this analysis suggests that threshold policies
achieve optimal or close-to-optimal performance in the majority of scenarios.
Since we find that threshold policies often achieve optimal or close-to-optimal performance, we delved
deeper into the policy structure to explore when threshold policies are provably optimal. Because processing
times, adjusted for uncertainty, play a prominent role in the transfer decision we studied many variants of
the weighted shortest process time (WSPT) rule as explicated in Chapter 9 of Pinedo (1995). Ultimately,
we found an interpretable variant given next.
THEOREM 4 A threshold policy is an optimal solution if either of the following conditions holds:
17

(i) Condition C-WSPT-a: If 1/a > 1/q and for X = 2,3,··· ,S,
τX/ρX −τX−1/ρX−1 ≤(1/a)/ρX + [(1 −a)/a](1 −ρX−1)/ρX−1; or
(ii) Condition C-WSPT-q: If 1/a ≤1/q and for X = 2,3,··· ,S,
τX/ρX −τX−1/ρX−1 ≤(1/q)/ρX + [(1 −q)/q](1 −ρX−1)/ρX−1.
Note that this variant of WSPT is appealing in that it gives a sufficient condition independent of all
economic parameters of the problem. Interestingly, the weights depend on uncertainty but via conditional
probabilities, which we interpret as a conditional risk-adjusted WSPT. See EC.2 for the proof of the above
theorem and a further discussion of its intuition and connection to WSPT rules.
5.2
Finite Waiting Room
We have thus far examined a system where arriving customers are not admitted if the agent is unavailable.
However, given the prevalence of queueing in real-world service systems (in the form of finite and infinite
waiting rooms), a brief examination of how its inclusion would impact our analysis is warranted. The addi-
tion of a waiting room to our model would allow us to capture these dynamics, but would also substantially
increase the number of admissible policies as one would need to condition the transfer decision at a given
attempt on the current queue length. While our approach would work in general, to keep focus we illustrate
our approach using a waiting room of capacity N where only cold transfers are permitted and at most two
resolution attempts are required.
To simplify analysis, we examine the problem under an infinite horizon, which bypasses the need to
induce policy stationarity through terminal conditions. Given this setup, the following policies are admis-
sible: Never Transfer, Always Transfer and Transfer when Q ≥n,n = 1,2,··· ,N (Q is now the number
of customers in the waiting room plus up to one current arrival). Under an infinite horizon, each of these
policies can be characterized as a Discrete Time Markov Chain (DTMC), yielding steady-state probabilities
with which we can calculate the profit per period. We demonstrate how to perform these calculations in
EC.3. Note that choosing N = 0 yields the model presented in §4.
Using the DTMC structure, we perform numerical experiments with a waiting room size of six (N = 6)
to allow for sufficient demand buildup to illustrate the queueing dynamics. Consider first Figure 3. The
figure shows the performance of all admissible policies, with the parameters reported above the plot area.
The arrival intensity (q) is varied between 0.01 and 1.00 on the horizontal axis and profit per period is
shown on the vertical axis. For q ∈[0.01,0.40], “Never Transfer” dominates “Always Transfer”. In this
range, arrival intensity is sufficiently low such that the cost savings from not transferring outweighs the extra
revenue loss caused by the additional blocking resulting from longer service times and, therefore, higher
utilization. Conversely, for q ∈[0.41,1.00], the additional revenue from accepting new customers from the
waiting room outweighs transfer costs, and “Always Transfer” dominates “Never Transfer”. Also note that
18

Figure 3
Profit Per Period by Arrival Intensity Under Admissible Policies for Waiting Room Capacity Six
for q ∈[0.02,0.66], state-contingent policies are optimal. Moreover, among all policies averaged over q,
the best is to transfer if Q ≥3. This has an intuitive interpretation as the “transfer when waiting room is
half full” policy, which allows for sufficient storage of demand but mitigates excessive customer blocking.
Finally, note that each policy approaches an asymptotic profit per period based on its maximum service
rate.1
Figure 4 shows how the presence of a waiting room affects profits. Specifically, we plot the optimal profit
under three scenarios: 1) optimal profit of all three admissible policies with no waiting room, 2) profit with
the waiting room under the Transfer when Q ≥3 Policy, 3) optimal profit with the waiting room under all
eight admissible policies (which we examined in Figure 3). Unsurprisingly, the inclusion of the waiting
room increases profit for all values of q as some demand may now be postponed rather than lost. However,
the increase is minimal at the extremes as the waiting room is seldom used under very low intensity and
nearly always full under high intensity. When comparing optimal profits in the waiting room scenarios, we
see that restricting the policy search to “Transfer when Q ≥3” results in nearly the same profit as the full set
of admissible policies. This is good news for managers as it indicates that intuitive search heuristics could
be quite effective when the policy space is large and customers are patient.
6
Application to AI-enabled Customer Service Design
In this section we turn to the firm’s broader customer service design problem, which includes the strategic
selection of service channels, the tactical choice of live-agent (gatekeeper) staffing levels and automated/AI
capability investment, and the operational control of resolution policies. To maintain focus, we limit our
analysis to a two-channel system with homogeneous customers, where the firm may offer a live-agent chan-
nel, an AI chatbot channel, or both. While the presented approach can be easily generalized to accommodate
more than two channels or heterogeneous customers, we omit these extensions for the sake of brevity and
1 The state-contingent policies approach the same asymptotic profit as that of the “Always Transfer” policy since, under high arrival
intensity, the waiting room is nearly always full, resulting in nearly every request being transferred if the first attempt fails. In other
words, the state-contingent policies behave nearly the same as the “Always Transfer” policy under high intensity.
19

Figure 4
Optimal Profit Per Period by Arrival Intensity with and without Waiting Room
clarity. As in the previous sections, we prioritize intuition and key results, with technical details provided in
EC.4 - EC.6.
6.1
Overview of Firm’s Problem
To examine the firm’s service design problem, we revisit the profit-maximization problem from (1) in §2.1:
max
kagent,Dagent,pbot
succ
πagent(kagent,Dagent,λagent(kagent,Dagent, pbot
succ)) + πbot(pbot
succ,λbot(kagent,Dagent, pbot
succ)).
(5)
We have already shown in §3 - §4 how to optimally set the live-agent resolution policies, Dagent. In §6.2 we
extend our model of request resolution to a multi-server setting, which will allow us to determine the optimal
staffing levels, kagent. In §6.3 we show how the firm can optimally set the chatbot performance level, pbot
succ.
Also note that because the problem in (5) is formulated from the firm’s profit-maximization perspective,
it must balance both cost and quality considerations. This is because kagent, Dagent, and pbot
succ give rise to
channel-specific performance measures (such as transfer probabilities and expected service times), which
in turn affect service quality. We characterize these effects in §6.4, where we solve the customers’ channel
choice problem and calculate demand rates for each channel (λagent,λbot) as a response to exogenously
given service performance measures. Then, in §6.5 we align the firm’s and the customers’ problems by
endogenizing the arrival rates to each channel. To do so, we set the demand rates expected by the firm equal
to the arrival rates resultant from aggregate customer decisions (setting λagent = qagent/kagent, λbot = qbot)
and solve (5) by evaluating it over all channel mix combinations, staffing levels, chatbot capabilities, and
optimized resolution policies within each channel. Finally, in §6.6 we perform numerical experiments over
a range of plausible bot training and wage cost structures to gain managerial insights.
6.2
Multiple Servers (kagent > 1)
To this point, our analysis has focused on the optimal control problem of a single live agent under exogenous
demand. In practice, most live customer service channels employ multiple agents to handle demand, which
introduces an additional layer of complexity and the decision variable of agent staffing levels. Increasing
20

the number of agents could enable the firm to deliver higher service quality by changing the resolution
policy such that agents make additional resolution attempts before transferring (or warm transfer rather than
cold transfer after failure). Moreover, the joint staffing and resolution policy problem also interacts with the
channel selection problem as the inclusion of automated channels such as AI chatbots could divert demand
away from the live channels and reduce (or fully eliminate) the need for live agents.
Extending our analysis to a multiserver setting would require us to condition the focal agent’s optimal
action on the status of all other agents, rendering practical analysis intractable; for example, the asymptotic
M/M/1 approach based on Abate et al. (1995, 1996) cannot be used here because our controls are state-
dependent. We thus propose an alternative routing scheme that maintains the same admissible resolution
policies as the single agent model. In particular, customers who enter the channel are randomly assigned
to one of kagent agents (irrespective of status), thereby retaining for each agent the Bernoulli arrival process
described in §3.1. This is akin to splitting traffic into dedicated queues and assigning work using a round-
robin system. Once incoming customer traffic is allocated, each agent channel structure is that of the model
of Sections 3 and 4, allowing us to focus on different customer service designs, and the inherent trade-offs
between offering different channel combinations, chatbot training, staffing, and resolution policies.
6.3
The Chatbot Channel
Our interviews with BlackBeltHelp (described in §1) suggest that AI developers program chatbots to make
a limited number of attempts to diagnose and resolve each request before transferring the customer to a
human expert. This is similar to the S-attempt approach that we used to model the live-agent channel (§3).
In the case of the chatbot channel, the developer conducts a cost-benefit analysis to choose which of the S
attempts to program the chatbot to make, and to what degree of reliability. Since the chatbot’s opportunity
cost of time is negligible, the chatbot continues to make attempts until all attempts for a given request are
exhausted, before transferring the customer. As a result, the chatbot’s resolution policy is fully characterized
by its resolution probability, pbot
succ, where the development cost function is increasing and convex in pbot
succ.
A convex cost is directly supported by the extensive computer science literature discussing the diminishing
returns of training domain-specific chatbots (Hoffmann et al. 2022, and references there). We choose the
form cbot(pbot
succ) = abot(100 · pbot
succ)bbot, which gives us flexibility to examine scenarios with different base
costs (scale parameter abot) and different rates of increase (exponent bbot).
The chatbot’s resolution policy is further simplified by the limited nature of its action set (relative to that
of the live agent). In particular, if the chatbot fails to resolve the request, the customer must be cold trans-
ferred to the expert. This is because the chatbot cannot perform warm transfers. Given that the chatbot will
make up to all programmed attempts before transferring to the expert, it is as if the chatbot is programmed
as a gatekeeper whose optimal policy is static in that it performs the sequential request resolution procedure
(from §3) and then transfers upon failure. Note that such a static protocol is a special instance of Case 5
21

of Theorem 3 in Table 2. Finally, from the customer’s perspective, there is no waiting time to access the
chatbot. The chatbot admits all customers that arrive and they are served immediately without waiting.
6.4
Customer Channel Choice Model
The staffing level, resolution policy, and chatbot capability (kagent,Dagent, pbot
succ) give rise to channel per-
formance measures; specifically, the customers’ admission probability (in the live-agent channel), transfer
probabilities, and expected service times. Customers respond to these measures by choosing the channel (if
any) that maximizes their utility. The resultant demand model is shown in Figure 5.
Each customer i chooses between joining the live-agent channel, the chatbot channel, and a fixed outside
option U0, knowing that once admitted, the customer is assured of request resolution. However, from the
customer’s perspective, the outcome and the amount of time spent in each channel are uncertain. We repre-
sent this uncertainty with the circles (random nodes) in Figure 5. The live-agent channel has three possible
outcomes: the agent that the customer is routed to succeeds, the agent transfers the customer to the expert,
and the agent is busy serving another customer. In the latter case, the customer is left with the choice to leave
the system or to contact the chatbot. (Consistent with §3, customers who are not admitted do not wait). The
chatbot channel is analogous, with the difference being that it is never congested. Customers act on their
idiosyncratic technology preferences (channel-specific service valuations vagent
i
and vbot
i ). Their responses
also depend on potential aversion to transfers (included in the E[Cexpert] terms), the relative comparison of
waiting costs (E[C] terms), and possible disutility of not being admitted to the live-agent channel (cnot
admit).
Note that the transfer aversion captured in E[Cexpert] is set higher for cold transfers than warm transfers as
suggested from our customer survey in §1. In EC.4 we fully specify the utilities and solve for the demand
rates for each channel, λagent and λbot, as a function of performance measures communicated to customers.
Figure 5
Customer Channel Choice Model
22

6.5
Customer Service Design Problem
We have so far assumed that the firm’s problem and the customers’ problem are solved independently. That
is, the firm’s problem is solved under exogenously given arrival rates, while the channel choice model in
§6.4 is solved under exogenously given performance measures. Linking the two problems requires that we
endogenize channel demand such that we end up at a “rational expectations” equilibrium in which the firm
delivers that which is promised to the customer, who in turn anticipates the fulfillment of this promise. We
do this by solving for λagent = qagent/kagent and λbot = qbot such that arrival rates from the resolution model
and demand rates from the customer choice model are set equal under a given choice of resolution policies
(Dagent, pbot
succ). To build managerial intuition, we do this for the special case of uniformly distributed service
valuations (vagent
i
, vbot
i ). See EC.5 for details.
Once the profit maximization problem in (5) is fully specified, it can be solved by jointly evaluating up to
four decisions: 1) the strategic decision of which gatekeeper channel(s) to deploy – live-agent-only, chatbot-
only, or both, 2) and 3) the tactical decisions of what staffing level to set in the live-agent channel (kagent), and
to what extent the chatbot is trained (pbot
succ), and 4) the operational decision of which live-agent resolution
policy to employ (Dagent). In EC.6 we formulate the firm’s profit function in (5) under the above inputs. In
essence, for each staffing level (including kagent = 0), the firm iterates through each admissible live-agent
resolution policy from Table 1 and each potential chatbot success probability value (including pbot
succ = 0) to
find the inputs that optimally balance channel demand, chatbot training costs, and expert resolution costs.
Then the firm selects the most profitable combination.
6.6
Numerical Illustration
For the purposes of illustration, we set S = 2 and evaluate 12 scenarios that differ in the shape of the
training cost function for the bot, as well as the cost of labor (agent wage cwage). The parameters used in the
illustration are described in the notes of Table 4.2
The optimal customer service design, which includes optimal staffing level kagent, optimal agent resolution
policy Dagent and optimal chatbot performance pbot
succ, is summarized in Table 4. Consider first Row (i), where
the base cost is low and the cost increases at a slow rate. These scenarios are representative of a firm that
can, with some effort, delegate the majority of customer problems to a chatbot. This can be reflective of a
relatively large e-commerce company specializing in consumer electronics, where a sophisticated chatbot
can handle order tracking, provide detailed product information, process return requests, and offer basic
troubleshooting for common issues. In this scenario, the optimal solution is to train the chatbot up to a
2 In addition to the parameters described in the table notes of Table 4, we assume that the firm pays the expert 3.5 per period to
process requests. Chatbot processing times are fixed and exogenous at 6 periods. Customers incur a disutility of 1 for each period
spent with the agent or bot, and a non-admission cost of 1 if not admitted to the live-agent channel (cnot
admit = 1). To reflect the lower
perceived service quality of being transferred, the per period disutility increases to 1.25 after a warm transfer and to 2 after a cold
transfer.
23

relatively high level, with pbot
succ ranging between 0.83 and 0.90 in the optimum. Further, as one may expect,
the optimal chatbot investment increases as cwage increases. Indeed, in the case of medium and high labor
costs, the optimal strategy is to have no human gatekeepers, i.e., kagent = 0.
While Row (i) may be appealing from the firm’s perspective, in the majority of real-life applications, tech-
nology has not yet achieved near-perfect capabilities, suggesting that Rows (ii)-(iv) may be more reflective
of the current chatbot economics.3 In these scenarios, the costs of providing a high pbot
succ can be prohibitively
high, which may be reflective of services such as banking or healthcare, where complex and personalized
interactions are often required. For example, in banking, chatbots might handle basic account inquiries or
transaction histories, but struggle with nuanced financial advice or complex loan applications. In healthcare,
chatbots may schedule appointments or provide general health information, but cannot replace the expertise
of medical professionals for diagnosis or treatment plans. In these scenarios, we observe that the optimal
pbot
succ reaches at most 0.59 (Scenario H(ii)). Indeed, if the chatbot development costs are sufficiently high and
agent wages are low (Scenario L(iv)), an agent-only architecture with a large number of agents (kagent = 7)
paired with the most customer-friendly policy of never transferring (Dagent = C) becomes optimal, with
chatbots no longer being viable.
Table 4
Optimal Customer Service Design under Various Live-Agent and Chatbot Development Costs
Live Gatekeeper Wage (cwage)
Bot Training Cost Scenario
(L)ow
(M)edium
(H)igh
(i) Low base cost, slowly increasing
kagent = 2, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.83
kagent = 0, Dagent = N/A,
pbot
succ = 0.90
kagent = 0, Dagent = N/A,
pbot
succ = 0.90
(ii) High base cost, slowly increasing
kagent = 3, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.52
kagent = 1, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.56
kagent = 0, Dagent = N/A,
pbot
succ = 0.59
(iii) Low base cost, rapidly increasing
kagent = 4, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.28
kagent = 2, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.29
kagent = 1, Dagent = T5,
pbot
succ = 0.29
(iv) High base cost, rapidly increasing
kagent = 7, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.00
kagent = 2, Dagent =C,
pbot
succ = 0.21
kagent = 1, Dagent = T5,
pbot
succ = 0.21
Notes: The bot training cost function is abot(pbot
succ)bbot with parameters: (i) abot = 0.00005, bbot = 2.60; (ii) abot = 0.00005, bbot =
3.00; (iii) abot = 0.00009, bbot = 2.60; (iv) abot = 0.00009, bbot = 3.00, cwage ∈{0.5,0.9,1.3}, r = 20, τ1 = 6, τ2 = 15, τw = 3,
ρ1 = 0.7, ρ2 = 1, a = 0.8, (vagent
i
,vbot
i ) ∼U[0,100].
To gain deeper insights, we zoom into Scenario M(iii) from Table 4. For this scenario, we illustrate in
Figure 6 the firm’s profit per period for different combinations of psucc
bot , kagent, and Dagent. The top three
heat bars show profits without chatbots for kagent = 1,2,3. The leftmost (vertical) heat bar represents the
chatbot-only scenario (kagent = 0). The three heat maps on the bottom right display profits with a hybrid,
human+chatbot strategy and kagent = 1,2,3.
3 A recent survey in Kagan et al. (2023) finds that customer service chatbots are currently able to resolve between 30 and 40 percent
of customer inquiries in most consumer settings.
24

Figure 6
Numerical Illustration (Scenario M(iii))
Without chatbot technology, the optimal staffing is kagent = 3 and the optimal resolution policy is T5
(”Always Transfer”), yielding a profit of 1.70. Introducing chatbots while maintaining the same staffing
and resolution policy increases profits by 41.2% to 2.40. Further improvements can be achieved by switch-
ing to resolution policy C (”Never Transfer”), increasing profits by an additional 17.6% to 2.70. This is
achieved through improved customer service quality, which in turn increases demand and revenue. Notably,
the globally optimal design involves reducing the number of gatekeepers to two (kagent = 2) and adopting the
customer-friendly resolution policy C. Moreover, across all scenarios that involve chatbot implementation,
the optimal pbot
succ is remarkably stable at around 0.30, regardless of resolution policy and kagent.
An important managerial takeaway from this numerical analysis is that any design involving both humans
and chatbots can obtain near-optimal performance, particularly when the appropriate resolution policy is
selected. Near-optimal performance can be achieved by a low staffing policy (kagent = 1) paired with a low
service quality policy (“Always Transfer”, i.e., T5). Alternatively, good performance can also be achieved by
a maximum staffing policy (kagent = 3) paired with a high service quality (“Never Transfer”, i.e., C). Hybrid
channel architectures thus give firms the flexibility to position themselves as a cost or a service quality
leader. In contrast, strategies that involve chatbots only or humans only are less flexible and lead to lower
profits. More broadly, these comparisons highlight that firms need to consider both the strategic implications
of AI development investments and the indirect effects on staffing and service delivery processes, in order
to balance service quality and costs.
25

7
Conclusion
This paper develops analytical tools for designing and managing customer service operations. While this
area is potentially vast, the relevant questions can be broadly divided into strategic (which customer service
channels should be offered?), tactical (what is the right configuration of the offered channels?), and oper-
ational (what is the protocol for managing requests within each channel?), as shown in Figure 7. We next
summarize how we have addressed each layer of the problem, and discuss what questions present interesting
opportunities for future research.
Figure 7
Three Layers of Customer Service operations
We began our investigation by addressing a key operational question in customer service operations:
what is the optimal request resolution strategy for the live-agent channel? To answer this question, we mod-
eled each channel as a gatekeeper system. Within each channel, agents (or AI chatbots) act as gatekeepers
receiving a stream of incoming customer requests. Requests are characterized by an ordered list of poten-
tial solutions, where each solution has a known probability of success and an associated service time. By
imposing appropriate terminal conditions to induce stationarity, our formulation accommodates both limited
operating hours (e.g., urgent care clinics) and 24/7 operations (e.g., airline reservation desks). We showed
that although the number of admissible policies can grow exponentially, a simple structure emerges such
that there are at most four optimal decision rules across the resolution steps.
To develop practical insights, we extended our analysis in two directions. We showed numerically that a
heuristic threshold policy approach performs well and found a sufficiency condition that ensures its opti-
mality. Threshold policies are computationally efficient with polynomial run time and are intuitive enough
that practitioners can readily implement them. Furthermore, to capture queueing dynamics, we extended
our model to include a finite waiting room. Despite the expanded policy space, we showed numerically that
a simple heuristic of transferring customers when the waiting room is half full performs near-optimally.
To address the tactical challenges of determining the extent to which each channel is staffed and/or
trained, and how much to invest into an AI Chatbot, we extended our operational model to incorporate the
26

specifics of AI chatbots (near-infinite scalability and inability to warm transfer) and multiple live agents.
Answering these tactical questions requires considering not only the direct costs of administering each
channel, but also understanding how these choices affect customer demand. Further, these tactical questions
interplay with the strategic service channel selection decision, such that the firm may need to alter its
operational protocols once a new channel is introduced. We explored numerically a variety of optimal
designs, which vary in channel architecture (live-agent-only, chatbot-only, both), live-agent staffing, chatbot
capability, and resolution policies. Among other insights, this numerical exercise showed that, contrary to
conventional wisdom, introducing an AI chatbot into a service design may increase (rather than diminish)
service quality.
Our work opens several promising avenues for future research. At the operational level, our model could
be extended to incorporate sophisticated routing protocols where the firm actively directs customers to spe-
cific agents (based on skill level or availability) or to specific channels based on request characteristics. This
would transform our current framework, which relies on round-robin assignment within the live channel
and customer self-selection across channels, into a more general matching problem that could potentially
improve system performance. At the tactical level, the model could be enriched to consider how AI-assist
technologies (beyond standalone chatbots) affect channel staffing and training. Such an extension would
help operations managers understand the complementarities between human and AI capabilities, particu-
larly as firms deploy technologies like real-time suggestion systems and automated documentation tools.
References
Abate, Joseph, Gagan L Choudhury, Ward Whitt. 1995. Exponential approximations for tail probabilities in queues, i:
waiting times. Operations Research, 43 (5), 885-901.
Abate, Joseph, Gagan L Choudhury, Ward Whitt. 1996. Exponential approximations for tail probabilities in queues ii:
Sojourn time and workload. Operations Research, 44 (5), 758-763.
Aircall. 2023. Customer service automation: pros, pitfalls, and best practices. URL https://aircall.io/
blog/customer-happiness/customer-service-automation/. Accessed: 2023-11-24.
Alizamir, Saed, Francis De V´ericourt, Peng Sun. 2013. Diagnostic accuracy under congestion. Management Science,
59 (1), 157-171.
Allon, Gad, Mirko Kremer. 2018. Behavioral foundations of queueing systems. The Handbook of Behavioral Opera-
tions, 9325.
Ansari, Asim, Carl F Mela, Scott A Neslin. 2008. Customer channel migration. Journal of Marketing Research, 45
(1), 60-76. doi:10.1509/jmkr.45.1.060.
Armony, Mor, Constantinos Maglaras. 2004. On customer contact centers with a call-back option: Customer decisions,
routing rules, and system design. Operations Research, 52 (2), 271-292.
27

Batt, Robert J, Christian Terwiesch. 2017. Early task initiation and other load-adaptive mechanisms in the emergency
department. Management Science, 63 (11), 3531-3551.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Jeffrey Hu, Mohammad S Rahman. 2013. Competing in the age of omnichannel retailing,
vol. 1. MIT Cambridge.
Cohen, Maxime C. 2018. Big data and service operations. Production and Operations Management, 27 (9), 1709-
1723.
Das Gupta, Aparupa, Uday S Karmarkar, Guillaume Roels. 2016. The design of experiential services with acclimation
and memory decay: Optimal sequence and duration. Management Science, 62 (5), 1278-1296.
De V´ericourt, Francis, Yong-Pin Zhou. 2005. Managing response time in a call-routing problem with service failure.
Operations Research, 53 (6), 968-981.
Dietvorst, Berkeley J, Joseph P Simmons, Cade Massey. 2015. Algorithm aversion: people erroneously avoid algo-
rithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144 (1), 114.
Feldman, Pnina, Andrew E Frazelle, Robert Swinney. 2023. Managing relationships between restaurants and food
delivery platforms: Conflict, contracts, and coordination. Management Science, 69 (2), 812-823.
Freeman, Michael, Nicos Savva, Stefan Scholtes. 2017. Gatekeepers at work: An empirical analysis of a maternity
unit. Management Science, 63 (10), 3147-3167.
Gallino, Santiago, Antonio Moreno. 2019. Operations in an omnichannel world. Springer.
Gans, Noah, Yong-Pin Zhou. 2007.
Call-routing schemes for call-center outsourcing.
Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 9 (1), 33-50.
Gao, Fei, Xuanming Su. 2017. Omnichannel retail operations with buy-online-and-pick-up-in-store. Management
Science, 63 (8), 2478-2492.
Gao, Fei, Xuanming Su. 2018. Omnichannel service operations with online and offline self-order technologies. Man-
agement Science, 64 (8), 3595-3608.
Hasija, Sameer, Edieal J Pinker, Robert A Shumsky. 2005. Staffing and routing in a two-tier call centre. International
Journal of Operational Research, 1 (1/2), 8-29.
Hathaway, Brett A, Evgeny Kagan, Maqbool Dada. 2023. The gatekeeper’s dilemma:“when should i transfer this
customer?”. Operations Research, 71 (3), 843-859.
Hoffmann, Jordan, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego
de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. 2022. Training compute-optimal large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, .
Kagan, Evgeny, Maqbool Dada, Brett Hathaway. 2023. Ai chatbots in customer service: Adoption hurdles and simple
remedies. Available at SSRN, .
Kremer, Mirko, Francis de V´ericourt. 2023.
Mismanaging diagnostic accuracy under congestion.
Operations
Research, 71 (3), 895-916.
28

Kremer, Mirko, Laurens Debo. 2016. Inferring quality from wait time. Management Science, 62 (10), 3023-3038.
Kumar, Piyush, Maqbool Dada. 2021. Investigating the impact of service line formats on satisfaction with waiting.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 38 (4), 974-993.
Leclerc, France, Bernd H Schmitt, Laurette Dube. 1995. Waiting time and decision making: Is time like money?
Journal of consumer research, 22 (1), 110-119.
Lee, Hsiao-Hui, Edieal J Pinker, Robert A Shumsky. 2012. Outsourcing a two-level service process. Management
Science, 58 (8), 1569-1584.
Lee, Sampson. 2008. To create advocates, you have to differentiate your organization. CustomerThink, URL https:
//customerthink.com/create_advocates_differentiate/. Accessed: 12/02/2023.
Lemon, Katherine N, Peter C Verhoef. 2016. Understanding customer experience throughout the customer sourney.
Journal of Marketing, 80 (6), 69-96. doi:10.1509/jm.15.0420.
Lovejoy, William S. 1988. Effect of stochasticity on optimal harvesting strategies in some lumped-parameter fishery
models. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 45 (10), 1789-1800.
Lund, Donald J, Detelina Marinova. 2014. Managing revenue across retail channels: The interplay of service perfor-
mance and direct marketing. Journal of Marketing, 78 (2), 23-39. doi:10.1509/jm.13.0220.
Luo, Xueming, Siliang Tong, Zheng Fang, Zhe Qu. 2019. Frontiers: Machines vs. humans: The impact of artificial
intelligence chatbot disclosure on customer purchases. Marketing Science, 38 (6), 937-947.
Naor, Pinhas. 1969. The regulation of queue size by levying tolls. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society,
15-24.
Puterman, Martin L. 2014. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley &
Sons.
Salesforce. 2020.
Digital customer service channels.
URL https://www.salesforce.com/blog/
digital-customer-service-channels/. Accessed: 2023-11-24.
Senawi,
Dounia,
Tim
McDougal,
Jaden
Herrin,
Leah
Yousif,
Michael
Kottwitz.
2023.
New
reali-
ties
drive
new
models
for
contact
center
transformation.
Technical
Report,
Deloitte
Consult-
ing LLP.
URL https://www.deloittedigital.com/content/dam/deloittedigital/us/
documents/offerings/offering-20230426-gcs-survey-report.pdf. Accessed: 2023-12-
06.
Sheehan, Ben, Hyun Seung Jin, Udo Gottlieb. 2020. Customer service chatbots: Anthropomorphism and adoption.
Journal of Business Research, 115 14-24.
Shumsky, Robert A, Edieal J Pinker. 2003. Gatekeepers and referrals in services. Management Science, 49 (7),
839-856.
Sun, Zhankun, Nilay Tanık Argon, Serhan Ziya. 2022. When to triage in service systems with hidden customer class
identities? Production and Operations Management, 31 (1), 172-193.
29

Veinott, Arthur F. 1966. On finding optimal policies in discrete dynamic programming with no discounting. The
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 37 (5), 1284-1294.
Xu, Yanyi, Arnab Bisi, Maqbool Dada. 2017. A finite-horizon inventory system with partial backorders and inventory
holdback. Operations Research Letters, 45 (4), 315-322.
30