TITLE: From the Classics to New Tunes: A Neoclassical View on Sharing Economy and Innovative Marketplaces
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13330
---

TSpace Research Repository 
 
tspace.library.utoronto.ca 
 
 
From the Classics to New Tunes: A 
Neoclassical View on Sharing Economy and 
Innovative Marketplaces 
 
Ming Hu 
 
Version Pre-print or submitted manuscript. 
 
 
Citation 
(published version) 
Hu, M. (2021). From the classics to new tunes: A neoclassical view on 
sharing economy and innovative marketplaces. Production and Operations 
Management, 30(6), 1668-1685. 
 
 
Publisher’s Statement This is the submitted version of the following article: Hu, M. 
(2021). From the classics to new tunes: A neoclassical view on 
sharing economy and innovative marketplaces. Production and 
Operations Management, 30(6), 1668-1685, which has been 
published in final form at https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13330. 
This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in 
accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Use of Self-
Archived Versions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite TSpace items 
 
Always cite the published version, so the author(s) will receive recognition through services that track 
citation counts, e.g. Scopus. If you need to cite the page number of the author manuscript from TSpace 
because you cannot access the published version, then cite the TSpace version in addition to the published 
version using the permanent URI (handle) found on the record page. 
 
This article was made openly accessible by U of T Faculty. 
Please tell us how this access benefits you. Your story matters. 
 
 

From the Classics to New Tunes:
A Neoclassical View on Sharing Economy and
Innovative Marketplaces
Ming Hu
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E6, ming.hu@rotman.utoronto.ca
Operations management has the tradition of coming from and going back to real-life applications. It deals
with the management of the process of matching supply with demand. The emerging business process in a
sharing economy or an innovative marketplace calls for active management at the operational level. We take
a neoclassical perspective by drawing inspiration from the classical models in operations management and
economics. We aim at building connections and identifying diﬀerences between those traditional models and
the new applications in sharing economy and innovative marketplaces. We also point out potential future
research directions.
1.
Introduction
Operations management deals with managing the process of matching supply with demand. The
discipline has the tradition of coming from and going back to real-life applications. Each one of
the founding pillars, such as inventory management and revenue management, establishes itself as
a ﬁeld not only because it has beautiful theories but also because the theories were motivated by
practice and can be readily implemented. On the one hand, the widely practiced classical inven-
tory theory typically treats demand as given and focuses on minimizing the cost associated with
inventory replenishment on the supply side. On the other hand, the traditional revenue manage-
ment models, initially practiced by the airlines and hotels, assume a ﬁxed supply side and focus
on maximizing the revenue of selling a limited amount of capacity by regulating the demand.
Nowadays, facilitated by the proliferating adoption of internet-connected sensors and devices,
the age-old idea of resource sharing (e.g., library book sharing) is reviving and developing into a
crop of innovative business models, which are often referred to as sharing economy and innovative
marketplaces. The notion, in general, may refer to a market model that allows sharing of access
to goods and services, or an online platform that enables individuals or small entities as buyers
and sellers to “transact.” The promise of this emerging industry lies in increasing the utilization
of resources/assets and improving the eﬃciency of transactions. These business models require
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

2
active management of regulating supply and demand at the same time, taking into account the
incentives and decisions of the sellers/service providers and buyers/customers. For example, Uber,
as an intermediary platform, crowdsources services from independent drivers to fulﬁll trip requests
by riders. The platform determines wage for drivers and price for riders, and dispatches a driver
to serve a rider after they ﬁnd it incentive compatible to enter the matching pool. Unlike Uber,
Airbnb is an online marketplace in which homeowners take the wheel by charging prices for their
short-term rentals to guests. The platform, as a broker, can inﬂuence the matching between hosts
and guests but cannot prescribe hosts’ decisions.
What does this article do and not do?
• This article takes a neoclassical perspective by drawing inspiration from the classical models in
operations management. It aims at building bridges between the traditional models and new areas,
which allow us to apply tools developed for the old to the new. The models presented here are par-
simonious and not the closest to reality. But they are built upon the classical operations/economics
models and tuned for those innovative applications. They can be a starting point to get one step
closer to reality.
• This article serves as a tutorial with basics, which one may use to start exploring this exciting
ﬁeld. It also points out some future research opportunities (see also Benjaafar and Hu 2020, Chen
et al. 2020c). As our main purpose is not to comprehensively survey the area which is rapidly
growing (see Hu 2019 for a collection of earlier works), not all of the related papers are covered.
• In this article, we will use Uber and Airbnb, two arguably most successful examples of shar-
ing economy and innovative marketplaces, to motivate a set of prototypical models. There are a
variety of unique aspects associated with other innovative business models and applications, such
as capacity planning and rebalancing in bike sharing (Freund et al. 2019) and service zone design
in electric vehicle sharing (He et al. 2017), which we do not cover here.
• This article focuses on analytical models to be aligned with the special issue’s theme. There
is a growing literature of empirical, experimental and behavioral studies, see, e.g., Cohen et al.
(2020), Allon et al. (2018), Ming et al. (2020), Jiang et al. (2020) on the ride-sharing market such
as Uber and Lyft, Li et al. (2019), Cui et al. (2020a) and Cui et al. (2020b) on the short-rental
market such as Airbnb, Kabra et al. (2019) on bike sharing and Bimpikis et al. (2020) on an online
marketplace.
2.
From Inventory Theory to Dynamic Matching
Motivated by Uber’s matching of drivers and riders, we study a parsimonious model of matching
which connects back to the classical inventory theory. In each period, supply and demand of various
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

3
“types” arrive in random quantities. In a sharing economy, as supply is crowdsourced, there exists
uncertainty on the supply side in the same fashion as the demand side. In ride-hailing, types can
be geolocations, as drivers and riders view the transportation as more of a homogeneous service.
Then the matching between a pair spatially closer to each other generates a higher reward because
of a shorter pickup time for the driver and shorter waiting time for the rider. For parsimony, we
assume away pricing decisions and focus on the centralized matching decisions. With unmatched
drivers and riders fully or partially stay in the system, the platform aims at maximizing the total
expected rewards by optimizing the matchings. This problem lies in the center of many sharing
economy platforms, which often use crowdsourced supply and match it dynamically with customer
demand in a centralized fashion, as supply and demand randomly arrive at the platform.
To stay close to the classical periodic-review inventory system, we assume there is a ﬁnite horizon
of T periods. At the beginning of each period t, m types of supply and n types of demand arrive
in random quantities, which could follow a Bernoulli distribution (taking only a value of 0 or 1)
as a special case. We use i to index a supply type and j to index a demand type. There is an
exogenously given reward rt
ij for matching one unit of type i supply and one unit of type j demand
in period t. For example, rt
ij may be a constant reward minus the traveling cost from location i
to location j in period t. We can write the rewards in a matrix form as Rt = (rt
ij). To obtain a
parsimonious formulation, one can account for waiting costs of those supply and demand types
that are not immediately matched by incorporating those costs into the matching rewards. The
state for a given period t constitutes the supply and demand levels of various types before matching
but after the arrival of random supply St and demand Dt of various types for that period, with St
and Dt of a vector in the dimension of m and n respectively. We denote, as the system state, the
supply vector by x = (x1,...,xm) and the demand vector by y = (y1,...,yn), where xi and yj are
the quantities of type i supply and type j demand available to be matched. On observing the state
(x,y), the ﬁrm decides on the quantity qij of type i supply to be matched with type j demand. For
conciseness, we write the decision variables of matching quantities in a matrix form as Q = (qij).
Given a feasible matching quantity matrix Q, the post-matching levels of type i supply and type
j demand are given by ui = xi −Pm
j′=1 qij′ and vj = yj −Pn
i′=1 qi′j, respectively. The post-matching
supply and demand vector is denoted by u and v, respectively. The unmatched supply and demand
at the end of a period carry over to the next period with a fraction of α ∈[0,1] and β ∈[0,1],
respectively. The carry-over rates can be made to be time dependent. The platform’s goal is to
determine a matching policy Q∗= (q∗
ij) that maximizes the expected total matching rewards over
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

4
the ﬁnite horizon. Denote by Vt(x,y) the optimal expected total rewards given that it is in period
t and the current state is (x,y). We formulate the following stochastic dynamic program:
Vt(x,y) =
max
Q∈{Q≥0|u≥0,v≥0}
Rt ◦Q + γEVt+1(αu + St,βv + Dt),
(DM)
where “◦” gives the sum of elements of the entrywise product of two matrices and γ ∈[0,1] is
a discount factor. The boundary conditions can be VT +1(x,y) = 0 for all (x,y), without loss of
generality.
Under some conditions, structural properties of the optimal matching policies for Problem (DM)
can be derived. Hu and Zhou (2020) establish the so-called “modiﬁed Monge condition” that
speciﬁes a dominance relation between two pairs of supply and demand types. The modiﬁed Monge
conditions are suﬃcient, and necessary in a robust sense, for the optimal matching policy to satisfy
the following priority properties in Problem (DM): For any two pairs of supply and demand types
with one strictly dominating the other, it is optimal to prioritize the matching of the dominating
pair over the dominated pair. The modiﬁed Monge condition generalizes the condition of a Monge
sequence, discovered by Gaspard Monge, a French mathematician, in 1781, which guarantees a
static and balanced transportation problem to be solved by a greedy algorithm (see Table 1 for
detailed comparisons). As a result of the priority properties, the optimal matching policy boils
down to a match-down-to structure when a speciﬁc pair of supply and demand types is considered,
along with the priority hierarchy. That is, there exist state-dependent thresholds, called match-
down-to levels, governing the matching of a speciﬁc pair of supply and demand types. Only if the
available amounts of resources exceed those levels, is it optimal to match the supply and demand
types down to those levels. If some pair of supply and demand types are not matched as much as
possible, all pairs that are strictly dominated by this pair should not be matched at all, due to the
priority structure.
Table 1
Comparisons between the Monge Sequence and Modiﬁed Monge Condition
Monge Sequence
Modiﬁed Monge Condition
static, deterministic, and balanced dynamic, stochastic, and unbalanced
transportation problem
matching problem
deﬁned for a sequence of all pairs
deﬁned for speciﬁc pairs
suﬃcient and necessary
suﬃcient, and robustly necessary
greedy algorithm:
priority and thresholds:
(1) priority sequence
(1) priority hierarchy
(2) match as much as possible
(2) match-down-to policy
This structural property of “priority and thresholds” is a generalization of priority structures seen
in the balanced and deterministic transportation problems, and the threshold-type policies seen
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

5
in the inventory management (such as base-stock levels) and quantity-based revenue management
(such as protection levels). Because of these connections, methodologies, techniques, and insights
developed for one domain can be transferred to the other. For example, Hu and Zhou (2020) further
show, by verifying the L♮-concavity of the value functions of a transformed problem, the optimal
total matching quantity or the optimal match-down-to levels can have monotonicity properties with
respect to the system state. This technique has been applied for deriving structural properties for
lost-sales inventory models (Zipkin 2008) and perishable-inventory models (Chen et al. 2014). For
another example, in view of the diﬀerence between backlogs vs. lost sales inventory systems, Chen
et al. (2019c) focus on a lost-sales analogy of the above dynamic matching problem that allows
backlogs. The authors show that under a supermodular reward structure, the optimal dynamic
matching policy can still have the structure of priority and thresholds for both backlogs and lost
sales systems, but the speciﬁc priority may be entirely diﬀerent in the two systems.
Research opportunities.
• Competitive analysis. In the above formulation, supply and demand have known arrival proba-
bilities. The platform may want to solve a robust optimization version of the problem with unknown
arrival patterns. The objective then becomes to design online algorithms (of making decisions on
the ﬂy) to protect the ﬁrm against the worst-case scenario and have theoretical performance guar-
antees over all possible instances (see, e.g., Karp et al. 1990 for an early work and Truong and
Wang 2019, Ma and Simchi-Levi 2020 for the latest developments).
• Computational approach to stochastic dynamic programming. The structure of priority and
thresholds holds for certain reward structures. But even for those cases, computing the thresh-
olds can be cumbersome. It is desirable to have a general computational approach that can work
for any reward structure. Given the success of applying approximate dynamic programming and
Lagrangian relaxation approaches to dynamic pricing problems in giving rise to structural prop-
erties and eﬃcient algorithms (see, e.g., Adelman 2007, Balseiro et al. 2020), it leaves a lot to be
desired for applying similar approaches to the dynamic matching problem.
• Centralized vs. decentralized dynamic matching. In some marketplace, e.g., the online labor
market, sequentially arriving participants on both supply and demand sides make self-interested
(i.e., decentralized) matching decisions. It can be essential for the platform that operates such
a marketplace to quantify the gap between centralized vs. decentralized matching in a dynamic
setting and identify ways to close the gap (see, e.g., Baccara et al. 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

6
3.
From One-Sided to Two-Sided Pricing
First, consider the most parsimonious one-sided pricing problem. A seller faces a market of cus-
tomers with size M and random customer valuation V . On the supply side, the marginal cost of
the product is a constant of w. The seller decides on the price p to solve the one-sided pricing
problem: maxp(p−w)d(p), where d(p) = M ·P(V ≥p) is the downward-sloping demand curve. This
formulation serves as the foundation of classical ﬁnite-horizon revenue management problems, in
which the marginal cost dynamically changes, contingent on the seller’s remaining capacity and
the time until the end of the sales horizon.
Figure 1
Two-Sided Market
Independent Contractors
Online 
Platform
Customers
Price p
Wage w
Now we extend this one-sided pricing problem to a two-sided one. As the purpose is to reveal
connections among problems, we slightly abuse the notation and it would be clear from the context
that the same notation may refer to diﬀerent variables in diﬀerent problems. Suppose an interme-
diary platform crowdsources a homogeneous good or service from a pool of independent sellers or
contractors with size N and random opportunity cost C and sell it to a market of buyers with size
M and random customer valuation V . See Figure 1 for an illustration of such a market. If there
is unlimited supply, the total amount of customers who are willing to pay for the service at price
p is d(p) = M · P(V ≥p). Given a posted wage w, the total amount of independent suppliers or
contractors, who are willing to provide the good or service, is s(w) = N · P(C ≤w). This is the
number of suppliers who would show up if they were guaranteed to be matched with a customer.
The platform decides on the wage w oﬀered to the sellers and the price p charged to customers to
solve the following two-sided pricing problem:
max
w,p (p −w)min{s(w),d(p)}.
(P)
One can show that for a given wage w and price p, even if the suppliers and customers strategically
anticipate their matching likelihood, the matching quantity is still equal to min{s(w),d(p)}.
Problem (P) is diﬀerent from the capacitated pricing problem maxp(p−w)min{Q,d(p)}, to which
the deterministic version of the classical revenue management problem boils down (see Gallego and
Van Ryzin 1994). The diﬀerence comes from in the capacitated pricing problem, the capacity Q
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

7
and the marginal operating cost w are independent and exogenously given, while they are linked
and endogenized in Problem (P).
In economics, research on two-sided markets has studied platforms such as credit cards, video
game consoles, and organ allocation/exchange. Rochet and Tirole (2003) consider a general model
of competition between two platforms with the transaction volume in the multiplicative form
of supply and demand. Such a form of the transaction volume is appropriate for a two-sided
market platform with a long-term objective. For instance, the credit card company cares about
the potential transaction volume in proportion to s(w) · d(p) if there are s(w) merchants on the
supply side accepting the credit card for payment and d(p) customers on the demand side using the
credit card. Motivated by the ride-hailing market, Problem (P) studies an on-demand matching
platform’s minute-by-minute pricing decisions that adapt to the changing market conditions. As a
result, the transaction volume takes the form being minimum of supply and demand quantities. To
see this, if in a short run, there are a number of s(w) drivers and d(p) riders within a neighborhood,
the transaction volume is close to min{s(w),d(p)}. In view of the classical newsvendor problem
with precommitted supply, taking the minimum of supply and demand is the most natural form
from an operational perspective.
The transaction volume taking the form of min{s(w),d(p)} results in a pricing problem of
a totally diﬀerent nature from the one-sided pricing problem maxp(p −w)d(p), or the problem
maxw,p(p −w)s(w)d(p) with a long-term objective. To see this, we illustrate below how the opti-
mal price changes as a function of exogenously given wage. Under very mild regularity conditions,
Hu and Zhou (2018) show that the optimal price p∗(w) = arg maxp(p −w)min{s(w),d(p)}, as a
function of exogenously given wage w, is U-shaped. That is, it is ﬁrst decreasing in w and then
increasing in w. See Figure 2 for an illustration.
Figure 2
U-Shaped Optimal Price as a Function of Exogenous Wage
p*(w)
w
w
Supply = Demand
Supply > Demand
w*
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

8
The intuition of the U-shaped optimal price function p∗(w) is as follows. When the wage is
meager, say, close to zero, just a few drivers are willing to come out and work. The platform sets
a price that is exorbitantly high so that only those riders who have very high valuations get a
ride. When the exogenous wage increases from being very low, more drivers come out to work, and
the platform lowers the price so that more riders get the service to catch up with the increasing
amount of available drivers. When the exogenous wage is high enough, there are too many drivers
willing to come out and expect to get some work. If the platform wants to give every driver a job,
the price charged to a rider would be too low, even possibly lower than the exogenous wage. In
this case, the platform is better oﬀto charge the optimal one-sided price with the wage as being
given. In other words, when the exogenous wage w is below a threshold w, the supply is limited
due to the relatively low wage, and thus the optimal price is the market clearing price, i.e., the
price such that d(p) = s(w), which would decrease as the wage rises. When the exogenous wage w
is above the threshold, the supply is ample due to the relatively high wage, and thus the optimal
price is the unconstrained revenue maximizing price arg maxp(p −w)d(p), which would increase as
the wage rises.
This U-shape property of p∗(w) is in stark contrast with the traditional supply chain settings.
Consider a supply chain where a retailer procures from its supplier who may, in turn, procure from
further up-stream suppliers. Any cost surge in the supply chain, e.g., a wage or cost increase at
some ﬁrm along the supply chain, would always push up the wholesale price w and lead to an
increase in the optimal retail price arg maxp(p −w)d(p). Moreover, the U-shape property of p∗(w)
is also in stark contrast to the classical economics literature on two-sided pricing. As mentioned,
Rochet and Tirole (2003) assume a multiplicative form of the transaction volume. That is, the
platform solves the problem maxw,p(p −w)s(w)d(p). It is easy to see that the objective function
(p −w)s(w)d(p) is log-supermodular in w and p. Then by Topkis’s theorem, the optimal price
arg maxp(p −w)s(w)d(p) is always increasing in w.
That range in which the optimal price may decrease in the exogenous wage is certainly relevant.
Note that the optimal wage and price (w∗,p∗) = arg maxw,p(p −w)min{s(w),d(p)} would satisfy
w∗≤w, because s(w∗) = d(p∗) must hold as there is no uncertainty and the platform can fully
control wage and price.
The above discussion reveals that Problem (P) with the short-term objective and the trans-
action volume taking the form of the minimum of supply and demand is natural for operations
management researchers but is fundamentally diﬀerent from the traditional unconstrained supply
chain setting (i.e., the one-sided pricing) and the two-sided pricing in the economics literature. It
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

9
provides us with a justiﬁcation for theoretical novelty in examining the two-sided pricing problem
at the operational level.
The parsimonious form of Problem (P) can serve as a workhorse model on top of which many
additional features can be incorporated. For example, Hu and Zhou (2018) focus on the widely
practiced, ﬂat, across-the-board commission contracts, under which the platform takes a ﬁxed cut
and the wage is equal to a fraction of the price, regardless of what price is charged, i.e., w = γp,
where γ is the payout rate to the drivers and (1 −γ) is the commission rate the platform takes.
The platform precommits to a commission rate before it sets a contingent price depending on the
randomly realized market conditions. The authors study the performance of an optimal commission
rate contract benchmarked with the case that the platform can freely choose wage and price for
any market condition without any constraint.
Research opportunities.
• Dynamic two-sided pricing. In practice, there exists uncertainty in the timing, number, and
valuation of arrivals of sellers/contractors and buyers. The platform can dynamically vary wage
and price to balance supply and demand. Unmatched sellers and buyers may hang around in the
market waiting to be matched. Contingent pricing, reacting to the market condition, obviously can
have an edge over a ﬁxed price. Cachon et al. (2017) show that drivers and riders are generally
better oﬀwith varying prices contingent on the realized supply and demand conditions. Chen et al.
(2020b) consider a dynamic version of Problem (P) allowing the intermediary to buy in, sell out
and hold inventory. On the other hand, static pricing may also be preferred. Banerjee et al. (2015)
show that a static pricing policy can be asymptotically optimal in a thick market. Chen and Hu
(2020b) further study a dynamic version of Problem (P) in which sellers/contractors and buyers
sequentially arrive at the market and can strategically time their transactions. A static pricing
policy by the intermediary platform has an advantage of deterring strategic waiting behavior of
sellers and buyers, which is hard to account for by pricing models. As a result, with static pricing,
all participants can be brought in as they arrive, increasing the thickness of the market. There
are still many unanswered questions. For example, it is interesting to characterize the structural
property of the optimal dynamic two-sided pricing policy with and without strategic behavior of
sellers and buyers.
• Spatial two-sided pricing. Problem (P) is a single-location model, assuming all supply and
demand are located nearby in a small region. If the spatial dimension of ride-hailing is considered,
it is critical to take into account drivers’ incentives of moving around which involve the time and
eﬀort in repositioning themselves, picking up riders, and going to the riders’ destination where it
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

10
may be hard to ﬁnd a good ride. Bimpikis et al. (2019) explore the spatial price equilibrium, in a
multi-location model allowing drivers to decide whether to work and where to position themselves
in a network of interconnected locations. The authors highlight the impact of the origin-destination
demand (im)balancedness across the network of locations on the platform’s wage, price, proﬁts and
consumer surpluses. Besbes et al. (2019) consider a continuously dispersed linear city where the
drivers can reposition themselves. Under a ﬁxed commission rate, the platform sets location-speciﬁc
prices along the linear city, and then the riders’ requests along the city realize. The drivers then
relocate themselves in a simultaneous-move game based on prices, demands, and driving costs. Garg
and Nazerzadeh (2020) show that drivers would cherry-pick trip requests under the multiplicative
surge (i.e., the payout scales with the trip length), and the issue can be addressed by the additive
surge (i.e., a surge component in the payout independent of the trip length). Spatial pricing is still
an underexplored area with many opportunities. For example, it is highly desirable to consider a
stochastic dynamic spatio-temporal model that allows the travel time to be proportional to the
travel distance between locations (see Ata et al. 2019 for an econometric study).
• Joint pricing and matching. The marriage of supply chain and revenue management gives
birth to the stream of research on joint pricing and inventory control (see, e.g., Federgruen and
Heching 1999, Chen and Simchi-Levi 2004). It will be a fruitful direction to consider the pricing
and matching decisions jointly. On the one hand, the platform can use wage and price to regulate
supply and demand of diﬀerent types, e.g., at diﬀerent geolocations, and on the other hand, the
platform then can decide on how to match those supply and demand that accept the given wage
and price. The coupling of pricing and matching makes the problem challenging yet fascinating.
4.
From Queueing to Resource Sharing
In the previous two sections, we draw connections between sharing economy and the classical
inventory (supply) and revenue (demand) management. Another critical methodology in operations
management is queueing theory that can be applied to study service systems. One unit of resources
can be shared among randomly arriving customers for a random amount of time. It is not a new
idea to view the resources as the servers and apply a queueing model to capture the dynamics of
supply-demand mismatch at the operational level, e.g., a customer who does not ﬁnd an available
resource upon arrival needs to wait (see Cachon and Feldman 2011 for Netﬂix DVD sharing), or
leaves the system without getting served (which is referred to as a “loss” system). What can be
novel is to consider crowdsourced servers’ incentives of participation, which determine the supply
quantity, and in turn, interact with demand, potentially under the moderation by a platform. For
example, Benjaafar et al. (2019) apply a multi-server loss queueing system to study peer-to-peer
product sharing.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

11
Pricing control. As one type of resource sharing, ride-hailing can naturally be viewed from a
queueing perspective. For example, one can revisit the two-sided pricing problem (P) by adopting
a queueing formulation. The beneﬁt of doing that is to capture the experienced delay by riders
(demand) or drivers (supply), a critical feature at the operational level that is absent in the simple
formulation (P). Now consider the following model. Suppose the riders are delay sensitive with a
waiting cost c per unit of time. They make joining or balking decisions based on the expected wait
time E(W) before getting served. This is analogous to the treatment in the unobservable queue,
and an alternative treatment can be similar to the observable queue (see Hassin and Haviv 2003,
Chap. 2 and 3). The eﬀective arrival rate of customers requesting the service should satisfy:
λ = Λ · P(V −p −cE(W) ≥0),
(1)
where Λ is the arrival rate of potential riders. Suppose each rider takes 1/µ amount of time to
serve, i.e., µ is the service rate. Given there are s(w) number of drivers (servers) available on
the street, Taylor (2018) and Bai et al. (2019) adopt the M/M/k queue formula as a natural
approximation to express the expected wait time E(W) experienced by riders in terms of the arrival
rate λ, the service rate µ and the number of servers k = s(w), which together with (1) can capture
the equilibrium outcome. Here, w should be understood as the expected payoﬀof drivers from
signing up and joining the workforce. Another coarser approximation is to use the M/M/1 queue
formula to express the expected riders’ delay E(W) with arrival rate λ and service rate s(w)µ,
see, e.g., Benjaafar et al. (2020) and Guo et al. (2020), which then lends tractability to explore
other phenomena under the approximation. In equilibrium, the eﬀective rate of riders requesting
services can be expressed in terms of wage and price, denoted by λ∗(w,p), and the number of
drivers who ﬁnd it incentive compatible to come out and work can also be expressed in terms
of wage and price, denoted by s∗(w,p). Analogous to Problem (P), the platform’s problem is to
solve maxw,p(p −w)λ∗(w,p), subject to s∗(w,p)µ < λ∗(w,p) which is the stability condition. The
underlying assumption of this parsimonious M/M/k formulation is that there are a ﬁxed number
of drivers in the system of a single location.
In contrast, Banerjee et al. (2015) study an “open” queueing network with two queues (where
the “open” network refers to that drivers can come to and exit from the system), an M/M/1 queue
to model idle drivers at one location and an M/M/∞to model busy drivers within the region (see
also He et al. 2017 in which the same modeling approach is adopted for electric vehicle sharing).
The authors focus on comparing static pricing and state-dependent contingent pricing policies.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

12
Routing and other controls. All queueing models mentioned above are single-location models.
To account for cars’ spatial movement and the platform’s routing controls, there is a stream of
research adopting the framework of a “closed” loss queueing network. Speciﬁcally, there is a ﬁnite
number of locations/regions and a ﬁnite number of drivers/cars (which can be controlled by wage
or routing decisions). Each region has its own stream of arriving riders. When a rider arrives at
a location, if there is an idle driver, the rider and driver can be matched and travel together to
another location with a given transition probability and a certain travel time. The ﬁxed number of
cars move between locations but never leave the system (referred to as the “closed network”), and
riders get lost if ﬁnding no idle driver in the desired location (referred to as the “loss system”).
In this stream, Af`eche et al. (2018a) consider two locations and focus on the performance impact
of repositioning control (or drivers’ self-repositioning) and demand-side admission control (with a
ﬁxed price p). Braverman et al. (2019) consider multiple locations and focus on empty-car routing
control. Chu et al. (2018) study a single-location model in which drivers can cherry-pick riders,
and focus on information, routing and priority controls by the platform.
On the other hand, ¨Ozkan and Ward (2020) consider an “open” loss queueing network in which
the drivers’ arrival and departure processes at each location are exogenous, and focus on the
dynamic matching decision. In a general setting, Gurvich and Ward (2014) study the dynamic
control of matching queues at the operational level. All these routing papers focus on the ﬂuid
deterministic counterpart of the original stochastic system, due to the apparent complexity of the
problem.
Self-scheduling servers. One feature of a sharing economy is supply uncertainty because
resources of goods and services are crowdsourced. Classical queueing models assume a ﬁxed number
of servers. This may reﬂect the reality that even though drivers have the freedom of dictating when
and how long to work, as soon as they start working, the setup cost keeps them to stay around
not just for one ride/task but for many. As a result, at a more operational level, the number of
available drivers may be somewhat constant over certain time window. But ideally one wants to
build queueing models that can handle random service capacity which results from self-scheduling.
For example, Ibrahim (2018) studies the controls of staﬃng, compensation, and delay announce-
ments, to eﬀectively control a queueing system with a random number of servers and impatient
customers.
Research opportunities. There is still a lot to be done in the directions mentioned above.
For example, most of those above multi-location queueing models assume loss demand, which is
desirable to be extended. Moreover, here are some broad directions and problems to explore:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

13
• Double-ended queue. As an alternative queueing model to the M/M/k queue, the double-
ended queue has been used to model a single-location taxi stand, at which drivers and riders arrive
independently, see Kendall (1951). After a driver and a rider pair up, they leave the system. The
double-ended queue can be a more appropriate modeling framework for a matching market where
service providers do not come back after a matching, e.g., shoppers at a grocery store help make a
delivery for their neighbors, and commuters pool their car with riders on the way to work or home.
This double-ended queue framework is a continuous-time version of the dynamic matching model
introduced in Section 2 with one supply type and one demand type, and may be readily extended
to account for two-sided pricing or/and multiple locations (types).
• Car pooling. When a car is shared among riders, the capacity of the “server” (i.e., the car)
is literally increased. However, such a capacity increase is endogenized by the riders’ choices. It
would be interesting to extend some of the above queueing models to account for the option of car
pooling by riders, see, e.g., Jacob and Roet-Green (2019), Hu et al. (2020).
• Free ﬂoating system. Those multi-location spatial models mentioned above are one step closer
to reality. However, they still do not fully capture the reality of free-ﬂoating cars. The gap is
analogous to the diﬀerence between docked vs. dockless bike sharing. A spatial model with ﬁner
granularity is desired and can ﬁt data better. In practice, from the drivers’ point of view, a renewal
“cycle” starts with dropping oﬀthe previous rider, and follows with waiting for a rider request, then
on the way to pick up the rider after receiving a dispatch order and then driving to the destination
with the rider in the car. From the riders’ point of view, the wait not only includes the amount
of time earlier riders still occupy the drivers but also consists of the pickup time for the rider and
some or all of the previous riders. The pickup time, proportional to the travel distance, makes the
dynamics complicated and hard to analyze because it depends on the number of available drivers
when a rider request arrives at the system and also on the routing policy (see, e.g., Feng et al.
2020). The system dynamics can be similar to the classical stochastic and dynamic vehicle-routing
problem but not the same. Bertsimas and Van Ryzin (1991, 1993) provide potential directions
on how to better understand the system dynamics. As the latest development in this direction,
Besbes et al. (2018) modify an M/M/k queue with a state-dependent service rate that takes into
account the pickup time under the match-to-the-closest dispatch rule. On top of the performance
evaluation for a given number of drivers and a speciﬁc routing policy (see, e.g., Hu 2020), one can
optimize the routing policy or study the optimal one- or two-sided pricing problem (see, e.g., Chen
and Hu 2020a).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

14
• Three-sided matching. In grocery/food delivery, platforms use technology to stitch together
couriers (drivers), grocery stores/restaurants, and customers. The problem is more complicated
than ride-hailing in which only two parties are involved. Other than more parties involved, the
complexity may come from: When couriers arrive at a designated place to pick up an order, the
order may not be ready, as there is a separate process of preparing it for pickup; Couriers may
pick up multiple orders at the same or diﬀerent places and send them to the same or diﬀerent
destinations (see, e.g., Gorbushin and Hu 2020); Other than pricing and routing decisions, the
platform can optimize the product oﬀerings by highlighting various options to moderate demand.
5.
From Newsvendor to Resource Sharing
The above-mentioned queueing formulations have the advantage of capturing asymmetric decision
timescales of the drivers and riders in ride-hailing. More speciﬁcally, drivers tend to evaluate more
long-term payoﬀs when deciding on whether to provide the service while riders make a purchase
decision in a much shorter timescale. The ﬁxed-server or closed-network queueing formulation
assumes a ﬁxed number/amount of drivers or service capacity to serve riders who arrive at a
transient system state.
An alternative formulation with ﬁxed capacity can be analogous to the classical newsvendor
problem. Cachon et al. (2017) consider a strategic-level decision period in which drivers decide
whether to sign up for a ride-hailing platform taking into account future expected payoﬀs and the
platform can impose a cap on the driver pool. Then in the short run, e.g., at a day-to-day level,
drivers decide on whether to come out and work depending on their realized opportunity cost
for that period, and the platform may set wage or price contingently. The problem is somewhat
analogous to a newsvendor problem, because of the endogenized driver pool size. In addition to
the cap on the driver pool at the strategic level, Gurvich et al. (2019) also allow the platform to
set a cap on the number of drivers who can work, in addition to wage or price decisions, in the
short-run. Here, the short-run cap imposed by the ﬁrm is literally a newsvendor quantity.
Similarly, one can build a simple newsvendor-type extension of Problem (P). At the strategic
level, the drivers anticipate the expected earning ¯w, and thus the number of drivers who sign up for
work is s( ¯w). In the short run, given the ﬁxed number s( ¯w) of drivers at work which is analogous
to the newsvendor quantity, the platform can set a price contingently, in view of the surge pricing
practice. That is, at the operational level, the platform is to solve for the contingent wage w∗
ϵ and
price p∗
ϵ such that they achieve
max
w,p (p −w)min{s( ¯w),dϵ(p)},
(N)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

15
where dϵ(p) is a realization of a random demand curve D(p) which can be obtained by perturbing
the deterministic demand curve d(p) additively or multiplicatively with a random variable E (whose
realization is denoted by ϵ). One could impose constraints on the relationship between p and w in
Problem (N) such as w = γp where γ is a ﬁxed payout rate. Given the contingent wage w∗
ϵ, the
fraction of drivers who get a job, out of those making themselves available, is s(w∗
ϵ)/s( ¯w). To make
sure the drivers earn what is promised on expectation, as a constraint,
¯w = E(w∗
E · s(w∗
E)
s( ¯w) ).
If the platform sets a committed price p at the strategic level, i.e., p∗
ϵ = p does not depend on
the random demand realization ϵ, the problem is then close to the classical newsvendor selling to
price-sensitive customers (see Petruzzi and Dada 1999). The diﬀerence, however, is that here the
“newsvendor” in sharing economy achieves its “newsvendor” quantity s( ¯w) through announcing
its committed pricing decision p, where ¯w is the expected eﬀective earning of drivers under price
p.
Research opportunities.
• Pricing and commission policies. Among others, the newsvendor-type formulations provide
opportunities to study various pricing strategy in the short run such as contingent vs. committed
pricing strategy, and crowdsourcing contracts at the strategic level such as contingent commission
rate vs. committed minimum wage contracts.
• The employee mode. One can consider a variant of the classical newsvendor selling to price-
sensitive customers with the price contingently determined on the uncertainty realization and the
“newsvendor” quantity is obtained as a function of eﬀective earnings. In this model, the drivers are
hired as employees and made incentive compatible to sign up for the job in anticipation of expected
earnings. Such an employee mode can become more practically relevant than the independent
contractor mode (see Problem (P)), as California Assembly Bill 5, in eﬀect starting Jan 1, 2020,
compels gig-economy platforms to treat their worker as employees as opposed to independent
contractors. It can be of signiﬁcant practical value to quantify the impact on the stakeholders such
as the drivers, riders, and the platform, when the system switches from the independent contractor
mode of Problem (P) to the employee mode analogous to Problem (N).
6.
From Strategic Customers to Strategic Buyers and Sellers
In all formulations mentioned above, when customers make a purchase decision, they compare
available options at the moment upon their arrival, i.e., their decision making is myopic. In the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

16
operations management literature, a large body of literature studies so-called strategic, or more
accurately, forward-looking, customer behavior, in which customers consider purchase opportunities
over time (see, e.g., Shen and Su 2007). This literature is motivated by potential strategic waiting
behavior by customers in anticipate of a future price drop. In ride-sharing and other marketplaces,
not only buyers but also sellers may demonstrate strategic behavior. Moreover, they may be not
only inter-temporally strategic but also spatially strategic.
First, let us consider strategic customer behavior on the demand side. Hu et al. (2018) consider
a two-period model, commonly adopted in the strategic customer literature, to capture riders’
strategic waiting in response to surge pricing in ride-hailing. At the beginning of period 1, a total
volume of N = 1 (inﬁnitesimal) drivers are available in a small region, and a total volume of M > 1
(inﬁnitesimal) riders appear in the same region, constituting a demand surge. The riders’ incremen-
tal valuations of getting rides from the platform, net of their next best options are heterogeneous
following a distribution V . Each unit of rider requires one unit of the drivers to provide service.
Once matched, both rider and driver leave the region indeﬁnitely.
In period 1, the platform sets price p1 for that period. Given p1, some riders will request rides in
this period, some may strategically wait out period 1 and request rides only in period 2, and the
rest never request rides. The riders requesting rides in period 1 and available drivers are randomly
matched. In period 2, new drivers with an opportunity cost c who were nearby and strategically
decided in period 1 to “chase the surge” arrive in the surge region to join any remaining drivers,
and the platform sets p2. The remaining riders from period 1 then decide whether to request rides,
and those who do are again randomly matched to available drivers. (For simplicity, one can assume
that no new riders appear in period 2.) Riders discount valuations of getting rides in period 2. This
model can explain why surge pricing, a short-lived sharp price surge followed by a lower price, can
even beneﬁt consumer surplus: The platform strategically inﬂates the initial price to make riders
voluntarily wait out the initial surge period, so as to attract drivers to the surge region and then
serve riders with a lower price. The surge pricing has a signaling eﬀect to drivers that the higher the
surged price, the more unserved riders out there, without any demand information communicated
to drivers.
On the supply side, Af`eche et al. (2018b) study the drivers’ forward-looking behavior in deciding
whether to reposition toward the hotspot after an unexpected demand shock of uncertain duration
occurs, given their location-dependent repositioning delay and payoﬀrisk. The paper compares the
performances of various dynamic policies of setting driver wages and rider prices by the platform,
taking into account the interplay of three timescales, rider patience, demand shock duration, and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

17
drivers’ repositioning delays. As mentioned earlier, Chu et al. (2018) study the cherry-picking
behavior by drivers, who may skip low-payoﬀriders and wait for high-payoﬀriders. Moreover,
Bimpikis et al. (2019), Af`eche et al. (2018a), and Besbes et al. (2019) focus on the drivers’ strategic
spatial repositioning, which have been mentioned above; see also Guda and Subramanian (2019)
in the marketing literature.
Research opportunities.
• Both sellers and buyers are strategic. Chen and Hu (2020b) allow both sellers and buyers of a
homogeneous good or service to be inter-temporally forward-looking, and show a two-sided pricing
and matching policy that induces their myopic behavior is asymptotically optimal. There is a lot
that can be further explored in this area. For instance, one wants to build more realistic models
that account for contingent pricing and joint strategic drivers’ and riders’ waiting and repositioning
behavior.
• Mechanism design. Drivers and riders have their own private information, and it is a critical
problem of how the platform can design mechanisms to tease out such information so to enable
more eﬃcient matching (see Ma et al. 2019 for a mechanism design problem in ride-hailing under
complete information).
7.
From One-Sided to Two-Sided Competition
The most classical competition models in economics are Bertrand (price) and Cournot (quantity)
competition models. Here we brieﬂy review a version of those models for diﬀerentiated products,
which we will extend to account for the competition between two ride-hailing platforms such as
Uber and Lyft. Consider a symmetric duopoly market with ﬁrms 1 and 2 each selling one product
by setting prices p1 and p2 respectively. The two products are substitutable. The demand system
that governs the market has a linear structure:
d1(p1,p2) = a −p1 + αp2,
d2(p1,p2) = a −p2 + αp1,
(2)
where a > 0 is the potential market size and α ∈[0,1) measures the substitutability between the
two products. Such a linear demand structure can be obtained from a Hotelling line model or
a representative consumer maximizing a quadratic utility function. Both ﬁrms have the same
marginal cost to procure, produce and distribute their products. In the Bertrand competition, both
ﬁrms simultaneously set prices to maximize their proﬁt. In the Cournot competition, both ﬁrms
simultaneously make decisions on the targeted sales quantity to maximize their proﬁt, and the
prices are resolved as the market clearing prices such that the targets are achieved in the competitive
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

18
market. The celebrated Kreps and Scheinkman equivalency says that Bertrand price competition
with precommitted capacity yields the same equilibrium outcome as Cournot competition (see
Kreps and Scheinkman 1983). That is, consider a two-stage sequential game in which the ﬁrms
maximize their proﬁt. In the ﬁrst stage, both ﬁrms simultaneously decide on the capacity of their
production and distribution. In the second stage, given the capacity level they build in the ﬁrst
stage, both ﬁrms simultaneously set prices. The outcome of this two-stage game is the same as
that of Cournot competition. The intuition behind the Kreps and Scheinkman equivalency is that
precommitment in capacity can curb throat-cutting price competition because ﬁrms cannot sell
beyond their capacity level.
Figure 3
Two-Sided Competition
Independent Contractors
Online 
Platform 1
Customers
Online 
Platform n
. . . .
Now one can ask similar questions for a competitive market where two platforms ﬁght on two
fronts. That is, on the one hand, platforms compete in oﬀering wages to the drivers and on the
other, they compete in setting prices posted to the riders, see Figure 3. On the demand side, we
can adopt the above linear demand system (2). On the supply side, we can also assume a linear
structure:
s1(w1,w2) = w1 −βw2,
s2(w1,w2) = w2 −βw1,
where β ∈[0,1) measures the substitutability between the two platforms in the eyes of drivers.
Similar to Section 3, we consider a short-term objective of the platforms. At the operational level,
given the competitor’s decisions, the objective of each platform i, i = 1,2 is to solve
max
wi,pi(pi −wi)min{si(wi,w3−i),di(pi,p3−i)}.
(P2)
We assume platforms simultaneously make their wage and price decisions. This game (P2) is a
natural extension of the two-sided pricing problem (P) to two-sided competition and that of the
one-sided Bertrand competition to two-sided wage and price competition, for simplicity, referred
to as two-sided price competition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

19
The counterpart of the Cournot competition in the two-sided market is that ﬁrms simultaneously
decide on the matching quantity and then on both supply and demand sides, market clearing
wages and prices are resolved to achieve the targeted matching quantity, which is referred to
as two-sided quantity competition. Hu and Liu (2019) show that analogous to the comparison
between the classical Cournot and Bertrand competition, two-sided quantity competition leads to
more alleviated market outcomes with higher market prices than two-sided pricing competition.
Moreover, a two-sided counterpart of the Kreps and Scheinkman equivalency remains to hold. That
is, consider a two-stage sequential game in which platforms maximize their proﬁt. In the ﬁrst stage,
both platforms simultaneously decide on the capacity level which limits their matching quantity. In
the second stage, given the capacity level they choose in the ﬁrst stage, both ﬁrms simultaneously
set wages and prices. The authors show that the outcome of this two-stage game is the same as
that of two-sided quantity competition. These results demonstrate the connection of the two-sided
competition with the classical one-sided competition, and show that the insights from the one-sided
competition remain robust for the two-sided competition.
Here come the new tunes. Because now the platforms compete on both supply and demand sides,
motivated by the competition between Uber and Lyft, one can consider two-stage games with other
precommitment devices than capacity. First, the platforms can commit to wages and then compete
on prices. Second, the platforms can commit to prices and then compete on wages. Third, the
platforms can commit to the commissions, or equivalently, the payout ratios, i.e., the ratio between
wage and price, and then compete on prices. By comparing these competition modes, Hu and Liu
(2019) show the following new insights among others. First, precommitment eﬀectiveness can vary
depending on the competitiveness of two sides of the market. In one-sided price competition, it is
always more beneﬁcial to ﬁrms if they commit on the supply side. In two-sided price competition,
platforms need to investigate which side, supply or demand side, of the market, is more competitive.
Precommitment on the more competitive side actually intensiﬁes the competition and performs
worse than no commitment at all. Second, in a deterministic setting, the ﬁrm has an incentive to set
wage and price so that supply is precisely matched with demand, which is referred to as “two-sided
balancing.” This two-sided balancing incentive (the same reason that drives the downward shape
of the optimal price as a function of the exogenous wage in the two-sided pricing problem (P), see
Section 3) serves as an intrinsic constraint that alleviates competition on the more competitive side.
These insights prevail even with market uncertainty in an extension where certain precommitment
occurs in the ﬁrst stage, before a contingent decision is made in the second stage, reacting to the
realized market condition.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

20
In a two-sided competition model, Bernstein et al. (2019) build supply and demand structures
on top of the linear systems by subtracting a disutility term that depends on supply and demand
utilizations to capture the congestion eﬀects when the two sides are unbalanced. The authors
focus on comparing single-homing vs. multi-homing behavior by the drivers (i.e., drivers have
their dedicated platform, vs. drivers can serve both platforms). Cohen and Zhang (2019) adopt a
MultiNomial Logit choice model for the demand side (another commonly used demand structure,
see Federgruen and Hu 2017) and a general supply curve for each platform assuming single-homing.
Their focus is to investigate the impact of a new service jointly oﬀered by competing platforms
where one platform’s dedicated drivers can provide shared rides that are available to riders from
either platform.
Research opportunities. Two-sided competition has not been much explored in the operations
management literature. One direction is to take a one-platform two-sided model as a base (see, e.g.,
Bai and Tang 2020) and extend it to competition, and another is to extend a one-sided competition
model (see, e.g., Federgruen and Hu 2015) to two-sided competition. In either path, the new two-
sided competition model needs to be practically grounded and generate novel results/insights to
make an impact. Moreover, a fruitful route can also be to study features arising from sharing
economy such as competition on the payout rate and bonus payment to drivers (see, e.g., Chen
et al. 2020a).
8.
From Supply Chain to Marketplace
The classical supply chain model involves three parties with a supplier (or manufacturer) selling
through a retailer to customers, see Figure 4. Nowadays a typical marketplace involves three parties
as well, with a group of independent sellers selling on a platform to customers, see Figure 5. The
key diﬀerences are (1) suppliers in a marketplace are usually in a large quantity, each with limited
inﬂuence on the whole market; and (2) unlike a retailer, the platform that operates a marketplace
may have limited control on a transaction between a seller and a customer.
Figure 4
Traditional Supply Chain
Supplier
Retailer
Customers
Retail
Price p
Wholesale 
Price w
The supply chain contract literature focuses on how the supplier can oﬀer a contract to the
retailer to maximize the supply chain surplus and then split the beneﬁt that has grown to the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

21
Figure 5
Platform Economy
Independent 
Seller 1
Online 
Platform
Customers
Independent 
Seller n
. . . .
largest (see, e.g., Cachon 2003). Unlike the traditional supply chain, the independent sellers in some
marketplace have the full right to set their own prices. But the platform can inﬂuence the sellers’
decisions by oﬀering a crowdsourcing contract, or a ﬁnancing scheme to sellers (see, e.g., Dong
et al. 2018), or inﬂuence the matching process between buyers and sellers, e.g., by manipulating
information disclosed to an interested party (see, e.g., Liu et al. 2020). To use Airbnb as an example,
hosts on the platform have full freedom to decide the price they would love to charge for their
listings. There are individual property owners, or corporate players who control multiple assets
(see Zhu et al. 2019). For any type of hosts, the platform can optimize the commission rate it
proportionally takes at the strategic level or customize the ranking of listings made available to a
guest.
As mentioned earlier, platforms often charge a commission for each transaction. That is, for
whatever price posted to the customers, regardless of whether that pricing decision is made by the
platform (e.g., in the case of Uber) or by the independent sellers (e.g., in the case of Airbnb), the
platform takes a ﬁxed fraction out of the total price paid by customers. This commission contract
structure is meant to qualify a platform for the legal status of being a broker. This commission
contract literally is a revenue-sharing contract, which can coordinate a traditional supply chain
with one supplier and one retailer. However, it is easy to see that such a commission contract signed
between an independent seller and the platform would most likely not be in the best interest of
the platform, because the seller now makes the pricing decision. Under competition, a seller may
be forced to set a price lower than what is desired by the platform.
The commission contract is signed and applied for a relatively long period of time, while prices
may vary at the transaction level. For example, a commission rate is ﬁxed for Uber drivers over at
least a couple of months, but prices Uber sets for each ride vary depending on the market conditions.
Hu and Zhou (2018) show that by carefully selecting a commission rate, even though the platform
may lose some ﬂexibility in moderating supply and demand (as now the wage is derived from the
pricing decision under the commission contract), the proﬁt loss may not be signiﬁcant, and there
exists a provable performance guarantee. Hu and Liu (2019) show that the commission contract
as a constraint governing the wage and price may, in fact, beneﬁt platforms under competition
(compared to no commission contract).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

22
Research opportunities.
• Crowdsourcing contract. Parallel to supply chain contracting, it is interesting to study crowd-
sourcing contracts of various forms, which aﬀect the incentive of the independent suppliers/vendors.
For example, Chen et al. (2019b) propose a compensation-while-idling mechanism, oﬀered to inde-
pendent self-interested suppliers, to achieve a centralized solution for a marketplace. Balseiro et al.
(2019) study the mechanism design problem of an intermediary who oﬀers a contract to an adver-
tiser in an online advertising marketplace. For another example, Netﬂix and Spotify crowdsource
movies and music from numerous vendors and artists and bundle them to sell at the price of one
(see Hu and Wang 2019). In the case of Spotify, the collected subscription fees for the bundle are
allocated according to the realized contribution, among all, by each crowdsourced product. In the
case of Netﬂix, the platform negotiates payments for each product ex-ante before releasing it on
the platform.
• Social utility. The sharing economy is based on the sharing activities between participants. As
the social structure is embedded as an indispensable foundation, the sharing economy has blurred
the line between economic and social transactions. For example, Cui et al. (2020b) show that on
Airbnb which facilitates shared living between a guest and a host, the guest may draw a social utility
from staying with the host. The existence of social utility can create an incentive misalignment
between the platform and a host. Think about the joy of oﬀering hospitality to travelers around
the world, which is the idea behind couchsurﬁng and leads to the birth of Airbnb. With this joy,
the host has an incentive to set a price lower than without social utility and lower than what the
platform desires. For another example, ride-hailing and food delivery platforms often allow tipping
to service providers, which encourages social interactions and is not taxed by the platforms. With
the presence of social utility in sharing economy justiﬁed, it is then valuable to study how such
presence would aﬀect the platform’s decisions.
• Platform intermediation. In practice, many marketplace operators are making eﬀorts to move
towards a more centrally controlled platform to gain eﬃciency or/and proﬁtability. For instance,
eBay now provides price suggestions to the sellers and buyers in the form of “the product is trend-
ing” at this particular price to facilitate transactions. Other than priming the sellers or using a
crowdsourcing contract to inﬂuence their decisions, the platform that runs the marketplace can
adopt other moderating tools depending on the context. For example, Allon et al. (2012) study the
impact of facilitating the matching between service providers and customers, and enabling com-
munication among service providers, in an online service marketplace. Arnosti et al. (2020) study
a matching market in which participants face search and screening costs when seeking a match.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

23
The authors focus on the platform’s moderating controls, such as limiting the number of applica-
tions that an individual can send or making it more costly to apply. Bimpikis and Papanastasiou
(2019) study information disclosure mechanisms by a platform. Liu et al. (2018) investigate the
commission or joint commission and price control by an on-demand healthcare service platform. It
is worthwhile to delve into the operations of a speciﬁc platform to study how the platform could
improve proﬁtability or eﬃciency.
9.
From Optimal Transport to Matching Supply with Demand
The origin of matching supply with demand is about the optimal transportation and resource
allocation. There can be a fundamental, yet unexplored, connection between the optimal transport
problem, a classical problem intensively studied in mathematics (see, e.g., Villani 2008), and the
operational problem of matching supply with demand. The optimal transport problem is to ﬁnd
the most cost-eﬀective way to move mass, e.g., to ﬁnd a way that transforms a given probability
density function into another that minimizes the cost of transport. This problem has accumulated
a large body of deep theories that have resulted in a couple of Fields medalists and may deepen
our understanding of matching supply with demand. The optimal transport problem treats the
original status and the targeted level as continuous distributions over a continuous space. To see its
connection with operations, imagine a heat map indicating the distribution of autonomous cars. A
central planner could move around those cars to serve riders. Traditional operations management
models often assume the system state and space to be discrete to stay closer to reality, e.g., there
is an integral number of echelons/stages in an inventory system, and there are discrete units of
capacity to sell in a revenue management setting. We do see promising evidence that relaxing those
discrete assumptions may lead to neater results, see, e.g., Song and Zipkin (2013), not to mention
the trivial example that the Economic Order Quantity formula gives a continuous quantity as the
optimal solution.
Research opportunities. In applying existing theories from the optimal transport problem to
operational problems, there are still signiﬁcant gaps, which may call for developing new theories.
• Temporal dimension. The classical optimal transport problem only has a spatial dimension.
In the physical world, moving resources is not only costly but also time-consuming. It is highly
desirable to incorporate the time dimension into the optimal transport problem.
• Uncertainty. The optimal transport problem does not have uncertainty. In operational prob-
lems, there exists uncertainty on both sides of supply and demand.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

24
• Moderation. In a matching market, both supply (corresponding to the original status) and
demand (corresponding to the target level) can be moderated by incentives such as wage and price
before the matching.
• Decentralized incentive. The optimal transport is a centralized solution dictating how resources
should be moved. In ride-hailing, resources such as drivers, unlike autonomous cars, have self-
interested incentives to be fulﬁlled. Besbes et al. (2019) study a decentralized version of the one-
or two-dimensional optimal transport problem in which drivers self-interestedly respond to the
platform’s (surge) pricing decisions.
It would be highly desirable to extend some of the primary forms of solution characterizations
of the optimal transport problem to account for the above mentioned operational features in a
general form.
10.
From Eﬃciency or Proﬁt Maximization to Alternative Objectives
and Other Social and Environmental Issues
In almost all the above discussions, the default objective is to maximize the system’s operational
eﬃciency or the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. As there are at least three parties of stakeholders involved in a
sharing economy, alternative objectives could be a weighted sum of the surpluses of buyers, sellers,
and the intermediary ﬁrm. For example, more legislation such as California Assembly Bill 5 is
signed to require ride-hailing platforms to put more weight on the drivers’ welfare in their decision
making. As explained in Section 3, an increase in the drivers’ welfare can entice more drivers to
come out and work and force the platform to lower prices, which beneﬁt riders at the same time.
Moreover, we are also faced with a brand-new set of unintended or unaccounted-for social and
environmental consequences that arise from the emergence of sharing economy. For example, Chen
et al. (2019a) show that more customers having access to a food delivery service may hurt the
food delivery platform itself and the society. Thus it can be practically impactful to ﬁgure out how
we can match service providers and products with users more eﬃciently while minimizing some of
the problems and waste caused by these technologies. Agrawal et al. (2019) point out challenges
and research opportunities in studying environmental sustainability in the circular economy. Here
we provide some additional research ideas that one may explore in a speciﬁc sharing economy or
innovative marketplace.
Research opportunities.
• Alternative objectives. All the previously discussed formulations may be re-examined under
an alternative objective. One can also compare the optimal policies under diﬀerent objectives.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

25
• Ride-hailing. The great thing about ride-sharing apps is that riders only have to wait a few
minutes for a ride, but that convenience comes with a price. Drivers are waiting idle on city streets
for requests or have to come from a long way to pick up customers. This phenomenon of a so-called
“wild goose chase” (see Castillo et al. 2017) leads to the low utilization of the cars and possibly
results in increasing traﬃc in cities. Hu (2020) shows that both temporal and spatial pooling (by
delay matching and designating pickup and drop-oﬀareas respectively), common notions in the
operations management, can resolve the issue to a large extent (see also Yan et al. 2019 for an
approach called “dynamic waiting” which is similar to temporal pooling). Besides, with a unique
gender perspective, Guo et al. (2020) examine how female users’ safety concerns aﬀect the system
conﬁguration of ride-hailing platforms. Lastly, Asadpour et al. (2020) study the implications of
utilization-based minimum earning regulations on ride-hailing service providers. As ride-hailing
has penetrated our daily lives, studies on various public policies could have a considerable impact.
• Food ordering and delivery. The food delivery services, such as Uber Eats, while removing
the hassle of cooking, are adding to our landﬁlls. The packaging that comes with the food orders
is often excessive or not recyclable. It is critical to consider the environmental downside in the
strategic and operational decisions in this emerging industry.
• Short-term rental. Airbnb is thought to be crowding out long-term renters. Empirical research
is desirable to quantify such an impact and guide policy-making to curb any potential downside.
• Clothes-sharing. Clothes-sharing ﬁrms such as Rent the Runway and Style Lend may be
encouraging customers–who know that they can resell or share their purchases–to buy more clothes
than they need. This not only increases the volume of clothes in circulation but incurs further envi-
ronmental costs, such as cleaning, shipping, and packaging, whenever these items change hands. A
holistic view needs to be taken to evaluate the overall impact of the notion of sharing clothes.
11.
Concluding Remarks
The ﬁeld of sharing economy and innovative marketplaces is an exciting area. The problems of
matching supply with demand in those contexts can be well rooted in practice and connected with
the classical ﬁelds in operations management such as inventory, supply chain, revenue management,
and queueing. This article aims at building bridges between those classical problems and the
new applications of sharing economy, which allow us to transfer questions, techniques, intuitions,
insights from one side to the other.
Moreover, the new applications also motivate us to learn, invent and develop new questions,
techniques, intuitions and insights, which help us better understand the essences of the problem
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

26
of matching supply with demand. In particular, the new applications in sharing economy and
innovative marketplaces typically may have the following features, in contrast to the classical
settings, which need to be considered:
• Many independent sellers. The suppliers are independent decision makers and there are a
large number of them. Analyzing such suppliers’ behavior may require approximation tools such
as mean-ﬁeld approximation (see, e.g., Balseiro et al. 2015) and non-atomic game theory.
• Supply uncertainty. The supply side has uncertainty, due to the independent, self-scheduling
behavior by suppliers.
• Platform intermediation. The platform can inﬂuence the decision making of sellers and buyers
who may have private information. The theory of mechanism design is a desirable toolset for
designing moderation schemes.
• Stakeholder welfare. As there are multiple parties involved, it is critical to take into account
the welfare of all parties such as sellers, buyers and the platforms.
Finally, the applications of sharing economy are likely to evolve (e.g., crowdsourced drivers
and human couriers may be replaced by autonomous cars and delivery robots), but the theme of
matching supply with demand seems not to fade away.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mingliu Chen and Yun Zhou for careful reading of an earlier version of the paper.
We also thank the anonymous reviewer for her/his constructive and insightful suggestions, which
improved the paper. This research is in part supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada [Grant RGPIN-2015-06757] and National Natural Science Foundation
of China [Grant 71825007].
References
Adelman, D. 2007. Dynamic bid prices in revenue management. Oper. Res. 55(4) 647–661.
Af`eche, P, Z Liu, C Maglaras. 2018a. Ride-hailing networks with strategic drivers: The impact of platform
control capabilities on performance. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3120544.
Af`eche, P, Z Liu, C Maglaras. 2018b. A tale of timescales: Surge pricing and dynamic matching for hotspot
demand shock in ridehailing networks. Presented at 2018 INFORMS Revenue Management and Pricing
Section Conference.
Agrawal, VV, A Atasu, LN Van Wassenhove. 2019. OM forum–New opportunities for operations management
research in sustainability. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 21(1) 1–12.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

27
Allon, G, A Bassamboo, EB C¸il. 2012. Large-scale service marketplaces: The role of the moderating ﬁrm.
Management Sci. 58(10) 1854–1872.
Allon, G, M Cohen, P Sinchaisri. 2018. The impact of behavioral and economic drivers on gig economy
workers. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3274628.
Arnosti, N, R Johari, Y Kanoria. 2020. Managing congestion in matching markets. Manufacturing Service
Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Asadpour, A, I Lobel, G van Ryzin. 2020. Minimum earnings regulation and the stability of marketplaces.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=3502607.
Ata, B, N Barjesteh, S Kumar. 2019. Spatial pricing: An empirical analysis of taxi rides in New York City.
Working paper.
Baccara, M, S Lee, L Yariv. 2020. Optimal dynamic matching. Theoretical Economics 15(3) 1221–1278.
Bai, J, KC So, CS Tang, X Chen, H Wang. 2019. Coordinating supply and demand on an on-demand service
platform with impatient customers. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 21(3) 556–570.
Bai, J, CS Tang. 2020. Can two competing on-demand service platforms be both proﬁtable? http://ssrn.
com/abstract=3282395.
Balseiro, SR, O Besbes, GY Weintraub. 2015. Repeated auctions with budgets in ad exchanges: Approxi-
mations and design. Management Sci. 61(4) 864–884.
Balseiro, SR, DB Brown, C Chen. 2020. Dynamic pricing of relocating resources in large networks. Man-
agement Sci. Forthcoming.
Balseiro, SR, O Candogan, H Gurkan. 2019.
Intermediation in online advertising.
M Hu, ed., Sharing
Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand, chap. 21. Springer, Cham, 505–528.
Banerjee, S, C Riquelme, R Johari. 2015. Pricing in ride-share platforms: A queueing-theoretic approach.
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. EC ’15, 639–639.
Benjaafar, S, J-Y Ding, G Kong, T Taylor. 2020. Labor welfare in on-demand service platforms. Manufac-
turing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Benjaafar, S, M Hu. 2020. Operations management in the age of the sharing economy: What is old and what
is new? Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 22(1) 93–101.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

28
Benjaafar, S, G Kong, X Li, C Courcoubetis. 2019. Peer-to-peer product sharing: Implications for ownership,
usage and social welfare in the sharing economy. Management Sci. 65(2) 477–493.
Bernstein, F, G DeCroix, NB Keskin. 2019. Competition between two-sided platforms under demand and
supply congestion eﬀects. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Bertsimas, DJ, G Van Ryzin. 1991. A stochastic and dynamic vehicle routing problem in the Euclidean
plane. Oper. Res. 39(4) 601–615.
Bertsimas, DJ, G Van Ryzin. 1993. Stochastic and dynamic vehicle routing in the Euclidean plane with
multiple capacitated vehicles. Oper. Res. 41(1) 60–76.
Besbes, O, F Castro, I Lobel. 2018. Spatial capacity planning. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3292651.
Besbes, O, F Castro, I Lobel. 2019. Surge pricing and its spatial supply response. Management Sci. Forth-
coming.
Bimpikis, K, O Candogan, D Saban. 2019.
Spatial pricing in ride-sharing networks.
Oper. Res. 67(3)
744–769.
Bimpikis, K, WJ Elmaghraby, K Moon, W Zhang. 2020. Managing market thickness in online B2B markets.
Management Sci. Forthcoming.
Bimpikis, K, Y Papanastasiou. 2019. Inducing exploration in service platforms. M Hu, ed., Sharing Economy:
Making Supply Meet Demand, chap. 10. Springer, Cham, 193–216.
Braverman, A, J Dai, X Liu, L Ying. 2019. Empty-car routing in ridesharing systems. Oper. Res. 67(5)
1437–1452.
Cachon, GP. 2003. Supply chain coordination with contracts. S Graves, T de Kok, eds., Handbooks in
Operations Research and Management Science: Supply Chain Management, vol. 11. Elsevier, 227–339.
Cachon, GP, K Daniels, R Lobel. 2017. The role of surge pricing on a service platform with self-scheduling
capacity. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 19(3) 337–507.
Cachon, GP, P Feldman. 2011. Pricing services subject to congestion: Charge per-use fees or sell subscrip-
tions? Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 13(2) 244–260.
Castillo, JC, D Knoepﬂe, G Weyl. 2017. Surge pricing solves the wild goose chase. Proceedings of the 2017
ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. EC ’17, 241–242.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

29
Chen, L, Y Cui, J Liu, X Liu. 2020a. Wage schemes and platform competition. http://ssrn.com/abstract=
3392700.
Chen, M, M Hu. 2020a. Courier dispatch in on-demand delivery. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3675063.
Chen, M, M Hu, J Wang. 2019a. Food delivery service and restaurant: Friend or foe? http://ssrn.com/
abstract=3469971.
Chen, N, G Gallego, P Gao, S Kou. 2020b. Dealership or marketplace: A dynamic comparison. https:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3472161.
Chen, X, Z Pang, L Pan. 2014. Coordinating inventory control and pricing strategies for perishable products.
Oper. Res. 62(2) 284–300.
Chen, X, D Simchi-Levi. 2004. Coordinating inventory control and pricing strategies with random demand
and ﬁxed ordering cost: The ﬁnite horizon case. Oper. Res. 52(6) 887–896.
Chen, Y, M Hu. 2020b. Pricing and matching with forward-looking buyers and sellers. Manufacturing Service
Oper. Management 22(4) 717–734.
Chen, Y-J, T Dai, CG K¨orpeo˘glu, E K¨orpeo˘glu, O Sahin, CS Tang, S Xiao. 2020c. OM forum–Innovative
online platforms: Research opportunities. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 22(3) 430–445.
Chen, Y-J, C Maglaras, G Vulcano. 2019b. Design of an aggregated marketplace under congestion eﬀects:
Asymptotic analysis and equilibrium characterization. M Hu, ed., Sharing Economy: Making Supply
Meet Demand, chap. 11. Springer, Cham, 217–248.
Chen, Z, M Hu, Y Zhou. 2019c. Optimal dynamic matching with impatient demand and patient supply.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=3329000.
Chu, LY, Z Wan, D Zhan. 2018. Harnessing the double-edged sword via routing: Information provision on
ride-hailing platforms. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3266250.
Cohen, M, M-D Fiszer, BJ Kim. 2020. Frustration-based promotions: Field experiments in ride-sharing.
Management Sci. Minor revision.
Cohen, MC, R Zhang. 2019.
Competition and coopetition for two-sided platforms.
http://ssrn.com/
abstract=3028138.
Cui, R, J Li, DJ Zhang. 2020a. Reducing discrimination with reviews in the sharing economy: Evidence from
ﬁeld experiments on Airbnb. Management Sci. 66(3) 1071–1094.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

30
Cui, Y, AY Orhun, M Hu. 2020b. Under the same roof: Value of shared living in Airbnb. http://ssrn.
com/abstract=3136138.
Dong, L, L Ren, DJ Zhang. 2018. Financing small and medium-size enterprises via retail platforms. http:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3257899.
Federgruen, A, A Heching. 1999. Combined pricing and inventory control under uncertainty. Oper. Res.
47(3) 454–475.
Federgruen, A, M Hu. 2015. Multi-product price and assortment competition. Oper. Res. 63(3) 572–584.
Federgruen, A, M Hu. 2017.
Competition in multi-echelon systems.
R Batta, J Peng, eds., INFORMS
Tutorials in Operations Research. 178–211.
Feng, G, G Kong, Z Wang. 2020. We are on the way: Analysis of on-demand ride-hailing systems. Manu-
facturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Freund, D, SG Henderson, DB Shmoys. 2019. Bike sharing. M Hu, ed., Sharing Economy: Making Supply
Meet Demand, chap. 18. Springer, Cham, 435–459.
Gallego, G, G Van Ryzin. 1994. Optimal dynamic pricing of inventories with stochastic demand over ﬁnite
horizons. Management Sci. 40(8) 999–1020.
Garg, N, H Nazerzadeh. 2020. Driver surge pricing. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3390346.
Gorbushin, A, M Hu. 2020. Courier sharing in food delivery. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3548978.
Guda, H, U Subramanian. 2019. Your Uber is arriving: Managing on-demand workers through surge pricing,
forecast communication, and worker incentives. Management Sci. 65(5) 1995–2014.
Guo, P, CS Tang, Y Tang, Y Wang. 2020. Gender-based operational issues arising from on-demand ride-
hailing platforms: Safety concerns and system conﬁguration. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3260427.
Gurvich, I, M Lariviere, A Moreno. 2019. Operations in the on-demand economy: Staﬃng services with self-
scheduling capacity. M Hu, ed., Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand, chap. 12. Springer,
Cham, 249–278.
Gurvich, I, A Ward. 2014. On the dynamic control of matching queues. Stochastic Systems 4(2) 479–523.
Hassin, R, M Haviv. 2003. To Queue or Not to Queue: Equilibrium Behavior in Queueing Systems, vol. 59.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

31
He, L, H-Y Mak, Y Rong, Z-JM Shen. 2017. Service region design for urban electric vehicle sharing systems.
Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 19(2) 309–327.
Hu, B, M Hu, H Zhu. 2018. Surge pricing and two-sided temporal responses in ride-hailing. http://ssrn.
com/abstract=3278023.
Hu, M, ed. 2019. Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand. Springer, Cham.
Hu, M. 2020. Spatial or temporal pooling solves wild goose chase. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3676065.
Hu, M, Y Liu. 2019.
Precommitments in two-sided market competition.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=
3338244.
Hu, M, J Wang, H Wen. 2020. Share or solo? Individual and social choices in ride-hailing. http://ssrn.
com/abstract=3675050.
Hu, M, L Wang. 2019.
Created unequal: Bundling with crowdsourced products.
https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3338314.
Hu, M, Y Zhou. 2018. Price, wage and ﬁxed commission in on-demanmd matching. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2949513.
Hu, M, Y Zhou. 2020. Dynamic type matching. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Minor revision.
Ibrahim, R. 2018. Managing queueing systems where capacity is random and customers are impatient. Prod.
Oper. Management 27(2) 234–250.
Jacob, J, R Roet-Green. 2019. Ride solo or pool: The impact of sharing on optimal pricing of ride-sharing
services. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3008136.
Jiang, Z-Z, G Kong, Y Zhang. 2020. Making the most of your regret: Workers’ relocation in on-demand
platforms. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management Forthcoming.
Kabra, A, E Belavina, K Girotra. 2019. Bike-share systems: Accessibility and availability. Management Sci.
Forthcoming.
Karp, RM, UV Vazirani, VV Vazirani. 1990. An optimal algorithm for on-line bipartite matching. Proceedings
of the twenty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM, 352–358.
Kendall, DG. 1951. Some problems in the theory of queues. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series
B (Methodological) 13(2) 151–185.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

32
Kreps, DM, JA Scheinkman. 1983. Quantity precommitment and bertrand competition yield cournot out-
comes. Bell J. Econo. 14(2) 326–337.
Li, J, A Moreno, DJ Zhang. 2019. Agent pricing in the sharing economy: Evidence from Airbnb. M Hu, ed.,
Sharing Economy: Making Supply Meet Demand, chap. 20. Springer, Cham, 485–503.
Liu, Y, X Wang, S Gilbert, G Lai. 2018. Pricing, quality and competition at on-demand healthcare service
platforms. http://ssrn.com/abstract=3253855.
Liu, Z, DJ Zhang, F Zhang. 2020. Information sharing on retail platforms. Manufacturing Service Oper.
Management Forthcoming.
Ma, H, F Fang, DC Parkes. 2019. Spatio-temporal pricing for ridesharing platforms. Proceedings of the 2019
ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. EC ’19, 583–583.
Ma, W, D Simchi-Levi. 2020. Algorithms for online matching, assortment, and pricing with tight weight-
dependent competitive ratios. Oper. Res. Forthcoming.
Ming, L, TI Tunca, Y Xu, W Zhu. 2020. An empirical analysis of price formation, utilization, and value
generation in ride sharing services. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3338088.
¨Ozkan, E, AR Ward. 2020. Dynamic matching for real-time ride sharing. Stochastic Systems 10(1) 29–70.
Petruzzi, NC, M Dada. 1999. Pricing and the newsvendor problem: A review with extensions. Oper. Res.
47(2) 183–194.
Rochet, JC, J Tirole. 2003. Platform competition in two-sided markets. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 1(4) 990–1029.
Shen, Z-JM, X Su. 2007. Customer behavior modeling in revenue management and auctions: A review and
new research opportunities. Prod. Oper. Management 16(6) 713–728.
Song, J-S, P Zipkin. 2013. Supply streams. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 15(3) 444–457.
Taylor, TA. 2018. On-demand service platforms. Manufacturing Service Oper. Management 20(4) 704–720.
Truong, V-A, X Wang. 2019. Prophet inequality with correlated arrival probabilities, with application to
two sided matchings. https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.02552.
Villani, C. 2008. Optimal Transport: Old and New, vol. 338. Springer Science & Business Media.
Yan, C, H Zhu, N Korolko, D Woodard. 2019. Dynamic pricing and matching in ride-hailing platforms. Nav.
Res. Log. Forthcoming.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145

33
Zhu, H, M Gumus, S Ray. 2019. Short-term housing rentals and corporatization of platform pricing. http:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3344260.
Zipkin, P. 2008. On the structure of lost-sales inventory models. Oper. Res. 56(4) 937–944.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3343145