TITLE: Internet of Things in Intralogistics: Applications and Emerging Research
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478251362677
---

EUR Research Information Portal
Internet of Things in Intralogistics: Applications and Emerging Research
Published in:
Production and Operations Management
Publication status and date:
Published: 01/11/2025
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1177/10591478251362677
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
de Koster, R., Roy, D., Lim, Y. F., & Kumar, S. (2025). Internet of Things in Intralogistics: Applications and Emerging
Research. Production and Operations Management, 34(11), 3343-3363. https://doi.org/10.1177/10591478251362677
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

Special Issue Article
Internet of Things in Intralogistics:
Applications and Emerging Research
Production and Operations Management
2025, Vol. 34(11) 3343–3363
© The Author(s) 2025
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/10591478251362677
journals.sagepub.com/home/pao
René de Koster1
, Debjit Roy2
, Yun Fong Lim3
and Subodha Kumar4
Abstract
Managing the performance of intralogistics operations, that is logistics operations within facilities such as manufacturing plants,
order fulﬁllment warehouses, ports and terminals, and retail stores, is critical in fulﬁlling customer expectations. Traditional
decision-making for intralogistics operations is based on historical data, typically collected over long-range intervals with
signiﬁcant processing delays. However, nowadays, Internet of Things (IoT) applications are used to gather detailed real-time
data to make dynamic decisions. These new data sources provide challenges and opportunities for operations management.
We provide an overview of prominent IoT technologies in four domains: Manufacturing, warehousing, ports and terminals,
retail, and other emerging areas. We discuss four prominent research questions (cutting across multiple application domains)
that can be addressed using new data sources, along with the methodological approach and managerial insights that may
result. In particular, IoT can improve the tracking and tracing of objects, equipment, and humans and provide rapid alerts,
allowing managers to make real-time decisions and improve asset use, uptime, and proﬁtability.
Keywords
Internet of Things, Operations, Intralogistics, Research Topics
Date received 30 November 2023; accepted 28 June 2025 after three revisions
Handling Editor: Kalyan Singhal
1
Introduction
Warehouses, manufacturing plants, terminals, retail stores,
and hospitals must meet customer demands while keeping
costs low. This is often challenging due to high customer
service expectations, volatile demand-straining resource sup-
plies, and high requirements for coordinated logistics activ-
ities. Intralogistics (or facility logistics) is concerned with
designing, planning, and executing logistics tasks within the
above facilities to meet these demands. Today, intralogistics
faces challenges in managing inventory and resources (work-
ers, machines, equipment, and space), monitoring employee
safety, preventing equipment breakdowns, and ensuring sus-
tainability. Most planning decisions, such as workforce and
inventory, are (at least partially) based on forecasts from his-
torical demand collected over a long period. However, such
decisions may not be able to utilize real-time demand infor-
mation. This may result in lost demand, for example, if alter-
native resources cannot be used to address order modiﬁcations,
surges in demand, or customer dissatisfaction. Innovative tech-
nologies employing smart, connected devices are transforming
intralogistics and reshaping the research landscape. These
technologies include smart IoT devices, Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
and robots, and can improve intralogistics operations by facil-
itating time-sensitive decisions and reducing costs.
IoT is a network of physical objects (products, equipment,
tools, but also operators) or As observed things” embed-
ded with sensors, electronics, and software, exchanging data
between these objects to improve the services provided by
these connected objects. Detailed data can be captured and
relayed with IoT devices in real time. Data can be stored in
the cloud and made available anywhere, and systems can be
equipped to make dynamic decisions in real time. Although
the IoT network is decentralized, all critical resources are con-
nected to a broader network, enabling it to capture and process
1Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, The Netherlands
2Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India
3Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore Management University,
Singapore
4Fox School of Business, Temple University, USA
Corresponding author:
Debjit Roy, Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India.
Email: debjit@iima.ac.in

3344
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 1. Projected growth in usage of Internet of Things (IoT) devices from 2020 to 2030 (in millions), by region. (adapted from
Vailshery, 2022).
large amounts of data in real time and use these to improve
resource coordination and secure informed data-driven deci-
sions. Figure 1 shows the projected growth in usage of such
IoT devices by region.
Several innovative solutions driven by the Internet of
Things are now available to improve facility processes. Porter
and Heppelmann (2014) classify the new wave with four areas
of functions and capabilities of information technology: Moni-
toring, control, optimization, and autonomy. Equipment, tools,
and humans are monitored by embedded devices (sensors) in
real-time. A variety of these are available to monitor workplace
performance. These include temperature sensors (measuring
workplace temperature), gyroscopic sensors (measuring the
speed and orientation of a moving object), and count sensors
(measuring the number of objects in a zone). These sensors
monitor the working conditions of a facility to ensure a safe
environment. Sensor data can be used to control the real-time
movements of objects. For example, if the number of work-
ers in a zone exceeds its capacity, workers will be notiﬁed
not to enter the zone. Finally, highly granular data also allows
for real-time optimization and dynamic planning of intralogis-
tic decisions. For example, the availability of machines, parts,
and workers in real time can be used to decide the quantum
of work to be released on the production ﬂoor and minimize
work imbalance. Workplaces can work autonomously by com-
bining monitoring, control, and optimization functionalities
in facilities. These developments have resulted in large-scale,
fully automated facilities, for example, production facilities,
container terminals, and distribution warehouses around the
world that work autonomously with minimal human interven-
tion (Azadeh et al., 2019). These developments provide ample
research opportunities for operations management.
Most industry applications revolve around monitoring and
improving the customer experience by sharing more accurate
and timely data. However, IoT applications can also improve
workforce productivity by providing early warning signals on
equipment performance and malfunctions, relaying real-time
alerts for immediate action, and enabling real-time collab-
oration among stakeholders. By deploying automation and
robotization, intralogistics systems in manufacturing facili-
ties, container terminals, distribution warehouses, and retail
stores have increased productivity and throughput capacity
multifold. Prologis, a large logistics real estate developer,
claims that warehouse automation can help increase facil-
ity productivity – measured by revenue per square foot -
from 10% to 20% in e-commerce real estate. This is mainly
driven by improved order accuracy, faster processing time, and
better use of human talent (Leonard, 2021). Likewise, auto-
mated equipment has replaced traditional manual equipment
in many deep-sea container terminals to improve productivity
and safety and mitigate labor shortages. For example, man-
ually operated straddle carrier trucks have been replaced by
automated guided vehicles and automated stacking cranes for
container transport or by automated lifting vehicles that can
transport and stack.
Although the number of IoT use cases has increased sig-
niﬁcantly, new data opportunities are opening new research
avenues to optimize applications by leveraging large data sets

de Koster et al.
3345
for dynamic decision-making and product performance opti-
mization. This paper aims to highlight how IoT applications
can overcome process challenges in intralogistics operations,
such as manufacturing, warehousing, ports and terminals, and
retail stores. Further, we highlight how the data that have
become available with IoT systems can shape new research in
intralogistics operations. Section 2 presents a brief review of
IoT technologies, discusses process challenges, and presents
a challenging new research question for intralogistics oper-
ations, which can be addressed using IoT-acquired data. We
discuss methodological frameworks that can be used to answer
the questions and potential insights that may be obtained
(Sections 3–6). Finally, we conclude with a summary and
future outlook in Section 7.
2
IoT Technologies, Justiﬁcation, and Data
Analytics
In this section, we discuss how IoT technologies interface with
other IT implementations in a company. We speciﬁcally dis-
cuss the ﬂow of information and how companies could justify
IoT projects. We then discuss how existing and new devel-
opments in statistical and ML techniques can be adopted to
analyze IoT data and generate insights.
2.1
IoT Technologies
An IoT network consists of several fundamental elements
(Figure 2): (1) Smart devices and sensors, (2) connectivity
devices, (3) cloud storage and processing, and (4) analytics
and decision-making. Many types of sensors and devices exist,
for example, for temperature, pressure, light intensity, prox-
imity measurement, or radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID).
The sensors continuously transmit data through low-power
wireless networks using various protocols, such as Wi-Fi,
blacktooth, ZigBee, and Z-wave. Massive amounts of data are
transferred by connectivity devices or gateways and stored in
the cloud. Often, pre-processing is necessary to make data
interpretable and manageable. The IoT cloud makes it pos-
sible to collect, store, process, and manage large amounts
of data in real time that can be accessed by many, even
at remote locations. It is a network of servers capable of
performing high-speed data processing while working on dis-
tributed database management systems. IoT systems work in
conjunction with a variety of enabling technologies, such as
virtual/augmented reality, ambient intelligence, cloud comput-
ing, robotics, IPv6 protocols (provides every internet “thing”
with a unique IP address) and QR coding, which have con-
tributed to the adaptation of IoT systems in many intralogistics
operations.
Figure 3 shows how the various hierarchical information
systems used in intralogistics applications process the shop
ﬂoor and external data. Level 0 is about data collection, Level
1 is about resource control, Level 2 is about analytics and oper-
ational decision-making, and Level 3 (Enterprise Resource
Planning [ERP]) is about organizational control and tactical
decision-making. Figure 4 shows how these information sys-
tems interface. Systems used for managing production (Man-
ufacturing Execution System [MES]), warehouse (Warehouse
Management System [WMS]), container terminal (Terminal
Operating System [TOS]), and retail (Point of Sales System
[POS]) information ﬂows are indicated, as well as some exam-
ples of typical data exchanged between the hierarchical levels.
Note that the implementation of IoT technology can be capital-
intensive, so a suitable justiﬁcation is necessary. In the next
section, we discuss potential approaches to justifying the IoT
project.
2.2
How Should We Justify Investments in IoT
Projects?
The cost of IoT projects can vary greatly depending on the
project’s complexity and requirements, such as the number
of devices and level of customization. Expiance, an IT solu-
tions company, discusses that IoT development costs could
range between $50,000 for basic projects to more than $1 mil-
lion for complex hardware and software integration projects
(Expanice, 2022).
Some IoT projects can contribute directly to cash ﬂows
(tangible outcomes). For example, using video analytics, the
number of jobs manufactured at the end of the line can be
counted accurately and billed to the customer in real time, pre-
venting revenue leakages (such a service is offered, for exam-
ple, by vorne.com), or cutting costs by minimizing machine
downtime (for example, SmartSignal analytics adopted by
GE, ge.com). Such technologies could also have an impact
on employee productivity. For example, using a difference-
in-difference technique, Tan and Netessine (2020) showed the
value of a tabletop device that facilitates table service in restau-
rants. They found that tabletop technology is likely to improve
restaurant sales per minute or sales productivity by approxi-
mately 11%. IoT applications in intralogistics can also offer
signiﬁcant intangible value to organizations by monitoring
employee well-being on the shop ﬂoor, monitoring sustain-
able energy usage, providing real-time employee feedback on
safety adherence, increasing product and company valuation,
increasing goodwill among consumers, and providing overall
customer satisfaction.
However, unlike traditional IT investments, IoT projects
may not have a certain return due to the inﬂux of risk compo-
nents. Hence, traditional ROI or NPV-based approaches based
on deterministic rates of return may not allow one to evalu-
ate such emerging technologies effectively. According to the
Standish Group Annual CHAOS 2020 (standishgroup.com)
report, about 66% of technology projects (based on the anal-
ysis of 50,000 projects worldwide) fail partially or fully. IT
projects exhibit two kinds of uncertainty: Technical uncer-
tainty and market uncertainty. Technical uncertainty can be
addressed during the implementation phase, but the uncer-
tainty in acceptance by shop-ﬂoor or logistics employees or

3346
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 2. Internet of things (IoT) network with ﬂow from data capture to analytics.
Figure 3. Hierarchical decision levels. ERP = Enterprise Resource Planning; MES = Manufacturing Execution System; WMS =
Warehouse Management System; TOS = Terminal Operating System; POS = Point of Sales System; PCS = Production Control System;
WCS = Warehouse Control System; TCS = Terminal Control System; ICS = Inventory Control System.

de Koster et al.
3347
Figure 4. Interaction of internet of things (IoT) sensors and devices with intralogistics and business information systems at various
hierarchical decision levels.
the market can also be considerable. This uncertainty is par-
ticularly applicable to IoT projects, where there are signiﬁcant
adoption and outcome risks. In addition, there are risks asso-
ciated with scalability, where connecting many devices and
managing the high-frequency data produced by the devices can
be challenging.
IoT projects have several potential investment paths: (1)
To stage investments, (2) to abandon investment, (3) to defer
initiation of investment, (4) to create growth opportunities
based on an initial investment, or (5) to change the scale
of investment. One way to address these risks is to impose
an excessively high hurdle using an NPV calculation. This
approach to technology investing is quite rigid and can outright
reject many potential technology investment projects. Another
way to evaluate an IT project is by adopting an “options think-
ing” approach (Lee and Lee, 2015). They demonstrate their
thinking with an example where a ﬁrm implements an RFID
tagging project to trace the product ﬂow in a supply chain.
Often, large projects begin with a pilot implementation, that
is, the success of a project can signal the ﬁrm to proceed
with full investment. For IoT projects, the ﬁrm can pursue
a pilot project, which requires far lower investment than the
full-scale implementation. The manager can evaluate all future
outcomes (returns) along with the event probabilities. If the
investment amount in the pilot project is less than the present
value of the expected future outcomes, the initial investment
can be made. If the pilot results in a favorable outcome, then
the call option can be exercised (see Lee and Lee, 2015 for
details). Fichman et al. (2005) discuss options-based evalu-
ation as a viable approach for highly uncertain projects that
allow ﬂexibility in investments based on outcomes. The vary-
ing probability distribution of the outcomes over time can be
factored into the valuation of the call option. Both the Bino-
mial Model and the Black Scholes Model are popular methods
to evaluate real options and decide if the investment based on
an uncertain outcome is justiﬁed (Leisen and Reimer, 1996).
2.3
IoT Data Processing and Statistical Techniques
IoT devices generate large amounts of data. Data must be
organized and processed to allow for decision-making (see
Figure 2). This section discusses research advances in han-
dling real-time data, methodological advancements, and use
cases. We then discuss practical tools that handle large data
sets. Before being used, data might need cleaning ﬁrst, as data
collected in real time is often polluted. Think of tracking the
movements of RF tags in a certain area. The readers might
read tags that are not part of certain ﬂows and that should
not be read. Or, loads are densely stacked, and the reader
might miss tags. Data, therefore, must be reviewed and pos-
sibly cleaned before they can be used for analytics. Ding et al.
(2022) provide an overview of data cleaning techniques that
can be deployed.
Research advancements in real-time data processing and ana-
lytics. To allow operations decision-making, IoT data are
usually integrated with other external data, as indicated in
Figure 2. Real-time IoT data can be organized in descriptive
dashboards that show metrics such as asset utilization and
system efﬁciency. Another area where real-time data can be
leveraged is the area of predictive analytics. To improve pre-
diction accuracy under high demand ﬂuctuations and improve

3348
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
inventory management decisions, Chuang et al. (2021) devel-
oped an iterative demand forecasting process. They adopted
a three-pronged strategy: Data pooling, feature engineering
informed by theory, and ensemble-based machine learning.
The resulting framework demonstrated a signiﬁcant improve-
ment in the accuracy of the forecast. Likewise, using telem-
atics data on driving behavior that includes harsh braking,
speeding, and steep acceleration and leveraging instrumen-
tal variable regression, Choudhary et al. (2021) studied how
providing real-time feedback to drivers can affect their driv-
ing behavior. Another area where real-time data usage is
quite effective is prescriptive analytics. There are numerous
online learning and optimization applications in operations
management. Several use cases exist, such as the allocation
of inventory or capacity before customer arrival observation.
Here, the decision maker needs to make a (sometimes irre-
vocable) decision with the overall objective of maximizing
the revenue or proﬁt while satisfying the resource constraints.
For example, Bertsimas et al. (2019) show how online algo-
rithms that include an optimization framework can support the
dispatch of thousands of taxis serving more than 25,000 cus-
tomers per hour in real time. Feng and Shanthikumar (2018)
discuss how feature extraction and selection can be adopted for
learning individual entity behavior in real time. See the sur-
vey by Chandrashekar and Sahin (2014) for commonly used
methods in feature extraction. With real-time data, (approx-
imate) dynamic programs can also be formulated to enable
dynamic decision-making. Dynamic programing and, more
recently, reinforcement learning can be used to study real-
time decision-making problems where a stochastic system
is described using: (i) States, (ii) actions/decisions/controls,
(iii) exogenous information/random variables, (iv) transition
function, and (v) objective function. These models help us
to develop optimal real-time policies based on system state
(Puterman, 1994). Isik et al. (2022) use a Markov decision
process (MDP) model to show how the performance of man-
ufacturing and service systems can be improved by dynamic
worker allocation.
Tools for IoT data processing and analytics. Due to the sheer
volume, variety, and real-time nature of IoT data that often
include time-stamped equipment sensor readings and perfor-
mance logs, cloud computing tools need not only to store
large data, but also to be capable of real-time stream pro-
cessing and batch processing of large datasets. There are
open-source platforms, such as Python, that offer data manip-
ulation and visualization capabilities. Python libraries, such
as Scikit-learn, TensorFlow, Keras, and PyTorch, offer pre-
dictive analytics capabilities, such as using data to forecast
future events and detect real-time anomalies in data. There are
also specialized tools available for real-time analytics, such as
Apache Kafka, Elasticsearch, Kibana, and Grafana. Likewise,
for building and deploying Machine Learning and Predictive
Analytics algorithms, practitioners consider standard solutions
such as Apache Spark and TensorFlow and cloud-based solu-
tions such as AWS IoT Analytics, Azure IoT Hub, and Google
Cloud IoT.
Inspired by the availability of real-time data and the
possibility of dynamic decision-making in several applica-
tion domains such as manufacturing, warehousing, terminals,
retail, and event management, here we pose novel and chal-
lenging research questions along with data and a potential
research methodology (see Table 1). We highlight the differ-
ences between the state-of-the-art literature and the proposed
models that leverage new IoT data sources in Table EC.1 in
the E-Companion Section EC.1. In subsequent sections, we
focus on four research questions that each span multiple intral-
ogistics domains (Sections 3 to 6). These research questions
are not all-encompassing, but they have in common that they
have not yet been addressed in the literature and that answer-
ing them requires the use of IoT data sources. The questions
range from strategic/tactical (RQ1) to more operational (RQ2,
RQ3, and RQ4). They also vary in the methods required and
in the types of objectives (efﬁciency versus human factors).
We adopt the following ﬂow for each research question and
graphically represent it in a framework: (1) Discussion of
the decisions in research and practice, (2) discussion of the
relevant data, (3) discussion of a methodological framework
and potential model to address it, and (4) discussion on the
actionable insights it may generate. In Section 7, we discuss
emerging areas of research and make concluding remarks.
3
How Can IoT Data Be Used to
Dynamically Optimize Facility Layout?
Figure 5 illustrates two examples of dynamic relocation: (1)
for a assembly layout, and (2) for a mobile fulﬁllment system
whereas Figure 6 shows the framework for this question. The
layout of a facility (e.g., warehouse, plant, museum, retail,
hospital) has a signiﬁcant impact on performance. Tradition-
ally, deciding on the layout of a facility (typically with the
objective of minimizing the total ﬂow distance: the distance
traveled by all products or by material handling equipment,
MHE) requires a strategic or tactical decision, as a given layout
is hard to change. Occasionally, other objectives may occur.
Aouad et al. (2024) try to layout the artwork to maximize the
expected length of the visitors’ path in a museum. However,
as products change and may take different routes along the
resources over time and demand changes dynamically, a layout
optimized for current demand may not be efﬁcient, let alone
optimal for future demand.
3.1
Facility Layout Decisions in Research and
Practice
Dynamic facility layouts are not common yet. An exam-
ple is SEW Eurodrive, in its electric motor, transmission,
and gearbox plant in Graben Neudorf in Germany. SEW can
dynamically change substantial parts of its production layout,

de Koster et al.
3349
Table 1. Alignment of research questions with application areas.
Figure 5. Dynamic relocation of a workstation (a) and storage pods based on popularity (b). The (x, y) coordinates of the centers of the
workstations and pods are indicated; they are decision variables in the dynamic facility layout problem (DFLP).
in particular, the grouping of storage pods around modular
production cells (Figure 5(a)). The products are mounted on
autonomous mobile robots (AMRs) and follow dynamic routes
along the resources (SEW, 2020). As product demand evolves
over time, reorganizing ﬂows, cells, and storage pod posi-
tions is now possible. With the advent of movable production
robots (mounted on AMRs), conveyors that can be dynami-
cally re-layouted (e.g., the ﬂexconveyor of (Gebhardt, 2023)),
and autonomously movable storage racks (e.g., the storage
pods used by Amazon), the layout can now be changed rapidly
and dynamically. Figure 5(a) illustrates this for the relocation
of a workstation for a new product assembly (as can be found
at SEW Eurodrive) and Figure 5(b) for relocating storage pods
in a mobile fulﬁllment system (like at Amazon) due to changes
in the demand of items stored in the pods.
The dynamic facility layout problem (DFLP) has received
attention from various authors. The problem was introduced by
Rosenblatt (1986) and reviewed by Balakrishnan and Cheng
(1998). Early work (e.g., by Balakrishnan and Cheng (2000),
Baykasoglu and Gindy (2001), and Erel et al. (2003)) focuses
on re-layouting facilities at given intervals to minimize the
total costs of ﬂow and of the re-layouting. McKendall et al.

3350
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 6. Research framework for dynamic facility layout
optimization corresponding to RQ1.
(2006) minimize the total handling and rearrangement cost
of a facility for a given set of changes in ﬂows. McKendall
and Shang (2006) study a related problem, solving it using
a hybrid ant system heuristic. Turanoglu and Akkaya (2018)
solve a similar problem using a so-called “bacterial forag-
ing” algorithm. As the problem is notoriously hard to solve,
heuristics are used to solve it, such as enumerating viable lay-
outs (Erel et al., 2003), simulated annealing (Baykasoglu and
Gindy, 2001), genetic algorithms (Balakrishnan and Cheng,
2000) or tabu search (Helm and Hadley, 2000). Another stream
of literature focuses on maximizing the revenue obtained from
new layouts. The papers by Gong et al. (2013) and Zhou
et al. (2016) study the re-layout optimization of a self-storage
warehouse facility dynamically to maximize revenue. Such
self-storage warehouses contain modular storage cells con-
structed from movable walls (fastened with snap-locks), which
can easily be rearranged by moving the walls. As the total stor-
age space is ﬁxed, decisions involve determining the number
of cells of each modular size, respecting the total space, so that
revenue from dynamic demand is maximized.
In its most common form, the DFLP can be formulated as a
multi-period quadratic assignment problem (Zhu et al., 2018).
min Z =
∑
t∈
∑
i,j∈
∑
r,s∈
xi,r,t × xj,s,t × fi,j,t × ar,s,
(1)
where is the set of time epochs where the layout can be
modiﬁed, is the set of spaces that can be occupied by the
eligible departments in set . The binary decision variables
are xi,r,t, which equals 1 if department r is located at space i at
time t. The input data are given by parameters fr,s,t, which rep-
resent the expected daily demand ﬂow between departments
r and s at time t, and ai,j, which is the travel distance cost
between spaces i and j. The objective, value Z, can be aug-
mented by adding costs for moving departments. Constraints
to this problem consist of space constraints (e.g. space usage
and avoiding overlaps) and constraints on the shape and size of
departments. The formulation assumes a unit-sized grid, and
all departments consist of an integral number of units that have
to be assigned to the grid. Due to the quadratic objective func-
tion, the problem is hard to solve optimally for realistic-sized
problems. Other formulations are possible (e.g., the problem
can be linearized), but do not lead to simpler solution meth-
ods, as the problem has been shown to be NP-hard, even for
single-line layouts (Kothari and Ghosh, 2014).
3.2
Relevant Data
While the dynamic FLP has received research attention,
IoT data and new technologies allow (and require) a new
approach of the problem. There are some fundamental differ-
ences these technologies bring to the DFLP. (1) Re-layouting
an existing facility typically is very difﬁcult, expensive, and
time-consuming, requiring careful planning and potentially
resulting in considerable losses due to downtime. However
with new technologies, such as robotic mobile workplaces,
storage racks movable by robots, dynamic travel paths, and
ﬂexible workstations (see Lamballais et al. (2022) describing
this), re-layouting has become much more feasible, cheap and
relatively fast. This impacts models as well. Not only (cost)
parameters change in equation (1), but also the frequency by
which the change can be carried out. (Partial) re-layouting
may now be carried out monthly, or weekly, depending on
the robotic technologies. (2) While past models typically
involve rectangular shaped departments, these are not neces-
sarily optimal. Gue and Meller (2009) have demonstrated that
non-parallel storage aisles in warehouses might be better under
circumstances. With movable storage racks, other aisle shapes
can be constructed. This implies the constraints in the FLP
model also can be different. In addition, the model in equation
(1) assumes spaces are given and each department should ﬁt
in a given space. However, much more freedom may exist in
placing workcells in the layout, as long as they do not over-
lap. (3) The availability and structure of IoT data itself may
lead to novel models and insights. One difference might be
the objective. Classical FLP models focus on minimizing the
travel cost between departments, measured by pairwise con-
nections. Based on detailed travel data from IoT sensors in
an Indian company, Ghorashi Khalilabadi et al. (2024) found
that travel is often not pairwise but rather in longer sequences,
visiting multiple departments in a single trip. This leads to a
modiﬁed objective function and different constraints, which
should be included in a dynamic FLP, as the nature of these
trips may change over time. A more complete formulation,
taking into account full travel data from IoT sensors and ﬂexi-
ble placement of departments, is provided in the E-Companion
Section EC.2. To redesign the facility dynamically, as changes
in demand and supply require, IoT data that can capture the
availability of resources and product requirements are essen-
tial. With IoT sensors, it is possible to track the routes of
products, people, MHE, and all other movable resources in real
time and use these data to trigger dynamic relocation of the

de Koster et al.
3351
Table 2. Linking model input parameters to data sources for RQ1.
Model input parameter
Description
Source of data
Size of building
Length, width, height, shape
Fixed
Size of departments n ∈N
Max and min length, width
User speciﬁed
Allowed shapes for department n ∈N
Shape ratio
User speciﬁed
ℑ
Set of I/O points (assigned to departments)
User speciﬁed

Worker/job travel sequences (in which jobs are
carried out)
Forecast based on IoT and ERP data
fr
Frequency of demand for travel sequence r ∈
Forecast based on IoT and ERP data
Allowed travel paths
Pre-determined travel aisles
User speciﬁed
IoT = internet of things; ERP = Enterprise Resource Planning.
facility’s production, storage, and handling resources. Table 2
links the model parameters to data sources, including IoT.
3.3
Methodologies and Models
Fortunately, with modern movable resources, overhauling the
entire layout at every point in time is not necessary. Not all
resources are mobile, and only some departments may need
adjustment. Moreover, switchover costs are low, and rear-
rangement takes relatively little time. However, the DFLP
assumes accurate tracking of all resources and ﬂows, and fore-
knowledge of given dynamic ﬂow data. With IoT sensors, ﬂow
data becomes available in real time. The downside is that ﬂex-
ible equipment is much more expensive, and relocation still
takes time and effort. The question is when investment in ﬂexi-
ble equipment pays off, and how much change in ﬂows justiﬁes
re-layouting the facility.
A solution approach could consist of two stages, as indi-
cated in Figure 7. In stage 1, the static problem is solved to near
optimality, for example, by using mixed-integer programing
(MIP), for a given demand forecast and worker and job travel
sequences. If the decision only involves locating some critical
resources (as done by Sheu and Choi (2023)), a more straight-
forward formulation may serve Stage 1. Stage 2 is based on
(approximate) stochastic dynamic programing, with an esti-
mate of the development of stochastic demand and the cost
and beneﬁts related to a given layout conﬁguration. It invokes
the (truncated version of the) stage 1 MIP algorithm to rapidly
estimate the approximate effect of anticipated major demand
changes, blockages, or failures on the shop ﬂoor. This trun-
cated version of the algorithm may only focus on the relocation
of some of the key mobile resources, in view of tractability.
Cezik et al. (2025) give an example of calculating the expected
(updated) turnover speed of pods in a robotic mobile fulﬁll-
ment system, with the objective of (re-)locating them to a
better storage region.
3.4
Actionable Insights
Research may shed light on the rate of change in demand ﬂows
and the increase in the cost of resources and equipment (e.g.
due to blockages or unavailability) that justify a change in
layout or resource reallocation. Lamballais et al. (2022) test
a framework similar to the one sketched in Figure 7 for the
case of workstation and robot allocation with non-stationary
(Markov-modulated) demand and show that optimal dynamic
reallocation can reduce costs (of order waiting and postpone-
ment) by up to 50% for large warehouses (compared to ﬁxed
assignments with no response to demand changes). It would
be useful to test it in other environments with mobile robotic
resources, with decisions going beyond resource reallocation.
As relayouting becomes cheaper and faster with the advent
of mobile resources, we expect a signiﬁcant impact on the
designs in future (discrete) production and warehouse facil-
ities. Note that beneﬁting from these novel dynamic designs
requires an upfront investment in technology. In the case of
the systems sketched in Figure 5, this requires the installa-
tion of generic workstations (Figure 5(b)) that can be used for
multiple tasks and can be closed or opened at low cost (by
brieﬂy stopping the system) or ﬂexibly moved (Figure 5(a))
. Such investments are incremental when made at the design
stage, but may become substantial when made in a brownﬁeld
operation.
4
How Can IoT Data Be Used to Improve
Worker Well-being?
Figure 8 shows the framework for this question. Even in auto-
mated operations, a substantial part of the work must still be
done by people. Some parts of the process are difﬁcult to
automate, such as fetching various differently shaped products
from storage shelves. However, in many countries, the work-
force is aging, workers are hard to ﬁnd, and people are not
always willing to work 24/7 and do heavy physical and repet-
itive work with modest pay grades. Therefore, to retain them
and keep them motivated, it is increasingly important to focus
not only on traditional operational performance measures of
productivity and quality, but also on the well-being of work-
ers (Corbett, 2023). Worker well-being is a broad concept and
can be distinguished at the individual, group, or even societal
level (Corbett, 2023). Corbett (2023) distinguishes ﬁve areas
in Operations Management and “the 10 Ps” where operations
and well-being are linked (Pace and productivity, Predictabil-
ity and probability, Process and prevention, Performance and
payment, and Pollution and protection). In this paper, we limit

3352
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 7. Modeling framework for the dynamic facility layout problem (FLP).
Figure 8. Research framework for worker well-being
improvement corresponding to RQ2.
well-being to the individual -or group level- and operationalize
it as “job satisfaction” of workers related to the tasks they per-
form. Well-being in general and job satisfaction speciﬁcally
are increasingly receiving attention in operations management
research, although not yet at the same level as traditional
performance measures.
4.1
Using Human Factors to Improve Operational
Performance and Job Satisfaction
The organization of manual work, in collaboration with auto-
mated systems and new IoT technologies, is one of the biggest
challenges in operational management. In particular, how do
we motivate and retain people to do the work? The set of fac-
tors related to how humans interact with a system and which
co-determines performance is called “human factors” (Ben-
doly et al., 2006; Grosse et al., 2015). Grosse et al. (2017)
distinguish workers on the following human factors: Physical
factors (such as posture), mental factors (like learning, for-
getting), perceptual factors (such as human information pro-
cessing) and psychosocial aspects (such as motivation, stress
or regulatory focus), as these factors directly impact perfor-
mance. Human factors interact with environmental variables
(system design) and also with treatment variables (like incen-
tives, or feedback) that jointly inﬂuence task performance.
Humans typically do not respond identically to these envi-
ronmental and treatment variables. Most of the results in this
context are obtained in empirical studies (lab, ﬁeld, or natu-
ral experiments). We refer to the work of Bai et al. (2022),
Batt and Gallino (2019), De Vries et al. (2016a), De Vries et
al. (2016b), De Lombaert et al. (2024), Glock et al. (2019),
and De Koster and Roy (2024) , who carry out or use the
results of empirical studies on human factors in interaction
with environmental variables to ﬁnd the effect on performance.
De Lombaert et al. (2023) provide a review of such studies.
Despite all this research on human factors discussed above,
research on the integration of human factors in warehouse
planning and on how they affect the behavior of humans in
automated environments is still scarce. While research on the
effect of human factors on well-being in operational contexts
is quite scarce, the effect on operational performance vari-
ables such as productivity and quality has been studied to
some extent. Here, we list well-known results on possible inter-
actions between measures and human factors that improve
operational performance.
Goal setting. Productivity may be increased by providing chal-
lenging goals (but not too challenging) in repetitive tasks (e.g.,
Doerr and Gue, 2013).
Incentives, gamiﬁcation, nudging. Incentives (aimed towards
productivity or quality) can enhance performance, but the
outcomes depend on how they are formulated. Providing
nudges may lead human workers away from congested areas,
to increase performance (Chen et al., 2024b). The impact of
such measures may differ for different people, dependent on

de Koster et al.
3353
Table 3. Linking model input parameters to data sources for RQ2.
Model input parameter
Description
Source of data
NO,t, NT,t
Remaining orders still to be carried out, Tardy orders
Demand and completed work
Bi,t
Decisions of picker i on which task to execute and how
Internet of things (IoT) or IT system entries
Worker real-time status
Worker positions, worker status and availability
IoT data
Facility data
Facility size, distances
Fixed data
behavioral traits, such as regulatory focus (De Vries et al.,
2016a).
Feedback. Quantity feedback, particularly when given pub-
licly, helps to increase productivity, in particular for workers
with the lowest ranking (Song et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2022).
Task norms. Setting norms for the work to be done can sig-
niﬁcantly increase throughput by increasing the speed of the
slowest workers and by decreasing the variance (Schultz et al.,
1999).
Other known variables that are more difﬁcult to inﬂuence
and have effects include peer pressure, group coherence, and
intrinsic motivation (Schultz et al., 1999).
Most experiments reported in the literature have been car-
ried out in non-automated, laboratory, or manual real-life set-
tings. It is still unknown how these measures would work out in
conjunction with automated equipment, such as collaborative
robots. Pasparakis et al. (2021) carried out an order-picking
experiment using collaborative robots in a warehouse lab.
They found that “human leading” in collaborative order pick-
ing leads to higher productivity compared to the situation with
’robot leading’. This negative effect of the robot leading is
partly mitigated by the worker’s prevention focus -a regulatory
focus geared towards obtaining goals at work through risk mit-
igation, see Higgins (2012). Some researchers use knowledge
obtained from such empirical studies in OR models. Matusiak
et al. (2017) was probably the ﬁrst to integrate worker-speciﬁc
picking skills in an integrated batching-routing-picker selec-
tion mixed integer linear programing model. They applied this
to the picker-to-parts warehouse of a store-based retailer. The
speciﬁc “skills” (related to picking route properties, such as
the rack levels for item picking, item weights, item volumes,
length of the tour, and “stackability” of the products in the
tour) were obtained by analyzing historical pick batches. The
authors claim a makespan improvement of up to about 9%.
Larco et al. (2017) explicitly consider the potential discom-
fort of the order picker (measured by the Borg scale, Borg and
Kaijser (2006)) as a second objective, next to pick time, in
product-to-location storage assignment decisions, using data
from two different warehouses. Wang et al. (2022) develop
robot schedules in a robotic mobile fulﬁllment system that take
into account the schedule-induced ﬂuctuations in worker speed
of human pickers. The authors model the problem as a stochas-
tic dynamic program and claim that they can thus reduce pick
times by 10%.
4.2
Relevant Data
In order to track the physical well-being of workers at work,
their decisions, the results of those decisions, and the worker
conditions when making these decisions must be tracked.
Workers make many small and large decisions while at work.
For example, if several orders must be picked, they can choose
which orders to execute next. Or, if a pallet must be stored in a
warehouse, they can select an open position. Or, in manufac-
turing or service provision, which task is selected next from the
list of eligible tasks. According to self-determination theory
(Deci and Ryan, 2012), fulﬁlling human needs for autonomy,
competence, and relatedness drives intrinsic work motivation.
In this context, an interesting study was conducted by Pas-
parakis et al. (2023), who show that order pickers leading
a collaborative robot enjoy higher job satisfaction. Auton-
omy increases when workers have more choices, leading to
higher intrinsic motivation. Research results suggest it also
leads to an increase in job satisfaction (see Chen et al., 2024a;
De Lombaert et al., 2024), and it may even enhance worker
productivity (Chen et al., 2024a). In addition, the worker’s
physical condition can be monitored by wearables, such as
heart rate variability monitoring (to detect stress), or to mon-
itor physically demanding tasks (bending, stretching, lifting,
moving). When all these data are monitored, they may be com-
bined to present tasks that beneﬁt both the worker and the
company. Table 3 links the model parameters to data sources,
including IoT.
4.3
Methodologies and Models
We show how the research question (How can IoT data be
used to improve worker well-being?) can be answered for the
case of a warehouse where online orders arrive continuously
over time, to be picked by manual workers equipped with the
right equipment to do this. Each worker is presented with a
subset of orders and makes a selection. Each order must be
executed by one worker before its due time. Our objective is to
increase both worker well-being and productivity (obviously,
trade-offs may exist between these objectives) while ﬁnish-
ing as many orders as possible before their due time. We do
this using an MDP formulation embedded in a reinforcement
learning framework similar to Begnardi et al. (2023). The gen-
eral framework is sketched in Figure 9. We have to distinguish
the state space, actions, and rewards.
States: At each time step t, the state vector St contains the
set of all remaining orders to be executed on the warehouse

3354
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 9. Reinforcement learning framework to increase worker job satisfaction.
grid graph, as well as its distance matrix, and the list of nodes
containing pickers and orders.
Actions: At each time step t, an idle picker i is assigned to a
(small) subset of available orders selected from the list, giving
the highest rewards Rt, as action Ai,t. Such actions are taken
whenever a picker becomes idle or when a new order enters
the system. Picker i then chooses one of the orders from the
subset, as action Bi,t, giving the best worker satisfaction.
Rewards: The reward function is a combination of worker sat-
isfaction, shown by the choice made by the order picker and
the costs ct related to the environment ct = CHNO,t + CTNT,t,
where NO,t, NT,t, CH and CT are the number of remaining and
tardy orders at time t and order holding and tardiness costs,
respectively.
The network can be initially trained on historical order data
executed by the pickers. Over time, it can be applied to actual
orders to improve order presentation decisions (actions Ai,t)
and the job satisfaction of pickers resulting from actions Bi,t.
4.4
Actionable Insights
Based on the outcomes of the RL model, some managerial
insights may emerge:
Increasing job satisfaction of workers: The model helps
workers select work that best matches their personal prefer-
ences. This will improve job satisfaction. In the longer term, it
may help to retain workers and, in markets with scarce labor,
even give the company a competitive advantage.
Increasing order execution performance: Since orders are
offered to pickers that ﬁt both their personal preferences and
company objectives, this may also have a positive impact on
company objectives and order execution performance (see
Chen et al., 2024a).
Using IoT-generated data on individual preferences and
capabilities of human order pickers may be useful when
optimizing the division of labor to improve overall picking
throughput. However, utilizing individualized performance
data in optimization models comes with some caveats, as
their use is not legal in several parts of the world (De Lom-
baert et al., 2025). Including human factors is certainly one
of the hot topics in OM modeling, but ethical and legal
aspects should be taken into account. Giving some freedom
to humans to select their work may help them overcome such
legal obstacles.
5
How Can IoT Data Be Used to
Dynamically Deploy Staff At Large-scale
Events?
Figure 10 shows the framework for this question. Efﬁcient
staff deployment is crucial to ensure smooth operations and
maximize attendee satisfaction at large-scale events (such as
conferences and exhibitions). This section proposes a stochas-
tic model for dynamic staff deployment based on IoT data
collected from some speciﬁc locations at events (such as secu-
rity checkpoints, registration desks, and catering stations).
Using real-time information on queue lengths, wait times, or
numbers of attendees served, the model enables event orga-
nizers to strategically allocate staff resources where needed.
Managerial insights derived from our theoretical analysis and
numerical studies provide valuable guidance in enhancing
large-scale events’ operations.
5.1
Dynamic Staff Deployment At Large-scale Events
Large-scale events, such as conferences and exhibitions, rep-
resent dynamic environments with ﬂuctuating attendance vol-
umes and varying operational demands. Traditional methods
of staff deployment often rely on static schedules and manual
adjustments, which may not respond effectively to changing
conditions. To address this challenge, we propose a novel
approach that harnesses the power of IoT data and stochas-
tic modeling to dynamically deploy staff at large-scale events.
The proposed model integrates real-time information from IoT
sensors deployed at key service points in the event venue, such

de Koster et al.
3355
Figure 10. Research framework for dynamic staff deployment
corresponding to RQ3.
as security checkpoints, registration desks, and catering sta-
tions. Using this information, event organizers can optimize
staff allocation, reduce wait times, increase the overall service
rate, and improve the attendee experience.
5.2
Relevant Data
Several companies offer IoT solutions tailored for large-scale
event management. Notable providers include Neoma, Monica
Project, and Samsara. These companies specialize in inte-
grating IoT sensors for crowd management and operational
efﬁciency in large venues such as convention centers, stadi-
ums, and hotels. They use technologies like CCTV cameras
(with embedded analytics for crowd density estimation), peo-
ple counting systems, and mobile apps to improve the overall
attendee experience. These technologies are designed to mon-
itor crowd ﬂow, enhance safety, and provide real-time data
at security checkpoints, registration desks, and other high-
trafﬁc areas. Some of these companies also offer wearable
devices such as staff wristbands and smart glasses, as well
as GPS trackers, which are ideal for tracking attendee move-
ment and deploying staff efﬁciently based on real-time data
in large-scale events. These IoT providers are instrumental
in helping large-scale event organizers improve operational
efﬁciency and provide real-time crowd management insights,
thereby optimizing resource allocation and enhancing attendee
satisfaction.
Speciﬁcally, real-time data can be collected at key service
points within a large-scale event venue as described below.
Security checkpoints: IoT sensors can be placed at secu-
rity checkpoints to monitor the ﬂow of attendees as they pass
through. They can track the movement of attendees and detect
any bottlenecks or congestion points in the queue. Real-time
data from these sensors provide information on the queue
length, wait time, and number of attendees served at each
security checkpoint.
Registration desks: IoT sensors can be installed at regis-
tration desks to track the number of attendees approaching
and waiting in line. They can detect when individuals enter
the queue and measure the time they spend waiting. By col-
lecting data on queue lengths, wait times, and numbers of
attendees served, real-time information is generated, indicat-
ing which registration desks experience high trafﬁc and longer
wait times.
Catering stations: IoT sensors can be installed in catering
stations to monitor the ﬂow of attendees lining up for food
and beverages. They can detect when attendees join the queue,
measure the time they wait, and track their movement as they
approach the service area. The real-time data collected from
these sensors offers information on queue length, wait time,
and number of attendees served at each catering station.
5.3
Methodologies and Models
More speciﬁcally, the ﬂow of attendees at a large event can be
modeled as a tandem system with two stations, as illustrated in
Figure 11 (Lim et al., 2020). Station 1 could represent a secu-
rity checkpoint, while Station 2 might represent a registration
desk. Each “job” within this setup represents an attendee, and
each station can only handle one attendee at a time. Initially,
there are M attendees waiting to enter the system at station
1, with M being ﬁnite. Unlike manufacturing settings that
assume an unlimited supply of jobs (Andradòttir and Ayhan,
2005; Andradòttir et al., 2001), our model accounts for a lim-
ited number of attendees—typical for large events, such as
daily conference attendance, which is naturally ﬁnite. A queue
of length L is located between the two stations. Attendees are
ﬁrst served at station 1 and then move to station 2 if it is avail-
able. If station 2 is occupied, the attendee either waits in the
queue (if space is available) or remains at station 1 (if the queue
is full). Thus, up to L+1 attendees may wait to enter station 2.
Importantly, attendees pass through each station in the order
they arrive.
Consider two teams of servers, each consisting of identical
servers, starting work together on attendee 1 at station 1 when
t = 0. Each time an attendee completes service at a station,
a server assignment policy directs the teams to either station
1 or station 2. Let Dm represent the time at which attendee
m exits the system, and E[Dm] its expected value. Our goal
is to determine a server assignment policy that minimizes the
expected makespan E[DM] – the estimated total time required
to serve all M attendees. An optimal server assignment pol-
icy is one that achieves this minimum expected makespan. It
can be shown that, under such an optimal policy, neither team
should remain idle at any time. Thus, our focus is solely on
non-idling policies, ensuring that both server teams remain
engaged and productive until all M attendees have been fully
served.
The expected makespan, E[DM], for a general non-idling
policy can be expressed as the sum of four components:
E[DM] = E[WM] + E[XM] + E[YM] + E[ZM],
(2)

3356
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Figure 11. A large-scale event with two stations.
Table 4. Time durations to serve attendee m = 1, … , M.
Wm : Duration of attendee m staying at the initial position
(before entering station 1)
Xm : Duration of attendee m staying at station 1
Ym : Duration of attendee m staying in the queue (before
entering station 2)
Zm : Duration of attendee m staying at station 2
where each component corresponds to a random variable,
as detailed in Table 4. Under a speciﬁc server assignment
policy, these four components can be independently calcu-
lated through a stochastic modeling approach similar to those
developed by Lim et al. (2020) and Wang et al. (2014). This
methodology provides the expected makespan E[DM] under
the given policy.
We brieﬂy describe the procedure to calculate each term in
equation (2) below.
(1) We ﬁrst calculate the durations at station 1. To determine
E[XM], we ﬁrst ﬁnd E[X1], E[X2], … , E[XM−1]. Each of
these terms can be determined by its previous terms.
Then, the expected duration E[XM] of attendee M stay-
ing at station 1 can be derived from these terms (see, for
example, Proposition 1 of Lim et al., 2020).
(2) We next calculate the durations at the initial position. Note
that for m = 1, we have E[W1] = 0. For m = 2, … , M,
we have E[Wm] = E[Wm−1] + E[Xm−1], which means the
expected duration of attendee m staying at the initial posi-
tion is the sum of the expected durations of attendee m−1
staying at the initial position and at station 1. Since we
have obtained E[Xm], m = 1, … , M, from step 1 above,
we can determine E[Wm] in a recursive manner starting
from m = 1.
(3) Then, we calculate the durations at station 2. We ﬁrst
determine the expected duration E[Zm] of attendee m stay-
ing at station 2, for m = 1, … , M −2. The expected
durations E[ZM−1] and E[ZM] can be derived from these
previous terms (see, for example, Proposition 2 of Lim
et al., 2020).
(4) Finally, we derive the durations in the queue. Clearly,
we have E[Y1] = 0 for m = 1. We then calculate the
expected duration E[Ym] of attendee m in the queue, for
m = 2, … , M, based on its previous terms (see, for
example, Proposition 3 of Lim et al., 2020).
Table 5 shows the IoT data that can be collected in large-
scale events (such as conferences or exhibitions). Numerical
experiments can be performed using this IoT data to evalu-
ate different server assignment policies. Realistic scenarios
should be considered to assess the policies’ performance under
different operational conditions. In addition, a sensitivity anal-
ysis must be conducted to test the robustness of the policies
and identify critical factors that inﬂuence performance. It is
worth noting that with the help of IoT sensors, the real-time
queue length, wait time, and number of attendees served can
be recorded at each service point, such as security checkpoint,
registration desk, and catering station. This real-time IoT data
allows us to automate many server assignment policies stud-
ied in the literature (Andradòttir and Ayhan, 2005; Andradòttir
et al., 2001; Lim et al., 2020), which rely on the above real-time
IoT information. Furthermore, the ability to record the real-
time service rate of team i at station j on job k can potentially
unlock many future research opportunities. For example, when
knowing that the service rate at a certain station is going down,
one can dispatch more servers to help at that station. What are
the optimal policies under such a situation where service rates
vary over jobs (or time)?

de Koster et al.
3357
Table 5. Linking model input parameters to data sources for RQ3.
Model input parameter
Description
Source of data
Queue length
Real-time queue length data can be collected at each
service point, such as security checkpoint, registration
desk, and catering station.
Internet of things (IoT) data
Wait time
Real-time wait time data can be collected at each service
point, such as security checkpoint, registration desk, and
catering station.
IoT data
Number of attendees served
Real-time number of attendees served can be recorded at
each service point, such as security checkpoint,
registration desk, and catering station.
IoT data
Service rate of team i at station j on job k
Real-time service rate of team i on job k can be recorded
at each station j, such as security checkpoint,
registration desk, and catering station.
IoT data
5.4
Actionable Insights
Based on the analysis of the stochastic model and numerical
experiments, several key managerial insights may emerge:
Optimal staff deployment policies: The stochastic model
allows event organizers to determine optimal stafﬁng levels
at each service point based on real-time IoT data. By ana-
lyzing the stochastic model, organizers can identify stafﬁng
policies that minimize overall wait times and maximize staff
utilization.
Proactive monitoring and adjustment: Real-time monitor-
ing of IoT data enables event organizers to adjust staff levels
proactively in response to changing operational dynamics. By
continuously observing queue lengths and wait times, organiz-
ers can identify potential bottlenecks and deploy staff where
needed to alleviate congestion and improve service efﬁciency.
Scenario analysis and contingency planning: Scenario anal-
ysis allows organizers to evaluate the impact of various fac-
tors, such as attendee arrival rates and service times, on the
performance of different stafﬁng policies. By considering
different operational scenarios, organizers can develop con-
tingency plans to mitigate the impact of unforeseen events or
ﬂuctuations in demand, ensuring smooth operations even in
challenging circumstances.
6
How Can IoT Data Help to Reduce
Order Turn-around Time with Real-time
Congestion Control?
Figure 12 shows the framework for this question. Conges-
tion in facilities can lead to customer dissatisfaction and
huge provider costs. Whether these are airport security check
queues, theme park ride queues, warehouse aisle queues, or
container terminal stack yard queues, mitigating queue waiting
times always leads to better customer service outcomes.
Figure 12. Research framework for reducing order turn-around
time corresponding to RQ4.
6.1
Demand Learning and Using Real-time Queue
Information to Reduce Fulﬁllment Times
Today, short fulﬁllment times are an important criterion for a
superior customer service experience. Whether it is the time
to ofﬂoad containers from a vessel at a seaport, fulﬁll an e-
commerce order at a distribution center, or manage customer
queues at the airport security check gates, reducing waiting
times has become crucial. The remaining resource capacity
plays an important role in reducing waiting times. However,
with large ﬂuctuations in demand, better scheduling and rout-
ing of customers or jobs help to better harness the capacity of
the resource.
Most studies on job scheduling and routing decisions in
facilities such as warehouses (Scholz et al., 2017; Weidinger
et al., 2019), container terminals (Duinkerken and Lodewi-
jks, 2015), or airport passenger security checks (Gilliam,
1979; Hanumantha et al., 2020) are static in nature. How-
ever, today with the help of real-time resource status data and
demand information, several customer (job) routing decisions
in facilities can be performed dynamically. To demonstrate
the research problem, we consider a warehouse order-picking
system for the remainder of this section.

3358
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
Existing Research and Gap. In manual picker-to-parts order
picking systems, pickers travel with a cart through the ware-
house, retrieving items from their storage locations to satisfy
customer demand. Each customer order is characterized by a
certain due time before which all items in the order should
be retrieved. Customer orders may be grouped (batched) into
larger picking orders (batches). The items of a batch are then
collected in a picking tour. Order picking time is affected by
item locations. A vast literature and several surveys relate
to various picking problems, such as those by Boysen et al.
(2019) and De Koster et al. (2007). Van Gils et al. (2018)
presents a comprehensive review of integrated operational
planning problems related to order picking.
As observed from the literature, most picker routing studies
are solved without considering aisle congestion. Research to
improve picker productivity has been limited to static picker
routing with different warehouse layouts. Congestion plays a
role, for example, when large pick carts are used to pick many
orders in batches. These carts block some rack sections and
parts of the narrow travel aisles. Today, IoT data can provide
the real-time congestion status of the aisles in the order pick
area (Altexsoft, 2023). This real-time status allows us to study
dynamic warehousing policies such as picker routing. Further,
an improved demand proﬁle enables the manager to develop
better picker stafﬁng and pick schedules.
6.2
Relevant Data
New data from IoT devices offer several real-time data-driven
research opportunities in facility logistics, including ware-
housing, terminals, and airports. Consider the example of a
warehouse. A traditional WMS helps the order picker identify
the right pick locations and sorts them sequentially to orga-
nize the pick path to reduce travel time. However, it lacks
dynamic decision-making capabilities. Today, smart sensors
embedded in MHE can navigate obstacles in the path, alert
the driver, identify a machine fault, detect potential conges-
tion, and enable dynamic decision-making. By collecting data
and using online decision-making, the MHE can teach and
alert operators, or it can be rerouted dynamically to a particular
zone to avoid congested travel paths and increase throughput.
In the next section, we focus on one such application where IoT
devices can provide insight into real-time storage aisle conges-
tion and enable dynamic picker routing to maximize picker
productivity. Likewise, enterprise resource planning systems
can be adopted to observe demand data over a long period.
Static layout data would help estimate resource travel times.
Table 6 links the model parameters with the data sources,
including IoT.
6.3
Methodologies and Models
Building dynamic operational capabilities in a warehouse can
improve productivity. An example of a novel IoT application of
dynamic operational policies can be found in human-robot col-
laborative systems. Here, human order pickers can be dynam-
ically allocated to cobots, collaborative robots that carry the
picked items and autonomously take them to packing stations
(see Azadeh et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b). The system mon-
itors the positions of all cobots and workers and can match
the worker with the closest robot or the robot with the most
urgent order in real time. The initial implementation of cobot
solutions in retail and life sciences warehouses showed a sub-
stantial productivity improvement. The ﬂexible deployment of
cobot solutions can support the warehouse capacity growth
plan (Crowe, 2020).
In this section, we study how dynamic real-time data in
warehouses, such as aisle congestion status, can provide addi-
tional opportunities to improve worker and equipment pro-
ductivity. Although we use the context of a warehouse, the
application applies to other contexts, such as container termi-
nals or airports. The modeling framework encompasses two
streams: (1) throughput analysis of the system with state-
dependent routing strategies and (2) demand learning and
dynamic optimization of system performance using inputs
from stream 1.
Throughput analysis of the system with state-dependent
routing strategies: To analyze the maximum throughput
capacity of a warehouse order pick system, closed queuing
network models are quite appropriate. In this network, the
customers circulate and are routed through different stations
to complete their process. The most commonly used routing
adopted for picker movement in a warehouse (both manual
and automated) is probabilistic or random routing (for exam-
ple, see Roy et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2009). Such routings do
not speciﬁcally capture the real-time congestion in the aisles.
However, with IoT count sensor data, the current number of
pickers at each aisle can be counted. This count information is
a signal of congestion level. This information can be adopted
to intelligently route the customer and minimize delays. Such
probabilistic shortest-queue routing schemes embedded in a
closed queueing network model have been developed in the
context of ﬂexible manufacturing systems, where parts are
routed to the shortest queue with the highest probability (see
Yao and Buzacott, 1987).
Figure 13 shows how an aisle can be crowded in real time.
Since two pickers are already present in the far left aisle, the
new picker completes the pick task in the second aisle before
reentering aisle 1. Additional pickers can either wait to enter
the aisle or postpone the pick in the aisle. In relation to the ﬁrst
stream of research, such state-dependent picker strategies can
be captured in a closed queuing network model with K work-
ers, such as the one depicted in Figure 14. The state-dependent
queuing model includes load-dependent queues that capture
the throughput of the aisles as a function of the number of
pickers present in the aisle (for example, 𝜇1(n) denotes the
load-dependent service rate of a picker in the Aisle 1 when
there are n pickers present in the aisle). Such models help us
understand the value of state-dependent picker routing, such

de Koster et al.
3359
Table 6. Linking model input parameters to data sources for RQ4.
Model input parameter
Description
Source of data
d(t)
Projected demand
ERP data
𝜇1(n), 𝜇2(n), … , 𝜇m(n)
State-dependent processing rates
IoT worker tracking data, and warehouse
layout dimensions data
no
First component of MDP state formulation
corresponding to the number of orders waiting
Warehouse management system
n1, n2, … , nA
Other components of MDP State formula
IoT count sensor data in each aisle
IoT = internet of things; MDP = Markov decision process; ERP = Enterprise Resource Planning.
Figure 13. An illustration of dynamic picker routing in a
warehouse.
Figure 14. An illustration of the state-dependent queuing model
of the warehouse order-pick system.
as shortest queue routings, in improving steady-state picker
productivity. Such models can also show the potential impact
of introducing warehouse cross-aisles in the layout and aisle
congestion control limits on picker productivity.
Demand learning and dynamic optimization: While the
previous stream relates to performance analysis, this stream
relates to optimizing the performance with demand learn-
ing and dynamic optimization of pick routes based on real-
time aisle status information. The framework is illustrated in
Figure 15.
Figure 15. An online learning and dynamic optimization
framework.
Learning demand and predicting workload have signiﬁ-
cant advantages in scheduling ﬂexible workers and minimizing
order fulﬁllment times. Today, machine learning methods offer
better predictability of demand. The most commonly used
approaches include Decision Tree, Random Forest, and Gra-
dient Boosted Tree. Other methodological advancements in
demand prediction include the Prophet method, which is a time
series-based demand prediction method and has been shown to
perform well in large-scale problems (Menculini et al., 2021;
Taylor and and, 2018). Cohen et al. (2022) also develop a
data aggregation with clustering that predicts demand with
an optimal feature identiﬁcation process at different levels of
granularity: Item, cluster, and aggregate levels. In addition,
transfer learning is increasingly adopted in demand prediction
where there is limited true data and a large amount of related
proxy data (Bastani, 2021). Demand learning in intralogistics
can help to plan resources in advance (an ofﬂine decision) and
respond to demand ﬂuctuations (for example, demand learning
can be used to estimate the number of pickers, K, for different
time periods). Note that picker resources are scheduled for the
shifts much ahead of time.
Now, dynamic demand arrival data can feed into a dynamic
programing model to minimize order fulﬁllment costs. For
example, the pickers can wait to batch orders if they can antic-
ipate future demand (based on demand prediction). There is
a trade-off between additional wait for order arrivals vs. ful-
ﬁllment time of the current order. We term this wait as a
strategic wait for future demand. During order fulﬁllment,
the resource can also delay processing an order due to con-
gestion at a storage location. The congestion in a location is
based on the current state of the system expressed by a tuple

3360
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
(no, n1, n2, … , nA), where no is the number of orders waiting to
be processed and n1, n2, … , nA denotes the current number of
orders being processed in aisles 1, 2, … , A, respectively. Note
that orders will wait only when K, the total number of pickers
available to process the orders, is all busy. The dynamic pro-
gram can have two actions: (1) wait for a batch or proceed, (2)
pick from a location, or return later. The cost function could
consist of order waiting costs and order postponement costs
(before picking). The waiting costs can be estimated from the
queuing model described earlier. The reward function can be
evaluated based on the number of waiting orders (no) in the
external queue. Look-ahead approximation heuristics can be
adopted to solve such large-scale dynamic programs (Truong,
2014).
6.4
Actionable Insights
With accurate demand prediction, the idle time of the staff
would be reduced, and the waiting time for the orders to be
processed would potentially decrease. Incorporating real-time
aisle status information can reveal state-dependent conditions
under which a picker is better off postponing the current pick
task in an aisle and continuing with the remaining pick tasks.
In addition, there would be times when additional travel would
be better than waiting for task execution at an aisle. Managers
could potentially observe that demand learning and dynamic
optimization models reduce the cost of operations and offer
a better customer experience. On a strategic note, our mod-
els can also help to understand the effect of warehouse layout
and conﬁguration on reducing crowding behavior and improv-
ing picker productivity. For example, with shorter aisles, it
may be better to wait, whereas with longer aisles, it may be
better to return later. Two key insights would emerge from
such research: (1) Formulate optimal real-time order batching
and routing policy, that is, when orders should be grouped for
picking. (2) Understand the performance trade-offs between
batching (waiting for batch formation) and travel time savings
(with order accumulation).
7
Summary and Future Outlook
Research on IoT technologies in intralogistics is still in a
nascent stage. Our paper provides avenues for developing new
data-driven research opportunities for intralogistics operations
with IoT technologies. To demonstrate the value of IoT tech-
nologies, we select four research questions relevant to different
intralogistics operations: manufacturing, warehousing, ports
and terminals, retail, and event management. Each question
can be addressed using IoT-generated data. Additional oppor-
tunities exist in emerging areas such as healthcare and utility
management, for example, see Section EC.3 in E-Companion.
In general, we see opportunities for research in dynamic and
online decision-making (see Cezik et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2024
for such applications in warehouse operations). In particular,
there are opportunities for IoT data to inform online decision-
making so that managers can act proactively and improve both
system performance and human well-being.
The following common operations management questions
emerge: (i) How can managers use IoT-generated track and
trace data to improve asset use, uptime, and proﬁtability?
(ii) How can the information collected by IoT sensors be
integrated with facility design and operational planning deci-
sions to optimize resource availability and cost? (iii) How can
IoT sensors learn from humans working alongside machines,
and how can system performance be optimized dynamically?
While we see IoT technologies as a rich source of granular
data, integrating IoT data with other data streams can pro-
vide immense value to companies. One could look at other
interesting design questions that lie at the interface of differ-
ent disciplines. An example could be linking IoT data from
intralogistics systems to design performance appraisal sys-
tems for human resources. Here, OM researchers can also
link productivity measures with payout structures, link task
assignments to workers based on productivity proﬁles, and see
how different task assignment strategies affect worker earning
potential.
Using IoT technologies, data become available in a contin-
uous manner. This makes the ideas of many online algorithms
applicable in practical settings. For example, in some of these
settings, a central planner in charge of setting the prices of
respective resources may not have complete information on
user preferences. As a result, the central planner’s goal is to
dynamically adjust the prices of resources in a market using
some online algorithms to achieve desirable resource alloca-
tion (Jalota and Ye, 2022). The availability of IoT data makes
this type of dynamic online algorithm (see, for example, Gao
et al., 2023; Jalota and Ye, 2022) extremely relevant.
Declaration of Conﬂicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The authors received the following ﬁnancial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The third author is sup-
ported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
grant #W2411062.
ORCID iDs
Reńe de Koster
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1740-7822
Debjit Roy
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5298-9664
Yun Fong Lim
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5124-5161
Subodha Kumar
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4401-7950
Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online (doi:
10.1177/10591478251362677).

de Koster et al.
3361
References
Altexsoft (2023) RTLS in warehouses: Boosting efﬁciency with
IoT-based systems https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/rtls-rﬁd-ware
house/.
Andradòttir S and Ayhan H (2005) Throughput maximization for
tandem lines with two stations and ﬂexible servers. Operations
Research 53(3): 516–531.
Andradòttir S, Ayhan H and Down D (2001) Server assignment poli-
cies for maximizing the steady-state throughput of ﬁnite queueing
systems. Management Science 47(10): 1421–1439.
Aouad A, Deshmane A and Martinez-de Albeniz V (2024) Design-
ing layouts for sequential experiences: Application to cultural
institutions. SSRN https://ssrn.com/abstract=4158587.
Azadeh K, De Koster R and Roy D (2019) Robotized and auto-
mated warehouse systems: Review and recent developments.
Transportation Science 53(4): 917–945.
Azadeh K, Roy D, De Koster R, et al. (2024) Zoning strategies
for human-robot collaborative picking. Decision Sciences 56(1):
50–70.
Bai B, Dai H, Zhang DJ, et al. (2022) The impacts of algorithmic work
assignment on fairness perceptions and productivity: Evidence
from ﬁeld experiments. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management 24(6): 3060–3078.
Balakrishnan J and Cheng CH (1998) Dynamic layout algorithms: A
state-of-the-art survey. Omega 26(4): 507–521.
Balakrishnan J and Cheng CH (2000) Genetic search and the
dynamic layout problem. Computers & Operations Research
27(6): 587–593.
Bastani H (2021) Predicting with proxies: Transfer learning in high
dimension. Management Science 67(5): 2964–2984.
Batt RJ and Gallino S (2019) Finding a needle in a haystack: The
effects of searching and learning on pick-worker performance.
Management Science 65(6): 2624–2645.
Baykasoglu A and Gindy NN (2001) A simulated annealing algo-
rithm for dynamic layout problem. Computers & Operations
Research 28(14): 1403–1426.
Begnardi L, Baier H, van Jaarsveld W, et al. (2023) Deep rein-
forcement learning for two-sided online bipartite matching in
collaborative order picking. In: Proceedings of machine learning
research ACML, volume 222.
Bendoly E, Donohue K and Schultz KL (2006) Behavior in oper-
ations management: Assessing recent ﬁndings and revisiting old
assumptions. Journal of Operations Management 24(6): 737–752.
Bertsimas D, Jaillet P and Martin S (2019) Online vehicle routing:
The edge of optimization in large-scale applications. Operations
Research 67(1): 143–162.
Borg E and Kaijser L (2006) A comparison between three rat-
ing scales for perceived exertion and two different work tests.
Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports 16(1):
57–69.
Boysen N, De Koster R and Weidinger F (2019) Warehousing in
the e-commerce era: A survey. European Journal of Operational
Research 277(2): 396–411.
Cezik T, Graves SC and Liu AC (2025) Velocity-based stowage
policy for a semiautomated fulﬁllment system. Production and
Operations Management 34(11): 3400–3415.
Chandrashekar G and Sahin F (2014) A survey on feature selection
methods. Computers & Electrical Engineering 40(1): 16–28.
Chen Y, De Vries J and De Koster R (2024a) Effect of picker pref-
erences and task selection on order picking outcomes. Working
paper, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
Chen Y, Xu A, He QC, et al. (2025) Smart navigation via strategic
communications in a mixed autonomous paradigm. Production
and Operations Management 34(11): 3381–3399.
Choudhary V, Shunko M and Netessine S (2021) Does immediate
feedback make you not try as hard? A study on automotive telem-
atics. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 23(4):
835–853.
Chuang HHC, Chou YC and Oliva R (2021) Cross-item learning
for volatile demand forecasting: An intervention with predictive
analytics. Journal of Operations Management 67(7): 828–852.
Cohen MC, Zhang R and Jiao K (2022) Data aggregation and demand
prediction. Operations Research 70(5): 2597–2618.
Corbett CJ (2023) OM forum – the operations of well-being: An
operational take on happiness, equity, and sustainability. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management 26(2): 409–430.
Crowe S (2020) DHL deploying 1,000 mobile robots across North
America https://www.cobottrends.com/dhl-deploying-1000-locu
sbots-north-america-2020/.
Deci E and Ryan R (2012) Motivation, personality, and develop-
ment within embedded social contexts: An overview of self-
determination theory. In: Ryan RM (ed.) The oxford handbook of
human motivation, pp.85–107. Oxford Unversity Press.
De Koster R, Le-Duc T and Roodbergen KJ (2007) Design and con-
trol of warehouse order picking: A literature review. European
Journal of Operational Research 182(2): 481–501.
De Koster R and Roy D (2024) Research: Warehouse and logis-
tics automation works better with human partners. Harvard
Business
Review
(online
article).
https://hbr.org/2024/06/
research-warehouse-and-logistics-automation-works-better-with-
human-partners.
De Lombaert T, Braekers K, De Koster R, et al. (2024) Is it good
to have a choice? The value of participatory order assignments in
warehousing. International Journal of Operations and Production
Management 45(3): 783–806.
De Lombaert T, Braekers K, Koster R, De , et al. (2023) In pursuit of
humanised order picking planning: Methodological review, liter-
ature classiﬁcation and input from practice. International Journal
of Production Research 61(10): 3300–3330.
De Lombaert T, Rijal A, Costrasal R, et al. (2025) Mass collection
of workers’ data in warehouse facilities: Reﬂections on privacy
and workforce well-being. Italian Labour Law e-Journal 17(2):
145–168.
De Vries J, De Koster R and Stam D (2016a) Aligning order pick-
ing methods, incentive systems, and regulatory focus to increase
performance. Production and Operations Management 25(8):
1363–1376.
De Vries J, De Koster R and Stam D (2016b) Exploring the role of
picker personality in predicting picking performance with pick
by voice, pick to light and RF-terminal picking. International
Journal of Production Research 54(8): 2260–2274.
Ding X, Wang H, Li G, et al. (2022) IoT data cleaning techniques: A
survey. Intelligent and Converged Networks 3(4): 325–339.
Doerr KH and Gue KR (2013) A performance metric and goal-
setting procedure for deadline-oriented processes. Production and
Operations Management 22(3): 726–738.
Duinkerken MB and Lodewijks G (2015) Routing of AGVs on
automated container terminals. In: 2015 IEEE 19th International

3362
Production and Operations Management 34(11)
conference on computer supported cooperative work in design
(CSCWD), pp.401–406.
Erel E, Ghosh J and Simon J (2003) New heuristic for the dynamic
layout problem. Journal of the Operations Research Society 54:
1275–1282.
Expanice (2022) Calculating the cost of IoT solutions: Estimates
from expanice soft https://expanice.com/article/cost-of-iot.
Feng Q and Shanthikumar JG (2018) How research in production
and operations management may evolve in the era of big data.
Production and Operations Management 27(9): 1670–1684.
Fichman RG, Keil M and Tiwana A (2005) Beyond valuation:
‘options thinking’ in IT project management. California Manage-
ment Review 47(2): 74–96.
Gao W, Ge D, Sun C, et al. (2023) Solving linear programs with fast
online learning algorithms. In: ICML 2023 Poster.
Gebhardt (2023) GEBHARDT FlexConveyor: Conveyor technology
modular system for Industry 4.0 https://gebhardt-group.com/en/
products/conveying-transporting-sorting/ﬂexconveyor.html.
Ghorashi Khalilabadi SM, Roy D and De Koster R (2024) Exploit-
ing travel sequences to optimise facility layouts with multiple
input/output points. International Journal of Production Research
0(0): 1–29.
Gilliam RR (1979) An application of queueing theory to airport
passenger security screening. Interfaces 9(4): 117–123.
Glock CH, Grosse EH, Abedinnia H, et al. (2019) An integrated
model to improve ergonomic and economic performance in order
picking by rotating pallets. European Journal of Operational
Research 273(2): 516–534.
Gong YY, De Koster RBM, Frenk JBGH, et al. (2013) Increasing the
revenue of self-storage warehouses by facility design. Production
and Operations Management 22(3): 555–570.
Grosse EH, Glock CH, Jaber MY, et al. (2015) Incorporating
human factors in order picking planning models: Framework
and research opportunities. International Journal of Production
Research 53(3): 695–717.
Grosse EH, Glock CH and Neumann WP (2017) Human factors in
order picking: A content analysis of the literature. International
Journal of Production Research 55(5): 1260–1276.
Gue KR and Meller RD (2009) Aisle conﬁgurations for unit-load
warehouses. IIE Transactions 41(3): 171–182.
Hanumantha GJ, Arici BT, Sefair JA, et al. (2020) Demand prediction
and dynamic workforce allocation to improve airport screening
operations. IISE Transactions 52(12): 1324–1342.
Helm S and Hadley S (2000) Tabu search based heuristics for multi
ﬂoor facility layout. International Journal of Production Research
38: 365–383.
Higgins ET (2012) Regulatory focus theory. Handbook of Theories
of Social Psychology 1: 483–504.
Isik T, Andrad́ottir S and Ayhan H (2022) Dynamic control of non-
collaborative workers when reassignment is costly. Production
and Operations Management 31(3): 1332–1352.
Jalota D and Ye Y (2022) Stochastic online ﬁsher markets:
Static pricing limits and adaptive enhancements. Working paper
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.00825.
Kothari R and Ghosh D (2014) An efﬁcient genetic algorithm for
single row facility layout. Optimization Letters 8: 679–690.
Lamballais T, Merschformann M, Roy D, et al. (2022) Dynamic poli-
cies for resource reallocation in a robotic mobile fulﬁllment sys-
tem with time-varying demand. European Journal of Operational
Research 300(3): 937–952.
Larco JA, Koster RD, Roodbergen KJ, et al. (2017) Managing ware-
house efﬁciency and worker discomfort through enhanced stor-
age assignment decisions. International Journal of Production
Research 55(21): 6407–6422.
Lee I and Lee K (2015) The internet of things (ioT): Applications,
investments, and challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons
58(4): 431–440.
Leisen DPJ and Reimer M (1996) Binomial models for option valua-
tion - examining and improving convergence. Applied Mathemat-
ical Finance 3(4): 319–346.
Leonard M (2021) E-commerce warehouse productivity could
improve up to 20% with greater automation: Prologis https://
www.supplychaindive.com/news/ecommerce-warehouse-product
ivity-prologis-robot-automation-prologis/594728/.
Lim YF, Lu B, Wang R, et al. (2020) Flexibly serving a ﬁnite num-
ber of heterogeneous jobs in a tandem system. Production and
Operations Management 29(6): 1431–1447.
Matusiak M, De Koster R and Saarinen J (2017) Utilizing individual
picker skills to improve order batching in a warehouse. European
Journal of Operational Research 263(3): 888–899.
McKendall AR and Shang J (2006) Hybrid ant systems for
the dynamic facility layout problem. Computers & Operations
Research 33(3): 790–803.
McKendall AR, Shang J and Kuppusamy S (2006) Simulated anneal-
ing heuristics for the dynamic facility layout problem. Computers
& Operations Research 33(8): 2431–2444.
Menculini L, Marini A, Proietti M, et al. (2021) Comparing prophet
and deep learning to arima in forecasting wholesale food prices.
Forecasting 3(3): 644–662.
Pasparakis A, De Vries J and De Koster R (2021) In con-
trol or under control? Human-robot collaboration in ware-
house order picking. SSRN https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=3816533.
Pasparakis A, De Vries J and De Koster R (2023) Assessing the
impact of human–robot collaborative order picking systems on
warehouse workers. International Journal of Production Research
61(22): 7776–7790.
Porter ME and Heppelmann JE (2014) How smart, connected prod-
ucts are transforming competition. Harvard Business Review
3–23. https://hbr.org/2014/11/how-smart-connected-products-are
-transforming-competition.
Puterman ML (1994) Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochas-
tic Dynamic Programming. USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.ISBN
0471619779.
Rosenblatt MJ (1986) The dynamics of plant layout. Management
Science 32: 76–86.
Roy D, Krishnamurthy A, Heragu S, et al. (2012) Performance analy-
sis and design trade-offs in warehouses with autonomous vehicle
technology. IISE Transactions 44(12): 1045–1060.
Scholz A, Schubert D and Wäscher G (2017) Order picking with
multiple pickers and due dates – simultaneous solution of order
batching, batch assignment and sequencing, and picker routing
problems. European Journal of Operational Research 263(2):
461–478.
Schultz KL, Juran DC and Boudreau JW (1999) The effects of low
inventory on the development of productivity norms. Manage-
ment Science (12): 1664–1678.
SEW (2020) Industrial IoT market https://www.sew-eurodrive.nl/
automation/factory-automation/industry-40/smart-factory-assem
bly-production/smart-factory-assembly-production.html.

de Koster et al.
3363
Sheu J and Choi T (2023) Can we work more safely and healthily
with robot partners? a human-friendly robot–human-coordinated
order fulﬁllment scheme. Production and Operations Manage-
ment 32(3): 794–812.
Shi Y, Yu H, Yu Y, et al. (2025) Analytics for IoT-enabled human-
robot hybrid sortation: An online optimization approach. Produc-
tion and Operations Management 34(11): 3364–3380.
Song H, Tucker AL, Murrell KL, et al. (2017) Closing the produc-
tivity gap: Improving worker productivity through public relative
performance feedback and validation of best practices. Manage-
ment Science 64(6): 2628–2649.
Tan TF and Netessine S (2020) At your service on the table: Impact
of tabletop technology on restaurant performance. Management
Science 66(10): 4496–4515.
Taylor SJ and Letham B (2018) Forecasting at scale. The American
Statistician 72(1): 37–45.
Truong VA (2014) Approximation algorithm for the stochastic multi-
period inventory problem via a look-ahead optimization approach.
Mathematics of Operations Research 39(4): 1039–1056.
Turanoglu B and Akkaya G (2018) A new hybrid heuristic algo-
rithm based on bacterial foraging optimization for the dynamic
facility layout problem. Expert Systems with Applications 98:
93–104.
Vailshery LS (2022) Number of IoT connected devices 2020-
2030,
by
region
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1194677/
iot-connected-devices-regionally/.
Van Gils T, Ramaekers K, Caris A, et al. (2018) Designing efﬁcient
order picking systems by combining planning problems: State-of-
the-art classiﬁcation and review. European Journal of Operational
Research 267(1): 1–15.
Wang R, Jouini O and Benjaafar S (2014) Service systems with ﬁnite
and heterogeneous customer arrivals. Manufacturing and Service
Operations Management 16(3): 329–480.
Wang Z, Sheu JB, Teo CP, et al. (2022) Robot scheduling for
mobile-rack warehouses: Human-robot coordinated order picking
systems. Production and Operations Management 31(1): 98–116.
Weidinger F, Boysen N and Schneider M (2019) Picker routing in
the mixed-shelves warehouses of e-commerce retailers. European
Journal of Operational Research 274(2): 501–515.
Yao DD and Buzacott JA (1987) Modeling a class of ﬂexible man-
ufacturing systems with reversible routing. Operations Research
35(1): 87–93.
Zhang M, Batta R and Nagi R (2009) Modeling of workﬂow
congestion and optimization of ﬂow routing in a manufactur-
ing/warehouse facility. Management Science 55(2): 267–280.
Zhang X, De Vries J, De Koster R, et al. (2022) Fast and faultless?
Quantity and quality feedback in order picking. Production and
Operations Management 31(4): 1536–1559.
Zhou S, Gong Y and De Koster R (2016) Designing self-storage ware-
houses with customer choice. International Journal of Production
Research 54(10): 3080–3104.
Zhu T, Balakrishnan J and Cheng CH (2018) Recent advances in
dynamic facility layout research. INFOR: Information Systems
and Operational Research 56(4): 428–456.
How to cite this article
de Koster R, Roy D, Lim YF and Kumar S (2025) Internet of
Things in Intralogistics: Applications and Emerging Research.
Production and Operations Management 34(11): 3343–3363.