TITLE: Managing Service Systems with Unknown Quality and Customer Anecdotal Reasoning
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12850
---

Managing Service Systems with Unknown Quality
and Customer Anecdotal Reasoning
Hang Ren
School of Management, University College London, Level 38, 1 Canada Square, London E14 5AA, United Kingdom,
hang.ren.13@ucl.ac.uk
Tingliang Huang
Carroll School of Management, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts 02467, United States, tingliang.huang@bc.edu
Kenan Arifoglu
School of Management, University College London, Level 38, 1 Canada Square, London E14 5AA, United Kingdom,
k.arifoglu@ucl.ac.uk
We consider service systems where customers do not know the distribution of uncertain service quality and
cannot estimate it fully rationally. Instead, they form their beliefs by taking the average of several anecdotes,
the size of which measures their level of bounded rationality. We characterize the customers’ joining behavior
and the service provider’s pricing, quality control, and information disclosure decisions. Bounded rationality
induces customers to form diﬀerent estimates of the service quality and leads the service provider to use
pricing as a market segmentation tool, which is radically diﬀerent from the full rationality setting. As
customers gather more anecdotes, the service provider may ﬁrst decrease and then increase price, and the
revenue is U-shaped. Interestingly, a larger sample size may harm consumer surplus, although it always
beneﬁts social welfare. When the service provider also has control over quality, we ﬁnd that it may reduce
both quality and price as customers gather more anecdotes. In addition, a high-quality service provider may
not disclose quality information if the sample size is small, while a low-quality service provider may disclose
if the sample size is large. Furthermore, as the expected waiting cost increases, information non-disclosure
is more attractive, thereby highlighting the importance of incorporating customer bounded rationality in
congested settings.
Key words : queueing, bounded rationality, behavioral operations, service systems
1.
Introduction
Service systems such as call centers, hospitals, restaurants, night clubs, and amusement parks are
prevalent in our everyday lives. In many situations, customers need to choose between waiting for
service in a queue or balking based on their inference of the service quality. The existing literature
(e.g., Debo et al. 2012, Guo et al. 2014) typically assumes that customers make this inference
fully rationally, e.g., following the Bayesian rule. However, this is usually challenging for average
customers in real-time decision-making. First, Bayesian updating requires customers to have prior
knowledge about the service quality. In practice, they may lack such knowledge because of scarce
learning opportunities (e.g., diners patronizing a new restaurant) or because they do not have the
1

2
relevant expertise (e.g., car owners incapable of evaluating all possible causes of a car breakdown).
Second, the calculation involved in Bayesian updating is demanding. In fact, the psychology and
economics literature has long argued that people usually do not follow the Bayesian rule in uncertain
situations (e.g., Edwards 1968, Kahneman and Tversky 1979, 1984).
Because of the informational and computational challenges underlying Bayesian updating, cus-
tomers naturally resort to simpliﬁed heuristics when estimating service quality. An example of such
a heuristic is to ask acquaintances about their past service experiences (i.e., anecdotes) and then
expect a service beneﬁt equal to the sample average. Compared to Bayesian updating, this anec-
dotal reasoning is non-parametric in nature and thus allows customers to estimate service quality
without knowing its distributional parameters. The computation involved in anecdotal reasoning is
also usually much simpler than applying the Bayesian rule. Furthermore, the worldwide booming
of online social media has greatly facilitated information sharing among customers, which makes
anecdotal reasoning especially popular. According to surveys by Nielsen (2013, 2015), customers
ranked word-of-mouth recommendations as the most trustworthy source of advertising from 2007
to 2015, with its percentage of trust nearly 20% higher than that of the runner-ups (i.e., consumer
opinions posted online and editorial content) in 2015.
Although anecdotal reasoning greatly simpliﬁes customers’ inferences of service quality, it may
lead them to hold incorrect estimates when service quality is intrinsically uncertain.1 Speciﬁcally,
anecdotal-reasoning customers attribute the server’s performance inferred from anecdotes entirely
to its capability rather than luck. Therefore they overestimate (underestimate) service quality if
the performance happens to be good (bad) and thus exhibit a joining behavior diﬀerent from the
full rationality setting. This presents new challenges for the management of service systems: (i)
As customers gather more anecdotes, how should the service provider (e.g., a new restaurant with
growing popularity) adjust price and service quality? (ii) Should the service provider disclose service
quality information (e.g., restaurants inviting expert reviews or giving away free drinks/desserts
to customers who post food photos on social media)?
To address these questions, we consider an M/M/1 unobservable queue with uncertain service
quality. Customers do not know its expected value and estimate it as the average of several anec-
dotes. The sample size measures their level of bounded rationality: With more anecdotes, customers
estimate service quality more accurately and thus their joining behavior converges to the fully
rational benchmark where they know the expected service quality.
1 Uncertainty about service quality is prevalent because of the inherent variability in service providers’ performance
(e.g., a chef may be unable to guarantee perfect timing and seasoning for every dish) and unknown/unpredictable
environmental factors (e.g., a pharmacist may be unable to predict all of a drug’s side eﬀects).

3
Using this anecdotal reasoning framework, we characterize customers’ equilibrium joining rate
and the service provider’s pricing, service quality, and information disclosure decisions. Unlike the
fully rational benchmark, the service provider uses pricing as a tool to segment customers with
diﬀerent service quality estimates. In particular, a low-quality service provider prices higher than
the fully rational benchmark to target the niche customers who considerably overestimate service
quality, and a high-quality service provider prices lower to target the mass customers who do
not considerably underestimate service quality. As customers gather more anecdotes, the optimal
revenue may ﬁrst decrease and then increase, while social welfare always increases. Interestingly,
consumer surplus may decrease due to intensiﬁed congestion. We also incorporate the service
provider’s quality control decision and ﬁnd that counter-intuitively, it may target a lower quality
level as customers gather more anecdotes (i.e., estimate service quality more accurately).
Apart from pricing, in practice service providers may also have the discretion to inform customers
of the mean service quality. We characterize this information disclosure decision and ﬁnd that
high-quality service providers may not disclose information if customers are suﬃciently boundedly
rational, while low-quality service providers may disclose if customers are rational enough. More-
over, a higher congestion cost makes information non-disclosure more attractive. This underscores
the importance of considering customer anecdotal reasoning in congested settings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a literature review in §2, and
present our model and preliminary analysis in §3. In §4, we study the service provider’s pricing,
quality, and information disclosure decisions. In §5, we extend the analysis by considering welfare-
maximizing service systems and customer heterogeneity in the sample size. We present concluding
remarks in §6. The proofs of lemmas and propositions are relegated to Online Supplement 1.
2.
Related Literature
The traditional queueing economics literature incorporates customers’ join-or-balk decision by
assuming that they perfectly understand the queueing system (Hassin and Haviv 2003, and ref-
erences therein). This assumption has been relaxed in several recent studies. For example, the
behavioral operations management literature studies service systems where customers do not know
the realized service quality and update their beliefs about it based on the queue length (Debo et al.
2012, Debo and Veeraraghavan 2014, Guo et al. 2014) or the expected waiting time (Kremer and
Debo 2015). Another branch of literature investigates the operations of diagnostic services where
customers rely on an expert service provider to identify the type of service they need (Alizamir
et al. 2013, Wang et al. 2010). As with our model, the aforementioned research assumes that cus-
tomers do not know the realized service quality. However, it focuses on the full rationality setting

4
where customers infer service quality following the Bayesian rule, whereas we consider boundedly
rational customers who estimate service quality based on anecdotes.
Recently, researchers start to incorporate customer bounded rationality in service systems. Huang
et al. (2013) capture customers’ inability to accurately estimate the expected waiting time by
introducing a random error term in their waiting time estimates. They derive the revenue and
welfare implications of customer bounded rationality for a monopolistic service provider. Li et al.
(2016) extend this analysis by considering market competition and the trade-oﬀbetween service
quality and service rate. Huang and Chen (2015) study a service provider’s pricing and service
rate decisions when faced with customers who estimate the expected waiting cost based on past
experiences and anecdotal reasoning. Cui and Veeraraghavan (2016) consider customers who hold
arbitrary beliefs about service rate and study the service provider’s decision to disclose the true
service rate. Although our paper also focuses on customer bounded rationality in service systems,
it is fundamentally diﬀerent from this literature. First, the bounded rationality in Huang et al.
(2013), Li et al. (2016), and Cui and Veeraraghavan (2016) stems from customers’ inability to
perfectly perceive the service rate or accurately calculate the expected waiting time. In our paper,
however, customer bounded rationality stems from their cognitive limitation of attributing service
performance inferred from anecdotes entirely to capability rather than luck. Second, Huang and
Chen (2015) focus on the extreme case where customers estimate the expected waiting time from
only one anecdote. In contrast, we study customer anecdotal reasoning regarding service quality
based on an arbitrary number of anecdotes. This allows us to derive insights into the service
provider’s information disclosure decision and the evolution of its pricing and quality strategies
as customers acquire more anecdotes over time. Third, Cui and Veeraraghavan (2016) assume an
exogenous price and service quality, whereas we endogenize both.
Researchers have also incorporated decision-makers’ bounded rationality in inventory manage-
ment. For example, Li et al. (2015) consider competing newsvendors’ cognitive limitation in the
form of inadequately perceiving demand uncertainty. In contrast, we study a diﬀerent type of
bounded rationality (anecdotal reasoning) in a diﬀerent operational setting (monopolistic service
systems).
Our anecdotal reasoning framework is adapted from the S(k)-equilibrium proposed by Osborne
and Rubinstein (1998). Unlike the classic Nash equilibrium where each player optimizes based on
a belief about other players’ behaviors, in the S(k)-equilibrium she samples each action k times
and chooses the one with the highest expected payoﬀ. This equilibrium concept has been widely
applied to model customer bounded rationality in several disciplines, including economics (Spiegler

5
2006a,b, Szech 2011), marketing (Huang and Yu 2014), and operations management (Huang and
Chen 2015).
Our paper is also related to the extensive economics literature on quality information disclosure
(for a review, see Dranove and Jin 2010). Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981) show that all ﬁrms
should disclose their quality to fully rational customers because they infer non-disclosing ﬁrms as
having the lowest quality. This “unraveling” result is overturned if information disclosure is costly
(Jovanovic 1982), customers ignore or cannot fully understand the disclosed information (Fishman
and Hagerty 2003, Hirshleifer et al. 2004), or customers are unsure about the usefulness of a certain
quality attribute (Stivers 2004). Our paper complements this literature by showing that customer
bounded rationality alone can also overturn the unraveling result.
There is an emerging service operations literature on information disclosure. Hassin (1986, 2007)
examines a service provider’s decision to disclose its queue length, service quality, service rate, and
unit waiting cost. Guo and Zipkin (2007, 2009) analyze the impact of diﬀerent levels of waiting
time information on the service system’s performance and consumer surplus. Guo et al. (2011)
study a service provider’s decision to disclose delay information to customers who estimate waiting
time by the entropy-maximization principle. Note that this literature imposes the full rational-
ity assumption on customers, whereas we focus on boundedly rational customers whose level of
rationality (given by the sample size) is inﬂuenced by the service provider’s information disclosure
decision.
3.
Model and Preliminaries
We consider an M/M/1 unobservable queue with homogeneous customers arriving according to
a Poisson process at rate λ (arrival rate or market potential, hereafter). In what follows, we will
refer to the service provider (server, manager, etc.) as “he” and each customer as “she.” Both the
server and the customers are risk-neutral. Upon arrival, a customer chooses between joining the
queue at price p or balking to obtain a constant payoﬀ, which we normalize to zero without loss
of generality. Joining customers are served on a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-served basis, and the service time
is exponentially distributed with rate µ. Waiting for service costs a customer c per unit of time,
and completing the service entails a random beneﬁt R (service quality or valuation, hereafter). For
analytical simplicity, we assume that the beneﬁt is normally distributed, i.e., R ∼N(R,σ2), where
R and σ2 denote the expected beneﬁt and its variance. The beneﬁt is realized upon completion of
the service, and only the service provider knows its distribution ex ante.
In contrast, the existing queueing economics literature assumes that customers also know the

6
service quality distribution (see, e.g., Guo et al. 2014). In our setting, this implies that their joining
rate λr(p) is given by (Hassin and Haviv 2003):
λr(p) =





0, if µ −
c
(R−p)+ < 0,
µ −
c
R−p, if 0 ⩽µ −
c
(R−p)+ ⩽λ,
λ, if µ −
c
(R−p)+ > λ.
We will refer to this case as the fully rational benchmark because customers have perfect knowledge
of the expected service quality. In what follows, we will derive the joining rate of anecdotal-reasoning
customers and show that it includes the fully rational benchmark as a limiting case.
3.1.
Customer Anecdotal Reasoning
Building on the established S(k)-equilibrium concept (see, e.g., Huang and Yu 2014, Spiegler
2006a,b), we develop customers’ anecdotal reasoning framework as follows. Upon arrival, each
customer gathers k service quality anecdotes/samples, which we denote as Ri, i = 1,...,k. Each
anecdote is an independent draw from the service quality distribution, i.e., Ri ∼N(R,σ2) for all
i. The customer estimates service quality as the sample average of all anecdotes. As a result, her
service quality estimate R is given by
R =
 
k
X
i=1
Ri
!
/k ∼N(R,σ2/k).
Note that customers’ service quality estimates diﬀer across each other and may not coincide with the
mean service quality R (i.e., they are indeed boundedly rational). Both results are due to customer
anecdotal reasoning: They attribute the service samples solely to the server’s capability instead
of luck, so some customers overestimate the expected service quality when the sample average
happens to be high, while the others underestimate because the sample average happens to be low.
Moreover, the sample size k measures customers’ level of bounded rationality since their service
quality estimates deviate less from the mean service quality as k increases (i.e., Var[R] decreases
in k). Intuitively, as customers acquire more anecdotes, the sample average is less inﬂuenced by
luck and thus reﬂects the mean service quality more accurately.
Remark 1. In practice, customers may also acquire anecdotes from online ratings/reviews,
which are not independent across customers. We have incorporated this type of anecdote as an
extension in Online Supplement 2.4.
3.2.
Customer Joining Behavior
Based on the service quality estimate R, customers make the join-or-balk decision to maximize their
estimated expected payoﬀ. Therefore, unlike the fully rational benchmark where customers play

7
mixed strategies, in our setting they use a pure threshold strategy: All customers with R ⩾p + W
join the queue and the rest balk, where W denotes their belief about the expected waiting cost.
Since R ∼N(R,σ2/k), the joining rate λP(R > p+W) is equal to λ¯Φ(
√
k(p+W −R)/σ), where ¯Φ
denotes the complementary cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
As in the traditional queueing economics literature (Hassin and Haviv 2003), we characterize the
equilibrium joining rate λk
a(p) by the condition that customers’ beliefs about the expected waiting
time are correct. Therefore, using the PASTA property (Wolﬀ1982), we have W =
c
[µ−λka(p)]+ .
Substituting this into the expression for the joining rate, we have
λk
a(p) = λ¯Φ
√
k

p +
c
µ −λk
a(p) −R

/σ

,
(1)
in which [µ −λk
a(p)]+ reduces to µ −λk
a(p) because λk
a(p) > µ cannot constitute an equilibrium—
in this case, the expected waiting time goes to inﬁnity and each joining customer can proﬁtably
deviate by balking. The next lemma shows that λk
a(p) as deﬁned by Equation (1) uniquely exists.
Lemma 1. For any p ⩾0,
(i) A unique λk
a(p) ∈(0,min{λ,µ}) exists and strictly decreases in p.
(ii) The equilibrium joining rate λk
a(p) strictly decreases in k for R < p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ , strictly
increases in k for R > p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ , and is invariant in k for R = p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ .
(iii)
lim
k→+∞λk
a(p) = λr(p).
Lemma 1 shows that the equilibrium joining rate is well-deﬁned and converges to the fully
rational benchmark as k goes to inﬁnity. Thus, our anecdotal reasoning framework includes the fully
rational benchmark as a limiting case. Intuitively, with more service samples, customers estimate
the expected service quality more accurately because the sample average is inﬂuenced more by the
server’s capability than by luck.
Lemma 1 also suggests that bounded rationality leads to fewer customers joining high-quality
service systems and more customers joining low-quality service systems. To see the intuition, ﬁrst
recall that the service quality estimates are normally distributed (i.e., Bell-shaped) among cus-
tomers, who apply the threshold strategy of joining (balking) the queue if their service quality
estimate is higher (lower) than the total cost (i.e., the price plus the expected waiting cost). In a
low-quality (i.e., R < p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ ) service system, the cost threshold is higher than the expected
service quality, so only customers who considerably overestimate the service quality (i.e., the right
tail of the Bell curve, dubbed as the niche customers) choose to join. In a high-quality (i.e.,
R > p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ ) service system, the cost threshold is lower than the expected service quality, so

8
all customers except those who considerably underestimate the service quality (i.e., the Bell curve
without the left tail, dubbed as the mass customers) choose to join. Since bounded rationality low-
ers the accuracy of customers’ service quality estimates (i.e., both tails of the Bell curves expand),
it increases the number of niche customers and decreases the number of mass customers. Therefore,
the joining rate for low-quality service systems increases in k and the joining rate for high-quality
service systems decreases in k.
4.
Analysis
In this section, we study the service provider’s revenue maximization problem, as given by:
max
p⩾0 Π(p,k) = pλk
a(p).
(2)
In §4.1, we characterize the optimal price and its revenue and welfare implications. Then we
incorporate the server’s quality control decision and examine the impact of the sample size on the
optimal price and quality. In §4.2, we analyze the quality information disclosure decision and how
it is inﬂuenced by the sample size and service system parameters.
4.1.
Pricing and Quality Control
In this section, we analyze the service provider’s pricing and quality control decisions and how
they are inﬂuenced by the sample size k. This is of particular interest because it provides insights
regarding a service provider’s dynamic decisions in a setting where customers acquire more anec-
dotes over time.2 As an example, consider a new restaurant with growing popularity (i.e., k is
increasing). Our analysis makes recommendations about how the restaurant owner should change
the menu prices and the quality of the food and service accordingly.
We ﬁrst examine the server’s pricing decision, as given by (2). Let p∗(k) and Π∗(k) denote the
optimal price and revenue for a given sample size k, and let p∗
r and Π∗
r denote the fully rational
counterparts. The next proposition characterizes the impact of k on p∗(k) and Π∗(k).
Proposition 1. (i) For any k ⩾1, a unique p∗(k) > 0 exists and
lim
k→+∞p∗(k) = p∗
r.
(ii) The optimal revenue Π∗(k) strictly decreases in k for R < R1(k), strictly increases in k for
R > R1(k), and is invariant in k for R = R1(k), where R1(k) ≡
cµ
[(µ−0.5λ)+]2 +
σ
2
√
kΦ′(0) is the mean
service quality at which λk
a(p∗(k)) = 0.5λ.
(iii) For a suﬃciently low λ, there exists a unique quality threshold R2(k) > R1(k), which strictly
decreases in k, such that p∗(k) strictly decreases in k for R < R2(k), strictly increases in k for
R > R2(k), and is invariant in k for R = R2(k).
2 See Online Supplement 2.1 for a discussion of the dynamic decision process.

9
Proposition 1(i) shows that the revenue maximization problem is well-deﬁned and the optimal
price converges to the fully rational counterpart as the amount of quality information grows.
Proposition 1(ii)-(iii) examine the impact of the sample size on the optimal price and revenue,
which we illustrate in Figure 1.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 1
The Impact of k on p∗and Π∗(µ = 2, λ = 2, c = 1, σ = 1)
As shown by Proposition 1(ii) and Figure 1, a larger sample size decreases the optimal revenue
of a low-quality (i.e., R < R ≡
cµ
[(µ−0.5λ)+]2 ) service provider by reducing demand (i.e., the niche
customers), and increases the optimal revenue of a high-quality (i.e., R > R1(1)) service provider
by increasing demand (i.e., the mass customers). Somewhat counter-intuitively, an intermediate-
quality (i.e., R ⩽R ⩽R1(1)) service provider’s optimal revenue ﬁrst decreases and then increases in
the sample size. This is because the service provider changes the pricing strategy as the number of
anecdotes increases. Speciﬁcally, as the sample size increases, he switches from targeting exclusively
the niche customers to targeting the mass customers. Since a larger sample size decreases demand in
the former situation and increases demand in the latter situation, the optimal revenue is U-shaped
in k.
The U-shaped revenue is similar in vein to Johnson and Myatt (2006) and Sun (2012). Johnson
and Myatt (2006) study the optimal pricing strategy of a ﬁrm that sells to customers who hold
heterogeneous product valuations. Sun (2012) extends the analysis by considering a 2-period model
in which the period-2 customers infer product quality from ratings left by the period-1 customers.
Assuming that customers are fully rational and hold heterogeneous product valuations, both papers
show that the ﬁrm’s optimal proﬁt is U-shaped in the variance of customers’ service quality esti-
mates. Our paper contributes to this stream of literature by showing that when customers deviate

10
from full rationality, the U-shaped revenue persists even when customers are ex ante homogeneous
in their valuation of service.
Proposition 1(iii) characterizes the impact of the sample size on the service provider’s optimal
pricing decision. As customers acquire more anecdotes, the number of niche customers decreases
while the number of mass customers increases. In response, a low-quality (i.e., R < R1(k)) service
provider lowers price and a high-quality (i.e., R > R2(k)) service provider raises price. Surprisingly,
we ﬁnd that an intermediate-quality (i.e., R1(k) < R < R2(k)) service provider who targets the
mass customers lowers price despite the increase in demand. To fully understand this result, note
that a larger sample size inﬂuences demand in both directions. First, it leads customers to estimate
service quality more accurately and thus increases demand. Second, it intensiﬁes congestion and
thus decreases demand. When the service quality is not high enough, the second factor dominates
and the service provider reduces price to incentivize customers to join. Notably, although we
establish Proposition 1(iii) only for the low market potential case, we have numerically veriﬁed
that it continues to hold when market potential is high (see Figure 1). Moreover, Proposition 1
continues to hold qualitatively for the no-congestion setting since our analysis includes c = 0 as a
special case.
Managerially, Proposition 1 shows that customer anecdotal reasoning fundamentally changes the
optimal pricing strategy in service systems: Managers should use pricing as a market segmentation
tool to “milk” the most proﬁtable consumer segment and should change it dynamically as customers
acquire more word-of-mouth over time. For example, consider a new restaurant whose service
quality is neither too high nor too low. Unlike the widely applied markup-on-cost pricing (Mealey
2016), the owner should start with high prices to target only customers who have received very
positive word-of-mouth. As customers gather more anecdotes, he should lower prices to shift from
this up-market strategy to the down-market strategy (i.e., even customers receiving occasional
negative word-of-mouth patronize). With further growth in the restaurant’s popularity, the owner
should then switch to raising prices due to the substantial customer base.
4.1.1.
Welfare implications. We now investigate the welfare implications of the service
provider’s optimal pricing strategy. Let W(p,k) and CS(p,k) denote the social welfare and con-
sumer surplus for a given price p and sample size k. By deﬁnition, we have
W(p,k) = λk
a(p)R −
cλk
a(p)
µ −λk
a(p),
CS(p,k) = λk
a(p)R −
cλk
a(p)
µ −λk
a(p) −pλk
a(p),

11
where the ﬁrst terms on the right-hand side represent the expected social beneﬁt of the service and
the second terms are the expected waiting cost. We will denote social welfare by W(λk
a(p)) instead
of W(p,k) because it depends on p and k only indirectly through λk
a(p). This observation suggests
that examining the impact of the sample size on social welfare boils down to characterizing its
impact on λk
a(p∗(k)), as given by the lemma below.
Lemma 2. The optimal joining rate λk
a(p∗(k)) strictly decreases in k for R <
cµ
{[µ−¯Φ(C)λ]+}2 ,
strictly increases in k for R >
cµ
{[µ−¯Φ(C)λ]+}2 , and is invariant in k for R =
cµ
{[µ−¯Φ(C)λ]+}2 , where
C ≈0.7517 is the unique solution of ¯Φ(C) = Φ′(C)C.
Lemma 2 shows that a larger sample size decreases the demand for a low-quality service system
(i.e., the niche customers) and increases the demand for a high-quality service system (i.e., the
mass customers). Based on this, we examine the impact of k on social welfare and consumer
surplus, as shown in the next proposition. For ease of exposition, we will abuse notation and write
W(λk
a(p∗(k))) as W ∗(k) and CS(p∗(k),k) as CS∗(k).
Proposition 2. (i) Social welfare W ∗(k) strictly increases in k for R ̸=
cµ
{[µ−¯Φ(C)λ]+}2 and is
invariant in k for R =
cµ
{[µ−¯Φ(C)λ]+}2 .
(ii) Consumer surplus CS∗(k) strictly increases in k for R < R1(k). If c > 0, CS∗(k) strictly
decreases in k for a suﬃciently high R.
A larger sample size always beneﬁts social welfare because it leads customers to make better
decisions by inducing fewer (more) customers to join a low- (high-) quality service system. Some-
what unexpectedly, this improvement in their decision-making at the individual level may harm
their aggregate beneﬁt. In fact, Proposition 2(ii) shows that consumer surplus strictly decreases
in k when service quality is suﬃciently high. The key insight is that the improved decisions (more
customers join a high-quality service system) present a negative externality (intensiﬁed congestion)
for other joining customers. When service quality is high enough, the increased sample size signiﬁ-
cantly intensiﬁes congestion such that the resulting consumer surplus loss outweighs the consumer
surplus beneﬁt due to better decision-making at the individual level. Overall, the consumer surplus
decreases. Notably, this result is unique to the congested setting, although the rest of Proposition 2
continues to hold in the absence of congestion (see Online Supplement 2.2). In fact, without con-
gestion a larger sample size never harms consumer surplus since their decision of joining does not
impact the other consumers’ welfare.
From a managerial perspective, Proposition 2 implies that customers’ quality information sharing
through word-of-mouth (e.g., dining experiences in a new restaurant) may not create a win-win

12
situation. In particular, information sharing leads fewer customers to visit a low-quality service
system and thus harms the service provider’s revenue, whereas it leads more customers to visit a
high-quality service system, which intensiﬁes congestion and thus may harm consumer surplus.
4.1.2.
Quality control. The preceding analysis focuses on the price as the only decision of
the service provider. In practice, he may also have control over the average quality level through,
e.g., staﬀtraining, facility upgrading, and service design. In this section, we characterize his joint
pricing and quality decisions. As before, we focus on the impact of the sample size k on the optimal
price and quality because this provides insights regarding a service provider’s dynamic quality and
pricing strategies in the setting where customers acquire more anecdotes over time (see Online
Supplement 2.1 for a detailed discussion).
We incorporate the quality decision by assuming that the service provider can choose R at cost
aR2 (the quality investment, hereafter), where a > 0 represents the rate of change of the marginal
quality investment. This quadratic cost structure is standard in the product and service design
literature (e.g., Anderson et al. 1997, Lahiri and Dey 2013).
The service provider’s joint pricing and quality control problem is given by:
max
p,R⩾0 ΠR(p,R) = pλk
a(p,R) −aR2,
(3)
where we denote λk
a(p) as λk
a(p,R) to stress its dependence on R. The next proposition characterizes
the impact of the sample size k on the optimal price ˆp and quality ˆR.
Proposition 3. (i) A unique ˆp > 0 determined by 2a ˆR = λk
a(ˆp, ˆR) exists.
(ii) When the market potential λ is suﬃciently low, the optimal quality ˆR strictly decreases in
k. If, in addition, the standard deviation of service quality σ is suﬃciently high or suﬃciently low,
the optimal price ˆp strictly decreases in k.
(iii) When the market potential λ is suﬃciently high and c > 0, the optimal price ˆp and quality
ˆR strictly decrease in k.
(iv) When the market potential λ is suﬃciently low, or suﬃciently high and c > 0, the optimal
revenue strictly decreases in k.
A larger sample size implies that customers estimate service quality more accurately. Therefore,
conventional wisdom would probably recommend the service provider to improve quality and raise
price. However, Proposition 3 points to just the opposite under certain conditions. To fully under-
stand this result, ﬁrst note that both quality improvement and price reduction may beneﬁt the
service provider: Quality improvement allows him to target a higher price, while price reduction

13
allows him to lower quality and thus save the quality investment. The service provider chooses to
reduce price because the quality improvement beneﬁt is lower. Speciﬁcally, when market potential
is suﬃciently low, demand is low and raising price does not increase revenue much. When market
potential is suﬃciently high, quality improvement leads to signiﬁcant congestion, so the server
cannot raise price much. Notably, this result underscores the importance of incorporating customer
bounded rationality in the congested setting: Without congestion, the optimal quality and price
strictly increase in k under suﬃciently high market potential.3 Intuitively, in this case the server
always sets a high quality and targets the mass customers. As they acquire more anecdotes, the
joining rate increases and the server improves quality to better exploit the increase in demand,
which further allows him to charge a higher price.
We would also like to note that the preceding analysis relies on the implicit assumption that
quality control does not impact service quality uncertainty. This holds for certain types of quality
improvements (e.g., interior refurbishment and tableware upgrading in a restaurant setting) but
may fail for others. If quality improvement reduces service quality uncertainty (e.g., staﬀtrain-
ing), then our recommendation to reduce both quality and price is strengthened: Quality reduction
not only lowers the quality investment, but also increases demand (i.e., the niche customers) by
magnifying the variation of customers’ service quality estimates. Nevertheless, if quality improve-
ment increases service quality uncertainty (e.g., recipe innovation that requires more complicated
cooking techniques), our recommendation may no longer hold.
Proposition 3 characterizes the quality control problem for suﬃciently high and low market
potential. The intermediate market potential case is analytically challenging, so we resort to a
numerical study, as illustrated in Figure 2. Consistent with the exogenous quality scenario, the
optimal price and revenue are both U-shaped in k. Perhaps more interestingly, we ﬁnd that a larger
sample size can induce the service provider to improve quality. This is because quality improvement
is more proﬁtable than price reduction under intermediate market potential: Quality improvement
and the resulting price increase can increase revenue substantially due to the considerable market
potential, while it does not signiﬁcantly intensify congestion because market potential is not too
high.
4.2.
Quality Information Disclosure
Apart from pricing and quality control, in practice service providers may also have the discretion
to disclose service quality information. For example, a hospital can post key performance measures
3 The rest of Proposition 3 continues to hold. See Online Supplement 2.2 for the proof and a related numerical study.

14
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
5
10
0
5
10
(a) ˆp and ˆR
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(b) ΠR(ˆp, ˆR)
Figure 2
The Impact of k on ˆp, ˆR, and ΠR(ˆp, ˆR) under Intermediate Market Potential (µ = 2,λ = 2,c = 1,σ =
10,a = 0.1)
(e.g., patient satisfaction scale, readmission rate, and mortality rate) in its waiting rooms, and a
restaurant can organize Yelp Elite events (Ayers 2011, Power 2011) and oﬀer free drinks/desserts
to customers who post food photos on social media such as Instagram (Dizik 2013), Facebook
(Werner 2014), and WeChat (SAMPi 2015).
To incorporate the information disclosure decision, we assume that the service provider chooses
to either inform customers of the mean service quality (i.e., k →+∞) or not (i.e., k is unchanged).
Therefore, his joint pricing and information disclosure decisions are given by:
max
p⩾0,i∈{k,+∞}Π(p,i) = pλi
a(p),
(4)
where we ignore the cost of the information disclosure to obtain sharper insights. As in Hassin
(2007) and Guo and Zipkin (2007), we focus on truthful information disclosure. This ﬁts our
setting since the disclosed information (i.e., the expected service quality) is ex-post veriﬁable after
collecting adequate service samples. Moreover, we do not explicitly consider partial information
disclosure (i.e., increasing k to a ﬁnite number) because this is always sub-optimal (as will be
shown in Proposition 4).
The joint optimization problem in (4) can be treated as a 2-stage optimization problem: The
server ﬁrst chooses k and then chooses p for any given k. By Proposition 1, the optimal price and
revenue are p∗(k) and Π∗(k). As a result, the server discloses information if Π∗
r > Π∗(k) and does
not disclose if Π∗
r < Π∗(k). The next proposition provides a full characterization of the information
disclosure decision, where ˜k is the sample size determined by Π∗(˜k) = Π∗
r and ˜R is the mean service

15
quality at which ˜k = 1.4
Proposition 4. (i) When R ⩽R, the service provider does not disclose information.
(ii)When R < R ⩽˜R, the service provider does not disclose information for k < ˜k, discloses
information for k > ˜k, and is indiﬀerent between the two for k = ˜k, where ˜k strictly decreases in R.
(iii) When R > ˜R, the service provider discloses information.
We illustrate Proposition 4 by a numerical example in Figure 3. Intuitively, a low-quality (i.e.,
R ⩽R) service provider exploits customer bounded rationality by pricing high to target exclusively
the niche customers. Therefore, he chooses not to inform them of the mean service quality. In
contrast, a high-quality (i.e., R > ˜R) service provider targets the mass customers. Since bounded
rationality lowers revenue by leading some customers to balk due to occasional unfavorable anec-
dotes, the service provider chooses to inform customers of the mean service quality. Interestingly,
we ﬁnd that an intermediate-quality (i.e., R < R ⩽˜R) service provider informs customers of the
mean service quality only when they are suﬃciently rational (i.e., k > ˜k). To see the intuition, ﬁrst
recall from Proposition 1 that the service provider switches from targeting exclusively the niche
customers to targeting the mass customers as the sample size increases. Since information disclo-
sure induces all customers to form an accurate service quality estimate (i.e., the niche customers
vanish and the mass customers expand), the service provider should inform them of the mean
service quality only when the sample size is suﬃciently large.
Proposition 4 contributes to the economics literature of quality disclosure (Dranove and Jin
2010, and references therein) by showing that customer bounded rationality alone can overturn
the classic unraveling result that a monopolistic ﬁrm should disclose quality information whatever
its quality is. This result is driven by the assumption of fully rational customers: Even a low-
quality ﬁrm should disclose information because customers rationally infer non-disclosing ﬁrms as
having the lowest quality. In our setting, however, customers cannot make this rational inference.
Therefore, the role of information disclosure is not to signal quality but to inﬂuence the market
composition (i.e., the niche & mass customers). A low-quality service provider should not disclose
quality information because it reduces demand (i.e., the niche customers).
Managerially, Proposition 4 underscores the importance of an up-to-date understanding of cus-
tomers’ service quality information. Speciﬁcally, contrary to the conventional wisdom that a high-
(low-) quality service provider always (never) discloses quality information, we ﬁnd that when ser-
vice quality is not too high or too low, lower-quality service providers may disclose information if
4 As shown in the proof of Proposition 4, ˜R uniquely exists. Moreover, ˜k ∈[1,+∞) uniquely exists for R < R ⩽˜R and
does not exist otherwise.

16
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
20
40
60
80
100
Non-Disclosure
Disclosure
Figure 3
The Impact of k and R on the Information Disclosure Decision (µ = 3,λ = 2,c = 1,σ = 5, R = 0.75,
˜R = 2.346)
word-of-mouth abounds in the market, whereas higher-quality service providers may not disclose
if word-of-mouth is scarce. In addition, a manager who has chosen not to disclose information may
still need to keep track of customers’ word-of-mouth: As they share more information over time,
he may switch to disclosing quality information.
Comparative statics. The next corollary characterizes the impact of service system parameters
on the service provider’s information disclosure decision; here we focus on the λ < 2µ case (since
otherwise the server never discloses information).
Corollary 1. When λ < 2µ, ˜k strictly decreases in µ and strictly increases in c. When µ −
p
cµ/R ⩽λ < 2µ, ˜k strictly increases in λ.
Corollary 1 again highlights the importance of incorporating customer bounded rationality in
congested settings: Information non-disclosure (i.e., customers remain boundedly rational) is more
attractive as the expected waiting cost increases (i.e., higher c, λ, or lower µ). In particular,
compared to the no-congestion setting (i.e., c = 0), the server is incentivized to induce consumers
to remain boundedly rational for a larger range of parameter values in congested settings. To
see the intuition, ﬁrst note that a higher expected waiting cost induces the service provider to
reduce congestion by switching to targeting exclusively the niche customers. He does not disclose
information because this reduces demand. Notably, we have numerically veriﬁed that ˜k strictly
increases in λ even when λ < µ−
p
cµ/R. For completeness of the analysis, we have also examined
the server’s information disclosure decision under endogenous quality (see Online Supplement 2.3).
We ﬁnd that all results in the present section continue to hold qualitatively.

17
5.
Other Modeling Considerations
In this section we extend the analysis in §4 by considering two modeling variations, i.e., welfare-
maximizing service systems and customer heterogeneity in the sample size.
5.1.
Welfare Maximization
Consider a social planner that takes control of a service system to maximize social welfare.
Typical examples include regulators levying tolls on public services, such as access to public
roads/bridges/tunnels, and passport/driver’s license applications. As in §4, we characterize the
social planner’s pricing, quality control, and information disclosure decisions.
5.1.1.
Pricing. The social planner’s pricing decision is given by:
max
p⩾0 W(p,k).
Consistent with Huang et al. (2013), we assume that customers are not compensated for receiving
the service, i.e., p ⩾0. This prevents individuals with no need of the service from congesting the
service system only for the compensation. Let p∗
w(k) and W ∗
w(k) denote the optimal price and social
welfare for a given sample size k, and let W ∗
r denote the optimal social welfare in the fully rational
benchmark. The next proposition provides a full characterization of p∗
w(k) and W ∗
w(k).
Proposition 5. (i) When R > R and k < ˆkw, the optimal price p∗
w(k) = 0 and W ∗
w(k) < W ∗
r ,
where ˆkw ≡
"
σΦ−1
 
1 −
µ−√
cµ/R
λ
+!#2
/
q
cR
µ −R
2
.
(ii) Otherwise, the optimal price p∗
w(k) = R −
q
cR
µ +
σΦ−1

1−µ−√
cµ/R
λ

√
k
and W ∗
w(k) = W ∗
r . More-
over, the optimal price p∗
w(k) strictly increases in k for R >
cµ
[(µ−λ)+]2 , strictly decreases in k for
R <
cµ
[(µ−λ)+]2 , and is invariant in k for R =
cµ
[(µ−λ)+]2 .
Bounded rationality leads customers to deviate from the socially optimal joining rate, but does
not inﬂuence joining customers’ beneﬁt from the service. Therefore, it never improves social welfare.
To correct for the distorted joining rate, the social planner prices higher (lower) than the fully
rational benchmark if the mean service quality is low (high). This induces the socially optimal
joining rate (i.e., welfare loss does not exist) unless the mean service quality is high and customers
are suﬃciently boundedly rational. In this case, fully correcting for the distortion requires the
social planner to set a negative price, which is infeasible. Therefore, he prices at zero and bounded
rationality leads to welfare loss. Notice that in the no-congestion setting, the social planner always
prices at zero for R > 0 since ˆkw →+∞. Intuitively, in the absence of congestion, joining is always
socially beneﬁcial as long as the service quality is positive. This result highlights the vital role

18
of congestion in determining the impact of customer bounded rationality on managing service
systems.
Compared to revenue maximization, Proposition 5 shows that bounded rationality aﬀects
welfare-maximizing service systems diﬀerently: It reduces the optimal revenue only when customers
are suﬃciently rational (i.e., k > ˜k), whereas it reduces the optimal social welfare only when they
are suﬃciently boundedly rational (i.e., k < ˆkw). The key insight is that the impact of bounded
rationality on customers’ joining behavior may have contrasting revenue and welfare implications.
For example, when R > R and k < min{˜k, ˆkw}, bounded rationality leads customers to join much
more than they should and thus harms social welfare. However, it increases the optimal revenue
by allowing the service provider to raise price.
5.1.2.
Quality control. Similar to §4.1.2, we incorporate the server’s quality decision by
assuming that he can choose the expected service quality R at cost aR2. Therefore, his quality
control problem is given by:
max
p,R⩾0 WR(p,R) = λk
a(p)R −
cλk
a(p)
µ −λk
a(p) −aR2,
where the ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand side represent social welfare and the last term is the
quality investment. Let ˆpw and ˆRw denote the optimal price and quality. The following proposition
characterizes the impact of k on ˆpw and ˆRw for suﬃciently high market potential.5
Proposition 6. (i) A unique optimal price ˆpw exists.
(ii) For suﬃciently high market potential λ and c > 0, the optimal price ˆpw strictly decreases in
k. The optimal quality ˆRw and social welfare are invariant in k when a ⩽¯a, and the social planner
should not oﬀer service when a > ¯a, where ¯a uniquely exists.
The social planner uses the pricing decision to maximize social welfare for a given quality level,
and uses the quality decision to balance between the maximized social welfare and the correspond-
ing quality investment. When market potential is suﬃciently high and quality investment is not
too costly (i.e., a ⩽¯a), the service system is suﬃciently congested and bounded rationality leads
customers to join more than socially desirable. In response, the social planner prices higher than
the fully rational benchmark and thus always achieves the ﬁrst-best social welfare. As customers
collect more anecdotes, they join less and the social planner prices lower to maintain the same
joining rate and social welfare. This further implies that the trade-oﬀbetween social welfare and
5 We have analytically shown that the social planner should not oﬀer service for suﬃciently low market potential (see
the proof of Proposition 6). Here we omit the presentation for brevity.

19
quality investment is unchanged. As a result, the social planner maintains the same service quality.
Notably, this result is unique to congested settings. Without congestion, a larger sample size leads
more customers to join as long as the service quality is positive. Therefore, the social planner
should improve quality (see Online Supplement 2.2).
To complement Proposition 6, we have conducted a numerical study to examine the intermediate
market potential case, as illustrated in Figure 4. In this situation, the service system is not too
congested and bounded rationality leads customers to join less than socially desirable. When λ is
moderately low, the joining rate is very low such that inducing the socially optimal joining rate
requires a negative price. Since this is not feasible, the social planner prices at zero. As customers
acquire more anecdotes, they join more and this higher service utilization drives the social planner
to improve quality. However, when the service system is suﬃciently congested, an even larger
sample size leads the social planner to lower quality to alleviate congestion. When λ is moderately
high, the joining rate is higher and the social planner can fully correct for customers’ under-joining
behavior at a positive price. As customers acquire more anecdotes, they join more and the social
planner prices higher to maintain the ﬁrst-best social welfare. However, he maintains the same
quality level since the trade-oﬀbetween social welfare and quality investment is the same.
0
20
40
60
80
100
2
4
6
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Moderately Low Market Potential (λ = 1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Moderately High Market Potential (λ =
1.8)
Figure 4
The Impact of k on ˆRw, ˆpw, and λk
a(ˆpw, ˆRw) under Intermediate Market Potential (a = 0.1,µ = 2,c =
1,σ = 10)

20
5.1.3.
Information disclosure. We now consider the social planner’s decision to disclose
service quality information. This has been widely practiced in the healthcare sector. For example,
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS 2017) in the US and the National Health
Service (NHS 2016) in the UK disclose hospitals’ key performance measures to the public online.
As in revenue maximization, we capture the information disclosure decision by assuming that the
social planner chooses between informing customers of the mean service quality or not. Therefore,
his joint pricing and information disclosure decisions are given by:
max
p⩾0,i∈{k,+∞} W(p,i).
The next corollary, which follows immediately from Proposition 6, characterizes the information
disclosure decision.
Corollary 2. The service provider discloses information if R > R and k < ˆkw, and is indiﬀer-
ent between disclosure and non-disclosure otherwise.
Corollary 2 suggests that a high-quality public service manager should inform customers of
the mean service quality when they are suﬃciently boundedly rational. This is because bounded
rationality leads to welfare loss in this case: It induces customers to join signiﬁcantly less than
socially desirable such that the manager cannot fully correct for the distortion with a non-negative
price.
5.2.
Heterogeneous Sample Sizes
To obtain sharper insights, we assumed in §4 that all customers estimate service quality based
on k anecdotes. In practice, however, some customers may have a larger sample size than others
because of easier access to anecdotes or higher cognitive capabilities. Consistent with the cognitive
hierarchy model (Nagel 1995, Stahl and Wilson 1994), we incorporate this heterogeneity into our
model by assuming that k follows a zero-truncated Poisson distribution with rate n.6 Therefore,
the proportion of customers with sample size i (i = 1,2,...) is equal to fi =
nie−n
i!(1−e−n), where n = E[k]
measures the average sample size across customers. Let λi denote the equilibrium joining rate of
customers with i anecdotes, and let λn
P ≡
+∞
P
i=1
fiλi denote the total joining rate. We can show that
λi = λ¯Φ
√
i

p +
c
µ −λn
P
−R

/σ

,
6 We have truncated k = 0 from the Poisson distribution because the anecdotal reasoning framework requires that
customers have at least one anecdote.

21
and then we have
λn
P = λ
+∞
X
i=1
fi ¯Φ
√
i

p +
c
µ −λn
P
−R

/σ

.
(5)
The next lemma shows that λn
P as deﬁned by Equation (5) uniquely exists, where RP is determined
by
+∞
P
i=1
fi ¯Φ
√
i
h
p +
c
(µ−0.5λ)+ −RP
i
/σ

= 0.5.
Lemma 3. (i) A unique λn
P ∈(0,min{λ,µ}) exists and strictly decreases in p.
(ii) The joining rate λn
P strictly decreases in n for R < RP, strictly increases in n for R > RP,
and is invariant in n for R = RP.
(iii)
lim
n→+∞λn
P(p) = λr(p).
Consistent with Lemma 1, Lemma 3 shows that a larger average sample size leads to fewer
customers joining a low-quality service system and more customers joining a high-quality service
system. In other words, incorporating customer heterogeneity in k does not qualitatively change
the impact of customer bounded rationality on their joining behavior. Based on this, we have
numerically veriﬁed that the impact of customer bounded rationality on the service provider’s
pricing, quality, and information disclosure decisions are also qualitatively preserved (see Online
Supplement 3.2).
6.
Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we studied the management of service systems with boundedly rational customers
who infer service quality based on anecdotes. We characterized their equilibrium joining behavior
and the service provider’s pricing, quality, and information disclosure decisions. Bounded rationality
induces customers to form heterogeneous service quality estimates; thus the service provider adopts
a pricing strategy diﬀerent from the fully rational benchmark. Speciﬁcally, a low-quality service
provider targets the niche customers who considerably overestimate service quality, whereas a high-
quality service provider targets the mass customers whose service quality estimates are not too
low. With quality control, the service provider may reduce both price and quality as customers
gather more anecdotes. We also characterized the service provider’s quality information disclosure
decision and found that it can be greatly inﬂuenced by customer bounded rationality: A lower-
quality service provider may disclose information if customers are suﬃciently rational, whereas a
higher-quality service provider may not disclose if they are suﬃciently boundedly rational.
This paper has several implications for service system management in practice. First, estimating
customers’ level of bounded rationality (i.e., the number of service quality anecdotes) is critical
because it greatly inﬂuences a manager’s optimal pricing, quality, and information disclosure deci-
sions. We conjecture that ignoring customer bounded rationality (by assuming that customers

22
know the actual average service quality) can lead to signiﬁcant proﬁt loss. Second, even though
conventional wisdom would probably suggest that managers should disclose quality information,
we show that this may lower proﬁt even for a high-quality service system. Third, when customers
acquire more anecdotes over time, a service system manager may not improve service quality. In
fact, when market potential is suﬃciently high or low, he should reduce quality and compensate
customers by lowering price. We hope that our theoretical model can stimulate future empirical
studies in behavioral operations and help improve service management in practice.
For parsimony, we abstract away from several factors, which could serve as the basis for future
modeling research. For example, we assumed that the service provider knows the service quality
distribution. This is plausible for service systems with an established service content. However, it
may fail if the service content is new, e.g., a restaurant experimenting with a new recipe. Future
research can extend our work by considering service providers’ decisions when they do not know
the service quality distribution. Another research direction is to incorporate market competition
in our model. It would be interesting to investigate whether customer anecdotal reasoning can
soften service providers’ competition on price and information disclosure. Finally, future research
can consider customers’ estimation of service quality based on both earlier customers’ anecdotes
and the service system itself (e.g., a prior belief, the queue length, or the expected waiting time).
References
Alizamir, S., F. de V´ericourt, and P. Sun (2013).
Diagnostic accuracy under congestion.
Management
Sci. 59(1), 157–171.
Anderson, E. W., C. Fornell, and R. T. Rust (1997). Customer satisfaction, productivity, and proﬁtability:
Diﬀerences between goods and services. Marketing Sci. 16(2), 129–145.
Ayers, B. (2011). How to get more Yelp reviews for your business. http://thegetsmartblog.com/how-to-get-
more-yelp-reviews. Accessed on 23 November 2016.
CMS (2017). Find and compare information about hospitals: Hospital Compare. https://www.medicare.gov/
hospitalcompare. Accessed on 23 February 2017.
Cui, S. and S. Veeraraghavan (2016). Blind queues: The impact of consumer beliefs on revenues and conges-
tion. Management Sci. 62(12), 3656–3672.
Debo, L. and S. Veeraraghavan (2014). Equilibrium in queues under unknown service times and service
value. Oper. Res. 62(1), 38–57.
Debo, L. G., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan (2012). Signaling quality via queues. Management Sci. 58(5), 876–891.
Dizik, A. (2013). Waiter, a pretty steak, please. http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014241278873245209045
78553502283072828. Accessed on 20 March 2016.

23
Dranove, D. and G. Z. Jin (2010).
Quality disclosure and certiﬁcation: Theory and practice.
J. Econ.
Lit. 48(4), 935–963.
Edwards, W. (1968).
Conservatism in human information processing. In: Kleinmutz, B. (Ed.), Formal
Representation of Human Judgement. Wiley.
Fishman, M. J. and K. M. Hagerty (2003). Mandatory versus voluntary disclosure in markets with informed
and uninformed customers. J. Law, Economics & Organization 19(1), 45–63.
Grossman, S. J. (1981). The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about product quality.
J. Law & Economics 24(3), 461–483.
Guo, P., M. Haviv, and Y. Wang (2014). Equilibrium queueing strategies when service quality is unknown
to some customers. Working Paper, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
Guo, P., W. Sun, and Y. Wang (2011). Equilibrium and optimal strategies to join a queue with partial
information on service times. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 214(2), 284–297.
Guo, P. and P. Zipkin (2007). Analysis and comparison of queues with diﬀerent levels of delay information.
Management Sci. 53(6), 962–970.
Guo, P. and P. Zipkin (2009). The eﬀects of the availability of waiting-time information on a balking queue.
Eur. J. Oper. Res. 198(1), 199–209.
Hassin, R. (1986). Consumer information in markets with random product quality: The case of queues and
balking. Econometrica. 54(5), 1185–1195.
Hassin, R. (2007). Information and uncertainty in a queuing system. Probab. Eng. Inform. Sci. 21(03),
361–380.
Hassin, R. and M. Haviv (2003).
To queue or not to queue: Equilibrium behavior in queueing systems.
Springer.
Hirshleifer, D. A., S. S. Lim, and S. H. Teoh (2004).
Disclosure to an audience with limited attention.
Available at SSRN 604142.
Huang, T., G. Allon, and A. Bassamboo (2013). Bounded rationality in service systems. Manufacturing
Service Oper. Management 15(2), 263–279.
Huang, T. and Y.-J. Chen (2015). Service systems with experience-based anecdotal reasoning customers.
Prod. Oper. Manag. 24(5), 778–790.
Huang, T. and Y. Yu (2014). Sell probabilistic goods? A behavioral explanation for opaque selling. Marketing
Sci. 33(5), 743–759.
Johnson, J. P. and D. P. Myatt (2006). On the simple economics of advertising, marketing, and product
design. Am. Econ. Rev. 96(3), 756–784.
Jovanovic, B. (1982). Truthful disclosure of information. Bell J. Econ. 13(1), 36–44.

24
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
rica. 47(2), 263–291.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1984). Choices, values, and frames. Am. Psychol. 39(4), 341.
Kremer, M. and L. Debo (2015). Inferring quality from wait time. Management Sci. 62(10), 3023–3038.
Lahiri, A. and D. Dey (2013). Eﬀects of piracy on quality of information goods. Management Sci. 59(1),
245–264.
Li, M., N. Petruzzi, and J. Zhang (2015). Overconﬁdent competing newsvendors. Management Sci. (Forth-
coming).
Li, X., P. Guo, and Z. Lian (2016). Quality-speed competition in customer-intensive services with boundedly
rational customers. Prod. Oper. Manag. 25(11), 1885–1901.
Mealey, L. (2016). How to price your restaurant menu. https://www.thebalance.com/how-to-price-your-
restaurant-menu-2888593. Accessed on 23 January 2017.
Milgrom, P. R. (1981).
Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and applications.
Bell J.
Econ. 12(2), 380–391.
Nagel, R. (1995). Unraveling in guessing games: An experimental study. Am. Econ. Rev. 85(5), 1313–1326.
NHS (2016). Find services – NHS Choices. https://www.nhs.uk/service-search. Accessed on 23 February
2017.
Nielsen (2013). Under the inﬂuence: Consumer trust in advertising. http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/
news/2013/under-the-inﬂuence-consumer-trust-in-advertising.html. Accessed on 20 March 2016.
Nielsen
(2015).
Digital
formats
are
among
the
most
trusted
advertising
sources
despite
slow growth. http://www.nielsen.com/id/en/insights/news/2015/digital-formats-are-among-the-most-
trusted-advertising-sources-despite-slow-growth.html. Accessed on 20 March 2016.
Osborne, M. J. and A. Rubinstein (1998). Games with procedurally rational players. Am. Econ. Rev. 88(4),
834–847.
Power, D. (2011). How to use Yelp Events to win new customers. http://sproutsocial.com/insights/how-to-
use-yelp-events-new-customers. Accessed on 23 November 2016.
SAMPi (2015). Wechat marketing Part II: Getting followers organically. http://sampi.co/wechat-marketing-
part-ii-getting-followers-organically. Accessed on 20 March 2016.
Spiegler, R. (2006a). Competition over agents with boundedly rational expectations. Theor. Econ. 1(2),
207–231.
Spiegler, R. (2006b). The market for quacks. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73(4), 1113–1131.
Stahl, D. O. and P. W. Wilson (1994). Experimental evidence on players’ models of other players. J. Econ.
Behav. Organ. 25(3), 309–327.

25
Stivers, A. E. (2004). Unraveling of information: Competition and uncertainty. Top. Theor. Econ. 4(1),
1–18.
Sun, M. (2012). How does the variance of product ratings matter? Management Sci. 58(4), 696–707.
Szech, N. (2011). Becoming a bad doctor. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 80(1), 244–257.
Wang, X., L. G. Debo, A. Scheller-Wolf, and S. F. Smith (2010). Design and analysis of diagnostic service
centers. Management Sci. 56(11), 1873–1890.
Werner,
L.
(2014).
A
new
app
gets
diners
rewards
for
posting
their
photos
on
Face-
book.
http://www.forbes.com/sites/lauriewerner/2014/07/29/a-new-app-gets-diners-rewards-for-
posting-their-photos-on-facebook/#72ee6b7a4afd. Accessed on 20 March 2016.
Wolﬀ, R. W. (1982). Poisson arrivals see time averages. Oper. Res. 30(2), 223–231.