TITLE: Enhancing the Financial Returns of R&amp;D Investments through Operations Management
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13186
---

Enhancing the Financial Returns of R&D Investments through Operations
Management 
Yiu, L. M. D., Lam, H. K. S., Yeung, A., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2020). Enhancing the Financial Returns of R&D
Investments through Operations Management . Production and Operations Management, 29(7), 1658-1678.
https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13186
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Production and Operations Management
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 07/07/2020
DOI:
10.1111/poms.13186
Document Version
Author Accepted version
For Author Accepted Manuscripts (AAM) published under Ulster University's Rights Retention Policy for Scholarly Works
(RRPSW)
When citing an AAM published under Ulster University's RRPSW please use the following citation structure:
Author, A. A. (Year). Title of article. Journal Name, [Accepted Author Manuscript]. PURE Portal URL. Licensed under CC BY 4.0.
General rights
The copyright and moral rights to the output are retained by the output author(s), unless otherwise stated by the document licence.
Unless otherwise stated, users are permitted to download a copy of the output for personal study or non-commercial research and are
permitted to freely distribute the URL of the output. They are not permitted to alter, reproduce, distribute or make any commercial use of the
output without obtaining the permission of the author(s).
If the document is licenced under Creative Commons, the rights of users of the documents can be found at
https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk
Download date: 13/06/2026

Enhancing the Financial Returns of R&D Investments through Operations Management 
 
Daphne L. M. Yiu 
School of Business, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau 
Email address: lmyiu@must.edu.mo 
Phone number: +853 2882 3281 
 
Hugo K. S. Lam 
Management School, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom 
Email address: hugolam@liverpool.ac.uk 
Phone number: +44 151 795 3621 
 
Andy C. L. Yeung (corresponding author) 
Faculty of Business, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
Email address: andy.yeung@polyu.edu.hk 
Phone number: +852 2766 4063 
 
T. C. E. Cheng 
Faculty of Business, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
Email address: edwin.cheng@polyu.edu.hk 
Phone number: +852 2766 5215 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Enhancing the Financial Returns of R&D Investments through Operations Management 
 
Abstract 
Although much research has been carried out to examine various contextual issues and moderating 
factors for successful R&D investments, very little research has been conducted to explore the role of 
a firm’s operational and process characteristics. In this study, we explore how firms could possibly 
enhance the financial returns of R&D investments through quality management, using Six Sigma 
implementation as an example, and efficiency improvement, using the stochastic frontier estimation of 
relative efficiency as a proxy. Based on data from 468 manufacturing firms in the U.S. over the period 
2007-2014, we construct a dynamic panel data model to capture the effects of R&D investments on 
firms’ financial returns in terms of Tobin’s q. Using the system generalized method of moments 
estimator, our results indicate that the financial returns of R&D investments are significantly enhanced 
when firms adopt Six Sigma and improve efficiency in operations. Our additional analyses further 
suggest that such an enhancement effect through quality and efficiency improvements is more 
pronounced under high operational complexity as approximated by labor intensity and geographical 
diversity. Instead of considering innovation activities and process management as contradictory 
functions, we show that quality and efficiency improvements indeed support firms’ R&D investments, 
leading to higher financial returns. 
Keywords: R&D investments; Tobin’s q; Six Sigma; operational efficiency 
History: Received: May 2018; accepted: March 2020 by M. Johnny Rungtusanatham after three 
revisions. 
 
1. Introduction 
The surge of research and development (R&D) activities has been demonstrated in a large body of 
research with a general consensus that R&D investments are critical to the long-term economic growth 
and competitiveness of firms (Howells, 2005; Li, 2011). However, the R&D literature has also 
suggested that the financial returns of R&D investments can vary significantly depending on a number 
of factors. R&D is inherently a high-uncertainty activity that involves tremendous and irrecoverable 
costs and time in discovery (Fung, 2006; Pandit et al., 2011). As the innovation process is highly 
complex and uncertain (Pandit et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2010), it is difficult to ensure a positive outcome. 
Research has shown that almost 80% of R&D investments fail before completion (García-Quevedo et 

 
 
al., 2018; Kocina, 2017) and many of them do not generate a positive financial return (Simester, 2016). 
For example, in the pharmaceutical industry, the success rate of a new drug development project is less 
than 25% (DiMasi et al., 2016; Paul et al., 2010). 
Much research has been carried out to examine the factors that determine the financial returns 
of R&D investments (Evanschitzky et al., 2012). Despite the extensive literature, researchers mainly 
focus on how knowledge characteristics (e.g., Liu et al., 2014; Rundquist, 2012), project team 
interactions (e.g., Fang et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2011), environmental factors (Li and Atuahene-Gima, 
2001), and marketing strategies (Rubera and Droge, 2013) affect the performance outcome of R&D 
activities. Very little research has been conducted to find out how operational and process characteristics 
of firms might potentially moderate the returns of R&D investments. In fact, a significant issue 
associated with R&D investments is related to the production and delivery of products, rather than the 
success of product technology per se. With compressed product life cycle and fierce market competition 
(Arnett et al., 2018), timely and reliable product delivery is increasingly critical. For instance, LG 
Electronics Inc. (LG) tried to differentiate its smartphones and embarked on an R&D project to develop 
the world’s first modular smartphone. Although the product design itself was successful, LG failed to 
make a profit due to supply chain complexity (Kang, 2016). LG’s carriers, distributors, and retailers 
were unable to work together in managing the complex modules and inventory. In fact, various scholars 
have investigated the common reasons for R&D and new product failures, most of which are highly 
related to operations, including timeliness to the market, a lack of real understanding of customer needs, 
product quality and reliability issues, and inadequate supply chain capabilities (e.g., Schneider and Hall, 
2011). Accordingly, the financial returns of any R&D project might depend not only on the technical 
achievement of the product, but equally importantly, the firm’s operational capability in product 
delivery and production. 
We examine the impact of R&D investments on firms’ financial returns in terms of Tobin’s q, 
and investigate the moderating effect of quality management and operational efficiency initiatives on 
R&D’s performance outcomes. From the traditional operations management (OM) perspective, a firm’s 
process management capability is important in ensuring the delivery of customer value (e.g., Linderman 
et al., 2003; Zu et al., 2008). Yet there are conflicting views in the literature about the roles of quality 
and operational efficiency in innovating activities like R&D. Some scholars, particularly those from the 
organizational behavior perspective, argue that process and quality management techniques, Six Sigma 
in particular, impede creativity and obstruct R&D activities (Benner and Tushman, 2002, 2003; Naveh 

 
 
and Erez, 2004; Piao and Zajac, 2016). For example, it has been widely reported that Six Sigma hinders 
the innovativeness in 3M (Huang, 2013), and the pursuing of process efficiency and innovativeness 
simultaneously would lead to negative organizational outcomes (Hurren, 2015; Klein, 2013). On the 
other hand, quality and process efficiency are fundamental to an organization, including its R&D 
activities. The success of R&D investments does not simply depend on technical creativity, but the 
overall production and delivery of products through quality and efficiency management. In fact, R&D 
does not stand alone in an organization but is pursued as part of the business under intense competition 
where quality and process capability are important to success. We examine the effects of Six Sigma and 
operational efficiency on the financial returns of R&D investments in this study. 
Based on a sample of 468 publicly-traded manufacturing firms in the U.S., we investigate if 
firms enhance their financial returns from R&D investments through implementing Six Sigma and 
efficiency improvement efforts. Our results show that Six Sigma and operational efficiency positively 
interact with R&D investments, leading to stronger financial returns. Our additional analyses further 
demonstrate that such a positive interaction is more pronounced under high operational complexity as 
approximated by labor intensity and geographical diversity of firms. We contribute to the OM literature 
by examining how the financial value of R&D investments could possibly be enhanced through quality 
management and efficiency improvement efforts, and the operating environment in which such an 
enhancement effect becomes more prominent. Prior studies have examined the moderating effects of 
developing marketing capability (Ngo and O’Cass, 2012; Rubera and Kirca, 2012) and deploying firms’ 
knowledge assets (Zhou and Li, 2012) on firms’ realization of R&D benefits (Kotabe et al., 2011). Yet 
little is known about the importance of quality management and operational capability to R&D activities. 
Our results suggest that strong quality and operational capabilities of firms are important in enhancing 
the financial returns of R&D investments. 
 
2. Theoretical Framework and Hypothesis Development 
2.1. R&D and Process Management: Conflicting or Complementary? 
Managing R&D process is challenging as it involves sophisticated technological elements and can be 
ambiguous to non-technical specialists (Mudambi and Swift, 2014). R&D processes are highly risky, 
and they involve search, experimentation, discovery and often radical changes in firms’ product 
portfolio that require different organizational capabilities. R&D processes often require firms to search, 
look for deviating alternatives that involve uncertain and experimenting behaviors for discovering new 

 
 
ideas and creating novel solutions (Andriopoulos and Lewis, 2009; Koryak et al., 2018). On the other 
hand, quality and process management are considered as systematic, structured enabling activities for 
implementation and execution. Quality management techniques such as Six Sigma often rely on 
structured organizational framework and routines to ensure efficiency, safeguard reliability and reduce 
errors (Farjoun, 2010). Quality and process improvements entail systematic refinements of a firm’s 
existing knowledge, while R&D activities require searching for novel ideas. Process routines and 
quality techniques that prize stability and reliability are likely to drive out innovative activities that 
pursue experimentation and risk-taking. As the micro-foundations in managing R&D activities and 
pursuing quality and continuous process improvements appear to be very different, there is potentially 
a conflict when product innovations and process stability or efficiency are pursued simultaneously 
(Boumgarden et al., 2012). As a result, the adoption of structured and repetitive routines such as Six 
Sigma could impair the innovativeness of a firm, impeding R&D activities. 
Yet another school of thoughts considers R&D investments not solely experimenting and 
technical inventing activities, but part of on-going economic and organizational activities for product 
innovation undertaken in a competitive market. R&D is seen as part of regular business functions 
carried out in complex organizational systems under severe time constrains and cost restrictions. A 
dualistic view of organizational design (Farjoun, 2010) suggests that the chances of R&D success are 
likely to be enhanced by a considerable amount of formalization and control such as those advocated 
by Six Sigma. In particular, organizational routines through process improvement serve as high-level 
premises that constitute enabling organizational structures, supporting effective new product 
development (Farjoun, 2010; Swift, 2016). Organizational routines simultaneously regulate and enable 
R&D activities, enhancing the financial returns from new product development (Benner and Tushman, 
2003; Farjoun, 2010). 
Teece (2007) argued that distinct processes, well-established operational procedures, and well-
structured decision rules are essential requirements for firms to adapt to fast-changing technological 
cycles. In particular, R&D intensive firms are often exposed to opportunities and threats associated with 
rapid emergence and decline of new products and technologies. Scholars in technology management 
(e.g., Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Teece, 2007) suggest that technical change itself is systemic in that 
multiple inventions and methods are integrated, and various organizational routines and skills are 
combined to create new products. Accordingly, both process management and R&D are required in a 
high-tech environment, enhancing the dynamic capabilities of firms and leading to competitive 

 
 
advantages (Anand et al., 2009; Helfat and Peteraf, 2015). 
Overall, various theoretical perspectives lead to different propositions on the relationships 
between organizational adaptation and technological innovation. Therefore, we develop alternative 
hypotheses on the relationships between operational initiatives and R&D investments. 
 
2.2. Alternative Research Hypotheses 
2.2.1. R&D and Six Sigma implementation 
Six Sigma is defined as “an organized, parallel-meso method to reduce variation in organizational 
processes by using improvement specialists, a structured method, and performance metrics with the aim 
of achieving strategic objectives” (Schroeder et al., 2008, p. 540). In general, the principles of Six Sigma 
programs are developed under a set of systematic and repeatable operational processes. In adherence to 
the Six Sigma principles, the management attention of firms is oriented towards improvements in 
quality, reduction in errors, and attack on the variability of process outcomes, achieving speedy, cost-
effective operations and efficiency outcomes. However, since the core tenant of Six Sigma is on 
reducing variation in organizational processes and routines, it is likely to be contradictory to R&D 
efforts for introducing novel, deviating new products. 
Instead of focusing on enhancing exiting designs, successful new products emerge when there 
is variation, and when new design deviates significantly and is untried totally from previous ones. 
Product innovativeness is of critical concern in new product developments because lack of innovation 
is considered as a common cause for new product failure (Sethi and Sethi, 2009). Innovativeness 
requires more divergent thinking that increases variance, relying on diversifying search rather than 
closed examinations. Strong emphasis on quality and reliance on statistical and fact-based decision-
making may affect the types of new products that are selected and supported (Canato et al., 2013). 
Applying the Six Sigma principles in new product planning and selection, novel inventions and 
radically new designs that deviate from firms’ current product lines are likely to be screened out, 
particularly when the quality and reliability of such deviating products are difficult to ascertain (Sethi 
and Sethi, 2009). In addition, as a key principle of Six Sigma, customer orientation could lead 
organizations to focus on improvements of existing customer requirements rather than radical solutions 
to future problems, weakening the innovativeness of R&D activities (Atuahene-Gima, 1996). Such a 
conflict leads to a negative perspective on the impact of Six Sigma on the financial returns of R&D: 
H1a. Six Sigma implementation hampers the financial returns of firms’ R&D investments. 

 
 
 
Yet, another school of thoughts suggests that like other organizational functions operating in the 
competitive marketplace, R&D and new product developments require well-organized processes and 
well-structured routines such as those advocated by Six Sigma. Six Sigma is a structured and systematic 
method to identify and eliminate the root causes of problems, reducing the defect rate while pursuing 
continuous process improvement (Choo et al., 2007; Kovach and Fredendall, 2013; Linderman et al., 
2003; Zu et al., 2008). By implementing Six Sigma, new product development and innovation 
deployment are systematically supported (Anand et al., 2010; Parast, 2011). Also, firms adopting Six 
Sigma normally embrace a parallel-meso organizational structure, involving quality and technology 
specialists at multi-functional levels (Schroeder et al., 2008; Sinha and Van de Ven, 2005). With Six 
Sigma programs, firms improve their new product development processes continuously through using 
quality management tools and techniques (Kovach and Fredendall, 2013; Scholtes et al., 2003; 
Schroeder et al., 2008). Previous research has shown that knowledge creation through Six Sigma 
implementation enables fast response to process uncertainty and reduces risk in product launch 
(Arumugam et al., 2013; Shah and Ward, 2003; Zu et al., 2008). 
The five phases of the Six Sigma structured method are used to define, measure, analyze, 
improve, and control (DMAIC) variations in operations (Hammer, 2002; Linderman et al., 2006; Patyal 
and Koilakuntla, 2015; Schroeder et al., 2008). Through the DMAIC process, firms’ innovative 
endeavors are likely to be embedded and carried out within a systems framework (Swink and Jacobs, 
2012). With accumulated experience through Six Sigma, firms would develop a stronger problem-
solving capability (Kale and Singh, 2007), making the product development process more stable 
(Kumar, 2012; Sitkin and Stickel, 1996) and enhancing financial returns. Hence, we develop an 
alternative hypothesis: 
H1b. Six Sigma implementation enhances the financial returns of firms’ R&D investments. 
 
2.2.2. R&D and efficiency improvements 
Operational efficiency refers to a firm’s relative efficiency (versus its industry peers) in converting 
resources into operating outcomes (Kim et al., 2011; Miller and Roth, 1994; Roth and Jackson III, 1995). 
Operational efficiency is related to distinct sets of firm-specific skills, processes, and routines for 
improving organizational effectiveness (Peng et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2010). A different theoretical 
perspective suggests that the financial returns from R&D investments are hindered by firms’ efforts in 

 
 
pursuing operational efficiency. Viewing from a knowledge management perspective, firms pursuing 
efficiency improvements tend to develop and refine their existing organizational knowledge that could 
lead to immediate benefits, rather than carrying out remote, boundary-spanning search into an uncharted 
area that is unlikely to benefit the firms immediately (Gupta et al., 2006; Andriopoulos and Lewis, 
2009). Firms focusing on process and efficiency incline to collect, apply, and refine their current 
capabilities, while firms aggressively pursuing R&D need to explore unrelated technological domains 
and develop discrete skill sets (Stettner and Lavie, 2014). Process improvements lead to immediate, 
measurable benefits, which in turn reinforce firms’ attention towards short-term efficiency targets 
(Gupta et al., 2006). As a result, firms with a focus on efficiency improvements are likely to lose sight 
on radical innovation (Benner and Tushman, 2002; Stettner and Lavie, 2014), leaving them vulnerable 
in the fast-changing technology market. 
Benner and Tushman (2003) pointed out that organizational structures and communication 
channels are also very different between R&D-intensive firms and efficiency-focused organizations. 
Specifically, firms pursuing efficiency improvements need to strictly stabilize organizational routines 
and tighten links among organizational boundaries, making cross-functional, cross-community 
communications for innovations more difficult. In an organization with closely-connected systems and 
streamlined processes, each activity is carried out in a strictly prescribed manner, and each functional 
area is measured for its immediate contribution, impeding creativity and radical inventions. Overall, the 
philosophies behind efficiency improvements and R&D activities in a firm are very different. While the 
former fosters commitment, narrowness, and cohesiveness, the latter entails thoughtfulness, breath, and 
openness (March, 1991; Gupta et al., 2006). These fundamentally incompatible philosophies of process 
management and innovation render efficiency improvements harmful to R&D activities: 
H2a. High operational efficiency hampers the financial returns of firms’ R&D investments. 
 
However, the literature also highlights the importance of integrating R&D activities into the 
organizational context in terms of organizational routines, management structures, and process systems 
(Prajogo and Sohal, 2006; Teece, 2007; Helfat and Peteraf, 2015). Rather than viewing R&D activities 
in isolation, OM scholars consider both process improvement and innovation as a bundle of closely 
matched routines and capabilities (Terziovski and Guerrero, 2014; Kortmann et al., 2014). 
Organizational routines help guide, promote, and systematize the process of new product development, 
and allow R&D activities to be reliably executed over time (Farjoun, 2010). Process improvement may 

 
 
help institutionalize R&D and product development activities, guarding against excessive 
experimentation and enabling early detection of problems (Farjoun, 2010; Koryak et al., 2018). Even 
though individual elements of creativity in R&D activities are difficult to be systematically and 
efficiently organized, firms might still benefit from the use of some structured enabling systems in new 
product development. Technology advancements take place in continuous interaction with 
organizational structures, information systems, and communication channels. The success of a new 
technology product requires strong operational capability and a culture of continuous process 
improvement. Accordingly, innovation and efficiency are likely to be highly related at the 
organizational level, reinforcing each other (Smith et al., 2017). 
Zollo and Winter (2002) argued that firms with efficient, reliable processes and procedures are 
more likely to obtain a stable condition for ideas search and discovery, supporting R&D activities. 
Organizational routines provide a framework guiding sense-making and putting ideas into practice 
(Farjoun, 2010). High-efficient firms consistently improve their organizational routines to stay current, 
making their processes more compatible with ongoing innovations (Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Helfat 
and Peteraf, 2015). Through pursuing both efficiency improvements and R&D, organizations develop, 
integrate, and configure internal and external resources, enabling organizational changes and enhancing 
their adaptation in rapid-evolving technology markets (Kortmann et al., 2014; Su et al., 2014). As 
pointed out by Teece (2007), technology innovation is not merely inventing new products, but 
revamping business processes and building entirely new markets that entail operational capability. By 
focusing on both R&D investments and efficiency improvements, firms develop a dynamic capability 
in an R&D-intensive environment, leading to stronger competitive advantage (Kortmann et al., 2014; 
Su et al., 2014). Thus, we hypothesize: 
H2b. High operational efficiency enhances the financial returns of firms’ R&D investments. 
 
3. Methods 
3.1. Sample and Data Collection 
In this study we focus on firms in the manufacturing sector listed in the U.S. with SIC codes in the 
range 2000-3999. We obtain firms’ accounting and financial information from Standard and Poor’s 
COMPUSTAT and corporate 10-K reports over the period 2007-2014. By the end of 2014, there were 
a total of 2,393 publicly-listed manufacturing companies. The sample used in our research is reduced 
due to missing data of some manufacturing firms for measuring research variables such as financial 

 
 
returns, R&D investments, and operational efficiency. For example, many small firms do not report 
R&D investments in their annual reports as it is not required by the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission. We also remove firms with negative R&D investments or unreasonably high R&D 
investments to reduce the influence of outliers. Moreover, we exclude industries (four-digit SIC codes) 
with fewer than ten firms as it is not meaningful and practical to measure some industry-adjusted 
variables such as operational efficiency based on small industry size, as discussed below. As a result, 
we have 468 manufacturing firms with sufficient data for all the measures in the final sample. These 
468 firms represent 19 industries based on two-digit SIC codes. Table 1 shows the top 13 industries of 
our sample, which includes a wide variety of manufacturing sectors. The top four sectors are (a) 
electronic and other electric equipment, (b) instruments and related products, (c) chemicals and allied 
products, and (d) industrial machinery and equipment, representing 77% of the total sample of 468. 
[Insert Table 1 about here] 
Similar to prior studies on Six Sigma (e.g., Shafer and Moeller, 2012; Swink and Jacobs, 2012), 
we search for Six Sigma adoption announcements using keywords such as the names of our sample 
firms and “Six Sigma” in conjunction with “adopt”, “implement”, “introduce”, or “deploy” through 
publicly available documents, including all the publication sources in Factiva, 10-K reports, and the 
corporate websites of these firms. We search for all the possible news related to Six Sigma for the 468 
firms and obtain a sample of 181 firms (39%) that have adopted Six Sigma. Based on the above 
publication sources, we further determine the first years of their Six Sigma adoptions. If a firm 
announces its first Six Sigma adoption in a certain year, we consider the firm as a Six Sigma adopting 
firm in that year and the subsequent years. Table 2 provides a few examples of the Six Sigma 
announcements. Table 3 shows the years of first Six Sigma adoption for the 181 firms and the highest 
frequency is between 1999 and 2006. Table 4 shows the sector related to chemicals and allied products 
with the most Six Sigma adopting firms. 
[Insert Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4 about here] 
We further classify the 181 Six Sigma adopting firms into two different types, attempting to 
quantify the potentially different levels of implementation efforts. In particular, we view firms as 
advanced Six Sigma adopters if they obtain independent, external awards for their Six Sigma 
implementation or their Six Sigma implementation is advocated internally by the top management team. 
This is because independent, external Six Sigma awards are often viewed as an indicator of a high level 
of comprehensive and successful Six Sigma implementation (Goh et al., 2003; Hendricks and Singhal, 

 
 
1997). Prior research has also regarded winning quality awards as a recognition of firms’ 
comprehensive and effective implementation of quality management programs (Hendricks and Singhal, 
1997; Yang and Hsieh, 2009). Similarly, the strategic initiation and positioning of Six Sigma by top 
management is an important indicator of a high-level, organization-wide quality management initiative 
(Schroeder et al., 2008; Yeung et al., 2005). For example, Six Sigma was widely and strategically 
adopted in GE following the advocacy of the CEO Jack Welch in early years. We search archival data 
from firms’ annual reports and letters to shareholders, company news from Factiva and other Six Sigma 
related sources to identify whether a firm’s Six Sigma implementation wins any external Six Sigma 
awards or advocated by its top management such as CEO and Chairman. We are able to identify 118 
such firms among the 181 Six Sigma adopting firms. For the remaining 63 firms without any external 
Six Sigma awards or top management’s advocacy, we view them as general Six Sigma adopters. As a 
result, our 468 sample firms consist of 118 or 25% advanced Six Sigma adopters (Level 2), 63 or 13% 
general Six Sigma adopters (Level 1), and 287 or 61% non-Six Sigma adopters (Level 0). 
 
3.2. Measurements 
Financial Returns. Consistent with prior studies (e.g., Jacobs et al., 2016; Krasnikov et al., 2009; Miller 
et al., 2015), we measure a firm’s financial returns based on its Tobin’s q, a ratio of the firm’s market 
value to the replacement cost of its assets. As Tobin’s q reflects the market’s evaluation of a firm’s 
prospects when taking all the available information into account (Miller et al., 2015), it is a forward-
looking, market-based measure of a firm’s financial returns. This measure well suits our research 
context as R&D investments are expected to affect firms’ future returns. In this research we adopt the 
widely-used approach proposed by Chung and Pruitt (1994) to measure Tobin’s q. Mathematically, the 
Tobin’s q of firm i in year t is computed as 
𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛’𝑠 𝑞𝑖𝑡= (𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑡× 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑡+ 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔⎼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖𝑡+ 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑡 
− 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡) / 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡 . (1) 
As Tobin’s q varies significantly across industries, we measure a firm’s financial returns as its 
industry-adjusted Tobin’s q, which is the firm’s Tobin’s q minus the median Tobin’s q in the firm’s 
industry (four-digit SIC code), to account for industry heterogeneity (Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005). The 
use of industry-adjusted Tobin’s q can also help reduce the potential bias due to market-wide systematic 
movements arising from unexpected events. This is especially the case for our research context in which 

 
 
the great recession occurred within our sample time period from 2007 to 2014. 
R&D Investments. We measure a firm’s R&D investments as its R&D intensity, i.e., the ratio 
of R&D expenses to sales (Ehie and Olibe, 2010; Jacobs et al., 2016; Xia et al., 2016). To ensure the 
validity of our test results, we remove R&D investments with unreasonable values. In particular, we 
remove R&D investments with negative values, which are mainly due to the negative sales as recorded 
in firms’ balance sheets. On the other hand, as it is unusual for firms to spend more on R&D than they 
are receiving in revenues, we remove firms whose R&D expenses are higher than their sales, i.e., R&D 
investments > 100%. This practice is also consistent with the maximum cut-off of R&D investments 
documented in prior studies (e.g., Anwar and Sun, 2013; Nunes et al., 2012). Nevertheless, as a 
robustness check, we also apply 25% as an alternative maximum cut-off point for R&D investments 
and obtain consistent results. 
Six Sigma Implementation. We use Six Sigma implementation to represent the quality 
management programs of firms. Six Sigma initiatives aim to initiate a persistent effort to improve 
organizational processes (Linderman et al., 2004), fostering improvement through identifying the root 
causes of variations and eliminating defects in the process (Choo et al., 2007; Kovach and Fredendall, 
2013; Schroeder et al., 2008). As discussed above, we assign a score of 0 to 2 to non-adopting firms, 
general adopting firms, and advanced adopting firms, respectively. It should be noted that we code the 
general and advanced adopting firms as 0 for all the years before their Six Sigma adoptions, enabling 
a dynamic measure of their Six Sigma implementation across time. 
Operational Efficiency. Operational efficiency is the relative efficiency of a firm in its ability 
to convert organizational resources into business outcomes in comparison with its industry peers (Peng 
et al., 2008; Alan and Lapré, 2018; Chuang et al., 2019). We use the stochastic frontier estimation (SFE) 
methodology to measure a firm’s operational efficiency in transforming its resources such as the number 
of employees (EMP), capital expenditure (CEX), and inventory (INV) into its operating income (OI), 
and measure the efficiency of each firm relative to its competitors in the same industry (Dutta et al., 
2005; Li et al., 2010). The SFE is a sound approach to measure a firm’s operational efficiency in its 
transformative framework of converting various operational inputs into operational outputs. Also, it 
incorporates a composite error term composed of random effects and pure inefficiency (Coelli et al., 
2005). It can isolate any influences from random factors other than inefficient behavior to prevent 
possible upward bias of inefficiency associated with deterministic methods (Vandaie and Zaheer, 2014). 
Specifically, we model a firm’s operational output (OI) as a function of its inputs (EMP, CEX, and INV) 

 
 
as follows: 
𝑙𝑛(OI𝑖𝑗𝑡) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑙𝑛(𝐸𝑀𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑡) + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛(CEX𝑖𝑗𝑡) + 𝛽3𝑙𝑛(INV𝑖𝑗𝑡) + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡−𝛾𝑖𝑗𝑡, 
(2) 
where 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡 is the purely stochastic random error term affecting operating income and 𝛾𝑖𝑗𝑡 captures the 
operational inefficiency of a firm i in industry j (four-digit SIC code) in year t. 𝛾𝑖𝑗𝑡 ranges from 0 to 1, 
with 0 meaning no operational inefficiency (relative to the industry). Thus, 𝛾𝑖𝑗𝑡 is a relative measure to 
indicate how inefficient a firm is in comparison with the corresponding frontier in the same industry 
and in the same year. The composite error term (𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡−𝛾𝑖𝑗𝑡) is estimated based on the difference 
between the maximum achieved operating income (in an industry) and the observed operating income 
so as to obtain a consistent estimate of firm-specific operational inefficiency 𝛾̂𝑖𝑗𝑡. As we classify 
industries based on four-digit SIC codes, some industries based on this classification only include a few 
firms. To reduce the bias due to small sample size, we focus our estimation of 𝛾̂𝑖𝑗𝑡 on those industries 
with ten or more firms. Finally, the operational efficiency of firm i in industry j in year t is 
Operational Efficiency𝑖𝑗𝑡= 1 − 𝛾̂𝑖𝑗𝑡. 
(3) 
Control Variables. We consider several pertinent control variables, including firm size, firm 
age, firm leverage, marketing expense, tangible assets, industry Tobin’s q, and industry size in this 
research. We measure firm size as the natural logarithm of total assets (Modi and Mishra, 2011). Prior 
research (e.g., Bharadwaj et al., 1999; Modi and Mishra, 2011) has suggested that firm size is negatively 
associated with Tobin’s q. We take firm age as the natural logarithm of the number of years from the 
date of incorporation (Zhang, 2015). Older firms are usually viewed as having greater structural inertia 
in organizations and being more resistant to changes, thus might be more difficult to improve financial 
returns (Hoisl et al., 2017). We measure firm leverage as the ratio of total debt to total assets (Zhang, 
2015). Firms with a higher leverage might be more capable of capitalizing on external financial 
resources to enhance their returns (Bae et al., 2017). We measure marketing expense as the difference 
between selling, general and administration (SG&A) expense and R&D expense divided by total assets 
(Raithel et al., 2012). Prior Marketing research (e.g., Kurt and Hulland, 2013; Oh et al., 2016) has shown 
that firms’ spending on marketing is positively related to their financial returns. We measure tangible 
assets as property, plant and equipment divided by total assets (O’brien, 2003). A firm with a higher 
level of tangible assets might be in a better position to leverage its resources for financial returns (Baker 
and Wurgler, 2002). We control for industry Tobin’s q, measured as median Tobin’s q based on four-
digit SIC codes, as there might be a positive correlation between firm-level Tobin’s q and industry-level 
Tobin’s q (Bardhan et al., 2013). We also include industry size, measured as the natural logarithm of 

 
 
all firms’ total assets in the same industry based on four-digit SIC codes (Lo et al., 2013), because a 
larger industry might provide a more stable operating environment (Brunnermeier and Cohen, 2003). 
Finally, we include year dummies to account for the influences of time-specific economic events that 
firms cannot control such as the great recession and industry dummies (two-digit SIC codes) to control 
for industry-specific effects. 
 
3.3. Estimation Strategy 
Firm performance such as financial returns could be persistent over time such that past firm performance 
is highly correlated with current firm performance. Prior research has also emphasized the importance 
of controlling for past firm performance, especially when the current firm performance is used as the 
dependent variable (Suarez et al., 2013; Vandaie and Zaheer, 2014). This can ensure a more robust 
estimation of the effects of other firm-level variables such as firms’ strategies and practices on the 
current firm performance. As our research views firms’ current financial returns as the dependent 
variable and considers the effects of several firm-level variables such as R&D investments and Six 
Sigma implementation on the current financial returns, we follow prior research to control for past 
financial returns in our analysis. As a result, we construct a dynamic panel data (DPD) model as shown 
in equation (4) to investigate the roles that Six Sigma implementation (H1) and operational efficiency 
(H2) play in moderating the R&D investments-financial returns relationship. 
𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡 
= 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛼2𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼3𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼4𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼5𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼6𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼7𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛’𝑠 𝑞𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼8𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼9𝑆𝑖𝑥 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑎 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼10𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼11𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼12𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡× 𝑆𝑖𝑥 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑎 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼13𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡× 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖𝑡 , (4) 
where i and t are firm and year indices, respectively, and 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is the error term consisting of two 
components, namely firm-specific fixed effects and idiosyncratic disturbances. We rely on 𝛼12 to 
determine how Six Sigma implementation (H1) moderates the R&D investments-financial returns 
relationship, while the moderating role of operational efficiency (H2) is indicated by 𝛼13. To reduce the 
multicollinearity concern, we center R&D investments, Six Sigma implementation, and operational 
efficiency when computing the interactions among them (Balli and Sørensen, 2013; Coombs and Gilley, 
2005). In line with prior DPD research (e.g., Suarez et al., 2013; Vandaie and Zaheer, 2014), we include 

 
 
the one-year lag of financial returns, i.e., 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1), as a regressor in our DPD model. 
We also control for an additional lag of financial returns, i.e., 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−2) , in our 
robustness tests and obtain similar results as shown in Section 5. 
Although this DPD model helps control for the influence of firms’ past financial returns, it gives 
rise to the “dynamic panel bias” or Nickell bias (Nickell, 1981) as the lagged financial returns are 
correlated with the fixed effects in the error term by construction. This correlation makes the 
conventional ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation inconsistent (Roodman, 2009). Although a more 
advanced least squares dummy variables (LSDV) estimator can address this bias (Kiviet, 1995), it does 
not deal with the other endogeneity concerns such as unobservable heterogeneity and simultaneity 
arising from the other regressors included in our research (Roodman, 2009). For example, considering 
R&D investments, it is possible that some unobservable firm-specific characteristics such as managerial 
ability may affect firms’ decisions to invest in R&D and also their ability to improve financial returns, 
making the relationship between R&D investments and financial returns biased. Moreover, although 
we expect R&D investments to affect financial returns, it is also possible that firms’ financial returns 
will influence their decisions to invest in R&D, leading to two-way causality. If this possible reverse 
causation is not addressed, the impact of R&D investments on financial returns could be overestimated. 
These arguments about the unobservable heterogeneity and simultaneity concerns also apply to the 
other regressors such as Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency that are included in our 
research. Although the endogeneity concerns can be addressed by employing conventional instrumental 
variables (IV) techniques that use external variables as instruments, prior research has demonstrated the 
difficulty of obtaining such strictly exogenous instruments externally (Roodman, 2009; Wintoki et al., 
2012). This difficulty is particularly evident in our research in view of the large number of endogenous 
variables included in our research and the limited availability of appropriate external datasets that cover 
our sample firms. As a result, we adopt the more advanced system Generalized Method of Moments 
(GMM) estimation technique that relies on transformations of existing variables rather than the use of 
external variables to address the endogeneity concerns (Arellano and Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 
1998). 
The system GMM estimator is suitable for our research context for several reasons. First, this 
estimator is applicable to “small T, large N” panels (Roodman, 2009), which fits our research focused 
on a small number of years (2007-2014) and a large number of firms (468 firms). Second, as the system 
GMM estimator is one of “the most robust methodologies for unbalanced panels with endogenous 

 
 
variables” (Flannery and Hankins, 2013, p. 13), it is appropriate for our research with some firms having 
more observations than the others and in which a number of endogenous variables are presented. Third, 
the system GMM estimator enables us to address the Nickell bias by transforming the error term to 
remove the fixed effects (in difference equation) and by instrumenting the lagged financial returns with 
variables orthogonal to the fixed effects in the error term (in level equation). Finally, the system GMM 
estimator relies on the transformation of existing variables rather than the use of external variables to 
construct instruments (Roodman, 2009; Wintoki et al., 2012). This is an important advantage for our 
research due to the difficulty to obtain appropriate exogenous instruments externally. 
We now provide a detailed explanation of how the system GMM estimator is implemented in 
our research. First, we transform the DPD model in the level equation (4) into its first difference form 
in the difference equation (5), as follows: 
△𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡 
= 𝛼1 △𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) + 𝛼2 △𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼3 △𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼4 △𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼5 △𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼6 △𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼7 △𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛’𝑠 𝑞𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼8 △𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼9 △𝑆𝑖𝑥 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑎 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼10 △𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼11 △𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡+ 𝛼12 △𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡× 𝑆𝑖𝑥 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑎 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑡 
+ 𝛼13 △𝑅&𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑡× 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖𝑡+△𝜀𝑖𝑡 , (5) 
where △𝑋𝑖𝑡 represents 𝑋𝑖𝑡−𝑋𝑖(𝑡−1) and △𝑋𝑖(𝑡−1) represents 𝑋𝑖(𝑡−1) −𝑋𝑖(𝑡−2) for each variable 𝑋 
included in equation (5). After the transformation, the constant term and the fixed effects in the error 
term are removed, so the concern of the Nickell bias is addressed. However, the lagged dependent 
variable 
could 
still 
be 
endogenous 
as 
the 
one-year 
lagged 
financial 
returns, 
i.e., 
𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1), in △𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) 1 is correlated with the one-year lagged 
idiosyncratic disturbances in △𝜀𝑖𝑡 2. The same applies to the other endogenous regressors included in 
equation (5). Arellano and Bond (1991) proposed a difference GMM estimator that uses longer lags of 
the endogenous regressors as instruments for the differenced endogenous regressors included in the 
difference equation as the longer lags are correlated with the differenced endogenous regressors but 
orthogonal to △𝜀𝑖𝑡. For example, the two-year lagged financial returns, i.e., 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−2), 
is mathematically related to △𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) but not to △𝜀𝑖𝑡 as long as the idiosyncratic 
disturbances in the error term are not serially correlated. However, if the idiosyncratic disturbances are 
 
1 △𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) = 𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−1) −𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠𝑖(𝑡−2) 
2 △𝜀𝑖𝑡= 𝜀𝑖𝑡−𝜀𝑖(𝑡−1) and the one-year lagged idiosyncratic disturbances are in 𝜀𝑖(𝑡−1). 

 
 
serially correlated, the two-year lagged financial returns are endogenous and thus an invalid instrument. 
In this case, the instrument set may have to start from the three-year lagged financial returns instead 
(Roodman, 2009). 
We choose instruments for the difference equation (5) in the following ways. First, we adopt a 
conservative approach to view all the regressors included in equation (5) as endogenous variables. This 
approach is consistent with prior GMM research that regards firms’ characteristics and strategies as 
endogenous variables (Bardhan et al., 2013; Fremeth and Shaver, 2014; Wintoki et al., 2012). Following 
Roodman’s (2009) suggestion, for each endogenous variable, we use its second lag to its maximum 
available lag, i.e., (t-2, t-maximum), as instruments. As a robustness check, we also use (t-2, t-4) as 
alternative instruments and obtain consistent results as shown in Section 5. Moreover, we conduct the 
Arellano-Bond test of autocorrelation in Section 4 to check whether there are serial correlations in the 
idiosyncratic disturbances that will make the second lags, i.e., t-2, invalid as instruments. 
A major concern about the difference GMM estimator is that the lags can be weak instruments 
for the difference equation if the dependent variable is close to a random walk (Blundell and Bond, 
1998). To address this weak instruments concern, Arellano and Bover (1995), and Blundell and Bond 
(1998) proposed a new estimator, called system GMM estimator, to use lagged differences as 
instruments for the original level equation (e.g., equation (4)), in addition to the use of lagged levels as 
instruments for the transformed difference equation (e.g., equation (5)) as discussed above. This means 
that this estimator estimates a system of two equations (the level and difference equations; e.g., 
equations (4) and (5)) simultaneously, which helps address the weak instruments concern and improve 
the estimation efficiency (Roodman, 2009). As the error term in the level equation still includes the 
fixed effects, the system GMM estimator addresses the Nickell bias by differencing the instruments to 
make them uncorrelated with the fixed effects in the level equation (Wintoki et al., 2012). As our 
instruments for the difference equation (5) start from the second lags of the levels as discussed above, 
the first lags of the differences are used as our instruments for the level equation (4) (Roodman, 2009). 
We conduct the Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions in Section 4 to check whether the instruments 
used in our research are orthogonal to the error term. 
 
4. Test Results 
Table 5 reports the descriptive statistics and correlations of our research variables. The results show 
that the variable of firms’ financial returns is highly correlated with its lagged value (r = 0.763, p < 

 
 
0.01). Thus, controlling the lagged variable of firms’ financial returns in our research is necessary. Table 
6 presents the system GMM test results. Model 1 is the basic model including a list of independent 
variables, year dummies, and industry dummies. Models 2 and 3 add the moderating effects of Six 
Sigma implementation and operational efficiency, respectively. Finally, Model 4 is the full model in 
which the moderating effects of both Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency are included 
simultaneously. All the four models are statistically significant (p < 0.01) based on the Wald chi-squared 
tests. The number of observations is 2,920 in the four models, suggesting that on average there are about 
six observations for each of the 468 sample firms (unbalanced panel). Such repeated measurements of 
the same firms over years enable us to cluster the standard errors by firms to obtain more robust results. 
Therefore, we report the robust standard errors clustered by firms in Table 6. 
[Insert Table 5 and Table 6 about here] 
We conduct two specification tests to verify the validity of the instruments used in our system 
GMM estimation. The first test is the Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions, which is used to check 
whether the instruments used in our research are correlated with the error term. Valid instruments, by 
definition, should be correlated with the endogenous variables but orthogonal to the error term 
(Alessandri and Seth, 2014). The Hansen test results shown in Table 6 are not significant (p > 0.1) 
across the four models, failing to reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are orthogonal to the 
error term. These statistics confirm a crucial assumption for valid system GMM estimation, i.e., the 
instruments are exogenous (Roodman, 2009). 
The second test is the Arellano-Bond test of autocorrelation, which is used to assess whether 
some instruments (e.g., the second lags) are rendered invalid due to autocorrelation in the idiosyncratic 
disturbances (Alessandri and Seth, 2014). As we apply this test to the residuals in differences, first-
order autocorrelation (AR1) should be significant by construction (Roodman, 2009). Therefore, we 
need to use the second-order correlation in differences (AR2) to check for the first-order serial 
correlation in levels (Lam et al., 2016). The Arellano-Bond test results shown in Table 6 suggest that 
although the AR1 statistics are significant (p < 0.01) across the four models (as they should be), the 
AR2 statistics are not significant (p > 0.1). We thus cannot find serial correlation in the idiosyncratic 
disturbances. This suggests that the second lags of levels are valid instruments for the difference 
equation and we need not force our instruments to start from the third lags, i.e., t-3. Taken together, 
these two specification tests demonstrate the validity of the instruments used in our system GMM 
estimation. 

 
 
The system GMM test results documented in Table 6 show that lagged financial returns, firm 
size, marketing expense, operational efficiency, and R&D investments are significant (p < 0.1) across 
the four models. In particular, the coefficients of lagged financial returns are positive in the four models, 
suggesting that previous year’s financial returns have a positive impact on current year’s financial 
returns. It thus confirms the persistence of firm performance over time as suggested in the literature 
(Baños-Caballero et al., 2014; Lam et al., 2016; Vandaie and Zaheer, 2014). The coefficients of 
marketing expense, operational efficiency, and R&D investments are also positive across the four 
models, indicating that firms’ investments in marketing, operations, and R&D can help improve 
financial returns. On the other hand, the coefficients of firm size are negative in the four models, 
showing that smaller firms have the advantage of improving financial returns. These results are 
generally consistent with prior studies’ findings (e.g., Bardhan et al., 2013; Bharadwaj et al., 1999; Kurt 
and Hulland, 2013; Modi and Mishra, 2011; Oh et al., 2016). 
Although Six Sigma implementation does not have a direct significant impact on financial 
returns (p > 0.1) as shown in Models 1 to 4, Models 2 and 4 indicate that its interaction with R&D 
investments is positive and significant (p < 0.05). Six Sigma implementation thus enhances the financial 
returns of firms’ R&D investments, supporting H1b but rejecting H1a. Finally, Models 3 and 4 also 
show a positive and significant (p < 0.05) interaction between R&D investments and operational 
efficiency, showing the positive moderating role of operational efficiency in the R&D investments-
financial returns relationship. Therefore, H2a is rejected but H2b is supported. 
 
4.1 Additional Tests 
The test results as shown in Table 6 support H1b and H2b but reject H1a and H2a, confirming a 
complementary rather than contradictory view on the moderating roles of Six Sigma implementation 
and operational efficiency improvement. These findings motivate us to further explore the conditions 
under which such complementary or contradictory effects are more likely to occur. In particular, we 
examine whether the moderating roles of Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency 
improvement might vary across different operating environments that exhibit different levels of 
operational complexity. This investigation direction is in line with the dynamic capability view which 
suggests that a firm’s competitive advantage arising from its dynamic capability might depend on the 
dynamism and complexity of its operating environment (Schilke et al., 2018). Consistent with prior OM 
research (e.g., Hendricks et al., 2009; Lam, 2018; Lo et al., 2014; Swink and Jacobs, 2012), we 

 
 
approximate operational complexity in terms of labor intensity and geographical diversity. This is 
because it should be more complex and challenging for firms to manage a large number of employees 
in operations and to deal with geographically dispersed customers across different countries. 
In order to investigate the roles of Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency under 
different levels of operational complexity, we split our sample firms into different sub-samples based 
on their labor intensity and geographical diversity. Specifically, for each manufacturing firm, we first 
measure its labor intensity as number of employees divided by sales and geographical diversity as the 
distribution of sales across different countries (Hendricks et al., 2009; Lam, 2018; Lo et al., 2014; Swink 
and Jacobs, 2012). We then put firms in the high labor intensity sub-sample if their labor intensity is 
higher than the industry median based on four-digit SIC codes, and the low labor intensity sub-sample 
otherwise. Similarly, we put firms in the high geographical diversity sub-sample if their geographical 
diversity is higher than the industry median based on four-digit SIC codes, and the low geographical 
diversity sub-sample otherwise. Finally, we perform system GMM estimation for each of these four 
sub-samples and document the test results in Table 7. 
[Insert Table 7 about here] 
 As shown in Table 7, Six Sigma implementation positively moderates the R&D investments-
financial returns relationship (p < 0.1) for firms with high labor intensity and high geographical diversity, 
but we cannot find a significant interaction between Six Sigma implementation and R&D investments 
(p > 0.1) for firms with low labor intensity and low geographical diversity. Similarly, our test results 
show that the interaction between R&D investments and operational efficiency is more significant for 
firms with high rather than low labor intensity and geographical diversity. Taken together, these 
findings suggest that the complementary effects are more (less) likely to occur under more (less) 
complex operating environments as approximated by labor intensity and geographical diversity. 
Our sub-sample analysis also suggests that Six Sigma implementation is positively and 
significantly related to financial returns (p < 0.1) for firms with high labor intensity and high 
geographical diversity, but there is no significant relationship between Six Sigma implementation and 
financial returns (p > 0.1) for firms with low labor intensity and low geographical diversity3. These 
 
3 We also check the number of Six Sigma adopting firms in each sub-sample. In particular, we find that among 
the 181 Six Sigma adopting firms, 100 of them (or 55%) are in the low labor intensity sub-sample, while 107 (or 
59%) are in the low geographical diversity sub-sample. Therefore, there is no evidence that the non-significant 
effects for firms with low labor intensity and low geographical diversity are driven by a limited number of Six 
Sigma adopting firms in these sub-samples. 

 
 
findings are consistent with those in prior research (e.g., Swink and Jacobs, 2012) and demonstrate the 
important role that Six Sigma implementation plays in more complex operating environments. 
 
5. Robustness Tests 
We also conduct various tests to check the robustness of our findings based on alternative measurement 
approaches and different estimation strategies. Table 8 reports the robustness test results and we discuss 
the detailed testing procedures below. Overall, the robustness tests provide further support for the 
conclusion drawn in our research and help rule out some alternative explanations of our research 
findings. 
[Insert Table 8 about here] 
First, we adopt an alternative measure of operational efficiency based on inventory turnover. 
Specifically, we compute inventory turnover as cost of goods sold divided by inventory and then 
normalize inventory turnover based on four-digit SIC codes to account for the difference in inventory 
turnover across industries (Mishra et al., 2013; Sakakibara et al., 1997; Wu et al., 2019). We perform 
the system GMM estimation with this alternative measure of operational efficiency and the 
corresponding test results shown in Model 1 suggest that the moderating effects of Six Sigma 
implementation and operational efficiency remain positive and significant (p < 0.05). 
As we classify firms’ efforts to implement Six Sigma into two different categories, i.e., 
advanced implementation and general implementation, a valid concern is whether advanced 
implementation indeed has a stronger moderating effect and thus can be coded as a higher level. To 
address this concern, we create two dummy variables: one representing advanced implementation and 
the other indicating general implementation. We then include the interactions between these two 
variables and R&D investments in the DPD model. The test results shown in Model 2 suggest that 
advanced implementation has a more positive and significant moderating effect than general 
implementation, supporting our classification of Six Sigma implementation. 
Moreover, we re-estimate the DPD model by replacing Six Sigma with ISO 9000, a popular 
quality management system widely adopted by manufacturing firms. We identify whether or not our 
sample firms adopt ISO 9000 via searches in Factiva. The keywords we use for the searches include the 
names of the sample firms and ISO 9000. We then code firms with and without ISO 9000 adoption as 
1 and 0, respectively. The test results as shown in Model 3 indicate a significant positive interaction 
between ISO 9000 adoption and R&D investments (p < 0.1), demonstrating the robustness of our 

 
 
findings. 
We also apply an alternative maximum cut-off point for R&D investments to remove firms with 
unusual high R&D intensities. Specifically, instead of applying the 100% cut-off point, we set the cut-
off points to 25%. The test results based on this alternative cut-off point remain consistent, as shown in 
Model 4, suggesting that our research findings are robust to outliers with very high R&D investments. 
Moreover, we add the squared term of R&D investments to our DPD model to examine the possible 
non-linear relationship between R&D investments and financial returns. The test results shown in 
Model 5 suggest that although the squared term of R&D investments is negative (inverted U-shape), it 
is not statistically significant (p > 0.1). On the other hand, R&D investments remain positive and 
significant (p < 0.01) after adding the squared term, confirming the linear relationship between R&D 
investments and financial returns. 
On the other hand, as prior R&D investments might affect current financial returns, we include 
additional time lags of R&D investments in the DPD model to control for the effects of prior R&D 
investments. The test results shown in Model 6 suggest that one-year lagged R&D investments have a 
positive impact on current financial returns, although the impact is significant at the 0.1 level only (p = 
0.098). There is no significant relationship between two-year lagged R&D investments and current 
financial returns (p > 0.1). Moreover, the impact of current R&D investments remains positive and 
significant (p < 0.05) after controlling prior R&D investments. These findings suggest that although 
prior R&D investments have some positive effects on current financial returns, such effects are not as 
strong as that of current R&D investments. A possible reason for the stronger effect of current R&D 
investments is that our measure of financial returns is based on the forward-looking, market-based 
Tobin’s q, which reflects the market’s evaluation of a firm’s prospects when taking all the available 
information into account (Miller et al., 2015). 
As firm performance such as financial returns could be quite persistent over time, we control 
for an additional time lag of financial returns, i.e., t-2, in our DPD model when performing the system 
GMM estimation. The test results with this additional control variable remain consistent as shown in 
Model 7. Moreover, the coefficient of this control variable, although positive, is not statistically 
significant (p > 0.1), suggesting that it is sufficient to control for the one-year lag of financial returns in 
our research. 
We also check the sensitivity of our findings to an alternative set of instruments used in the 
system GMM estimation. Specifically, instead of using all the available lagged values starting from t-

 
 
2, i.e., (t-2, t-maximum), as instruments for the difference equation, we choose a smaller set of 
instruments by limiting the maximum number of lags to t-4, i.e., (t-2, t-4). The test results based on this 
alternative set of instruments are shown in Model 8. The Hansen and AR2 test results are not significant 
(p > 0.1) in this model, confirming the validity of these alternative instruments used in our system GMM 
estimation. This model also shows consistent test results for all the research variables. 
Finally, we perform a random effect estimation of the DPD model as shown in Model 9. The 
test results remain consistent, although the lagged financial returns’ coefficient and the t-statistic are 
much higher than those in the system GMM estimation because the random effect estimation is less 
capable of addressing the dynamic panel bias (Roodman, 2009). 
 
6. Discussions 
R&D activities are often carried out in fierce market competition environments and the financial returns 
of R&D investments are highly uncertain. Previous research has examined how the success of R&D 
investments is associated with marketing capabilities (Arunachalam et al., 2018), human capital (Chen 
and Huang, 2009), and environmental turbulence (Wong, 2014), identifying several critical success 
factors for R&D activities. We approach this problem from a different perspective. We examine how 
the financial returns of R&D investments could possibly be enhanced from a process capability point 
of view. A large body of literature suggests that R&D activities are in conflict with process and 
efficiency improvements. Many believe that while process management enhances a firm’s operational 
efficiency, it could create organizational inertia and innovation traps, restricting the effectiveness of 
R&D efforts (Benner and Tushman, 2002). As a result, firms focusing on both R&D and efficiency 
improvements may encounter inconsistency elements that diminish the firms’ overall effectiveness 
(Boumgarden et al., 2012). Our analyses based on the interactive effects between quality and efficiency 
improvements and R&D investments on firms’ Tobin’s q, however, do not support this argument. 
Our results show that the financial returns of R&D investments are significantly enhanced when 
firms adopt Six Sigma and improve operational efficiency. Firms might establish stronger process 
systems and routines to reduce the uncertainty and enhance the chance of success of R&D investments. 
Our empirical results suggest that quality management and operational initiatives are supportive to 
R&D investments. Although certain management skills for R&D activities (e.g., inducing variation and 
idea generation) are very different from those for continuous process improvement (e.g., variation 
reduction and standardization), operational capability and the success of R&D efforts can be highly 

 
 
related to the extent that continuous improvement can help install robust processes and enhance the 
financial returns of new product development. 
The positive interaction results in our research indicate that quality and efficiency initiatives 
and R&D investments are supportive to each other, which are in line with a dynamic capability view 
(Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Teece, 2007) on the relationship between the two different constructs. A 
dynamic capability comprises two dimensions, namely ability to sense and shape product and market 
opportunities through various means such as R&D investments, and competence in seizing 
opportunities through “distinct skills, processes, procedures, organizational structures, decision rules 
and disciplines” (Teece, 2007, p. 1319). A dynamic capability is essential in adapting to changing 
market requirements and technological opportunities (Teece, 2007; Helfat and Peteraf, 2015). Quality 
and efficiency underpin an enterprise’s capability in realizing the value of innovative ideas and 
reinforcing robust disciplines to deliver superior financial value from R&D investments. 
In fact, the uncertainties associated with R&D activities are multi-layered, and many of these 
issues are highly related to OM. Lev et al. (2016) suggested that the financial returns of R&D 
investments hinge on firms’ capability in managing product and process uncertainties. While product 
uncertainty refers to the technical feasibility of new products and their market acceptance, process 
uncertainty concerns the risks associated with the economic production and timely delivery of R&D 
and new products. Research suggests that one of the most critical issues associated with R&D-intensive 
firms is that firms need to restructure themselves and renew their organizational processes from time to 
time (Lev et al., 2016). Six Sigma adoption and efficient operations enhance firms’ capability in dealing 
with product and process uncertainties as firms carry out R&D and develop new products (Aoki and 
Wilhelm, 2017). More importantly, process and operational capabilities are extremely critical as firms 
need to re-orientate their processes, and re-organize and renew themselves periodically (Floyd and Lane, 
2000) so as to reduce the related uncertainties and enhance the returns of their R&D investments. 
In the R&D-intensive industries, firms need to periodically develop the best practice, strengthen 
business processes, and reinvent and restructure operational systems through various quality and 
efficiency initiatives (Eisenhardt et al., 2010). A dynamic capability perspective on the relationship 
between efficiency and R&D also implies that not only R&D investments are supported by quality and 
efficiency improvements, but quality and efficiency initiatives are reinforced by R&D. This suggests 
that firms may not obtain full benefits from their disciplined organizational processes and decision rules 
if they do not renew themselves periodically through exploring new products and markets, i.e., R&D 

 
 
investments. Taking the dynamic capability view on the positive interaction results documented in our 
study, it is possible that firms will become less inert in their quality and efficiency initiatives if they 
also invest heavily in R&D (Eisenhardt et al., 2010; Piao and Zajac, 2016). 
Our results further show that the enhancement effect of quality and efficiency initiatives on 
R&D investment is more pronounced under high operational complexity as approximated by labor 
intensity and geographical diversity. Operational complexity refers to the variety and uncertainty 
coming from the customers, operations and supply chains and the amount of information necessary for 
organizing the processes. The result is consistent with previous findings that a competitive and complex 
operational environment provides a more fertile ground for quality and efficiency improvements (Lo et 
al., 2013; Swink and Jacobs, 2012). In a complex operating environment (e.g., labor-intensive 
operations with global markets), the support of R&D investments through quality and efficiency 
improvements becomes more essential, while in a less complicated operational environment (e.g., 
highly automated processes focusing on domestic markets) such a dual focus is less critical. When R&D 
and new product development activities are undertaken in a dynamic and multifaceted environment, 
firms need to strengthen their quality and efficiency initiatives to a greater extent. 
A rapid-changing technology environment not only leads to volatility and dynamism in 
operations, but also makes the processes more complex and more difficult to manage. In this case, 
operations managers not only need to rigorously control their processes, but dramatically renew 
themselves from time to time, making the interaction between R&D and process management more 
important. Overall, operational complexity in terms of dynamism, variety and uncertainty may drive 
such a complementary effect. Our results show that the more complex the operations, the higher the 
synergy effect between R&D and process management. 
 
7. Conclusions and Limitations 
Previous research has examined a number of contextual factors for successful R&D activities. However, 
very little is known about the role of quality management programs and efficiency improvement 
initiatives in enhancing the financial returns of R&D investments. Based on operational and financial 
data from U.S. manufacturing firms, we construct a DPD model to capture the effects of R&D 
investments on the financial returns of firms. Performing system GMM estimation of the DPD model, 
we show that firms’ financial returns from R&D investments are significantly enhanced when they 
adopt Six Sigma and improve operational efficiency. Our additional analyses show that such a 

 
 
complementary effect is more pronounced under higher operational complexity. Our research supports 
the dynamic capability view on the competitive advantage of firms and the dualistic perspective that 
operational initiatives and R&D investments are mutually enabling and supplement each other in an 
organization. R&D and process improvements are highly dependent and complementary under dynamic 
and complex operating environments, driving the financial returns of R&D investments. 
 There are some limitations in this research. Like most other studies using secondary data, the 
measurements of constructs are one of the biggest challenges of our study. The objective of our research 
is to examine whether the financial returns of R&D investments are enhanced or hindered as a result of 
Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency improvement. While the amounts of R&D 
investments can be directly extracted from firms’ accounting data, the measurements of Six Sigma 
implementation and operational efficiency are less straightforward. In this study we determine whether 
or not a firm has adopted Six Sigma and the level of its implementation based on publicly available 
information, instead of conducting a direct investigation into the firm. Similarly, we can only assess 
operational efficiency by using the stochastic frontier estimation of the relative efficiency of a firm in 
its industry. We realize that the relative efficiency of a firm is not affected by process management 
alone, but an array of complex organizational factors (e.g., effective human resources). The stochastic 
frontier estimation of the relative efficiency of a firm in its industry cannot be a perfect indicator of 
effective operational routines, although it is a commonly accepted indicator of operational efficiency at 
the macro-level. 
We measure R&D investments based on firms’ R&D expenses as documented in their annual 
reports. Although this measurement approach is consistent with prior literature on R&D at the firm 
level, it cannot differentiate whether such investments are for incremental R&D, radical R&D, or both. 
It would be interesting for future research to provide a more direct measure of firms’ incremental and 
radical R&D investments, and examine how incremental and radical R&D activities might benefit 
differently from Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency improvement. 
Finally, when hypothesizing the moderating roles of Six Sigma implementation and operational 
efficiency improvement, we assume that the corresponding disciplines and systematic orientation can 
“spill over” to R&D activities, making them more effective in driving financial returns. Although we 
do find that Six Sigma implementation and operational efficiency improvement positively moderate the 
financial returns of R&D investments, it is still possible that some firms might pursue their quality and 
efficiency initiatives and R&D activities separately, or loosely couple them. It is thus worth further 

 
 
investigating the possible “spill over” effects of quality management and efficiency improvement in the 
R&D context. 
 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the Editors and anonymous referees for their many helpful comments on earlier versions of 
our paper. This research was supported in part by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong under 
grant number PolyU 155226/16B. Cheng was also supported in part by The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University under the Fung Yiu King - Wing Hang Bank Endowed Professorship in Business 
Administration. Lam acknowledges the support of the British Academy through the BA/Leverhulme 
Small Research Grant (grant number: SG170105). 
 
References 
Alan, Y., M.A. Lapré. 2018. Investigating operational predictors of future financial distress in the US 
airline industry. Production and Operations Management, 27(4): 734-755. 
Alessandri, T.M., A. Seth. 2014. The effects of managerial ownership on international and business 
diversification: Balancing incentives and risks. Strategic Management Journal, 35(13): 2064-
2075. 
Anand, G., P.T. Ward, M.V. Tatikonda, D.A. Schilling. 2009. Dynamic capabilities through continuous 
improvement infrastructure. Journal of Operations Management, 27(6): 444-461. 
Anand, G., P.T. Ward, M.V. Tatikonda. 2010. Role of explicit and tacit knowledge in Six Sigma 
projects: An empirical examination of differential project success. Journal of Operations 
Management, 28(4): 303-315. 
Andriopoulos, C., M.W. Lewis. 2009. Exploitation-exploration tensions and organizational 
ambidexterity: Managing paradoxes of innovation. Organization Science, 20(4): 696-717. 
Anwar, S., S. Sun. 2013. Foreign entry and firm R&D: Evidence from Chinese manufacturing 
industries. R&D Management, 43(4): 303-317. 
Aoki, K., M. Wilhelm. 2017. The role of ambidexterity in managing buyer-Supplier relationships: The 
Toyota case. Organization Science, 28(6): 1080-1097. 
Arellano, M., O. Bover. 1995. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-components 
models. Journal of Econometrics, 68(1): 29-51. 
Arellano, M., S. Bond. 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an 
application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies, 58(2): 277-297. 
Arnett, D.B., I.L. Sandvik, K. Sandvik. 2018. Two paths to organizational effectiveness – Product 

 
 
advantage and life-cycle flexibility. Journal of Business Research, 84: 285-292. 
Arumugam, V., J. Antony, M. Kumar. 2013. Linking learning and knowledge creation to project success 
in Six Sigma projects: An empirical investigation. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 141(1): 388-402. 
Arunachalam, S., S.N. Ramaswami, P. Herrmann, D. Walker. 2018. Innovation pathway to profitability: 
The role of entrepreneurial orientation and marketing capabilities. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 46(4): 744-766. 
Atuahene-Gima, K. 1996. Market orientation and innovation. Journal of Business Research, 35(2): 93-
103. 
Bae, J., S.J. Kim, H. Oh. 2017. Taming polysemous signals: The role of marketing intensity on the 
relationship between financial leverage and firm performance. Review of Financial 
Economics, 33: 29-40. 
Baker, M., J. Wurgler. 2002. Market timing and capital structure. The Journal of Finance, 57(1): 1-32. 
Balli, H.O., B.E. Sørensen. 2013. Interaction effects in econometrics. Empirical Economics, 45(1): 583-
603. 
Baños-Caballero, S., P.J. García-Teruel, P. Martínez-Solano. 2014. Working capital management, 
corporate performance, and financial constraints. Journal of Business Research, 67(3): 332-338. 
Bardhan, I., V. Krishnan, S. Lin. 2013. Business value of information technology: Testing the 
interaction effect of IT and R&D on Tobin’s Q. Information Systems Research, 24(4): 1147-1161. 
Bebchuk, L.A., A. Cohen. 2005. The costs of entrenched boards. Journal of Financial Economics, 78(2): 
409-433. 
Benner, M.J., M.L. Tushman. 2002. Process management and technological innovation: A longitudinal 
study of the photography and paint industries. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(4): 676-
707. 
Benner, M.J., M.L. Tushman. 2003. Exploitation, exploration, and process management: The 
productivity dilemma revisited. Academy of Management Review, 28(2): 238-256. 
Bharadwaj, A.S., S.G. Bharadwaj, B.R. Konsynski. 1999. Information technology effects on firm 
performance as measured by Tobin’s q. Management Science, 45(7): 1008-1024. 
Blundell, R., S. Bond. 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models. 
Journal of Econometrics, 87(1): 115-143. 
Boumgarden, P., J. Nickerson, T.R. Zenger. 2012. Sailing into the wind: Exploring the relationships 
among ambidexterity, vacillation, and organizational performance. Strategic Management 
Journal, 33(6): 587-610. 
Brunnermeier, S.B., M.A. Cohen. 2003. Determinants of environmental innovation in US 

 
 
manufacturing industries. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 45(2): 278-
293. 
Canato, A., D. Ravasi, N. Phillips. 2013. Coerced practice implementation in cases of low cultural fit: 
Cultural change and practice adaptation during the implementation of Six Sigma at 3M. 
Academy of Management Journal, 56(6): 1724-1753. 
Chen, C.J., J.W. Huang. 2009. Strategic human resource practices and innovation performance – The 
mediating role of knowledge management capacity. Journal of Business Research, 62(1): 104-
114. 
Choo, A.S., K.W. Linderman, R.G. Schroeder. 2007. Method and psychological effects on learning 
behaviors and knowledge creation in quality improvement projects. Management Science, 
53(3): 437-450. 
Chuang, H.H.C., R. Oliva, G.R. Heim. 2019. Examining the link between retailer inventory leanness 
and operational efficiency: Moderating roles of firm size and demand uncertainty. Production 
and Operations Management, 28(9): 2338-2364. 
Chung, K.H., S.W. Pruitt. 1994. A simple approximation of Tobin’s q. Financial Management, 23(3): 
70-74. 
Coelli, T.J., D.S.P. Rao, C.J. O’Donnell, G.E. Battese. 2005. An Introduction to Efficiency and 
Productivity Analysis, 2nd ed. Springer, USA. 
Coombs, J.E., K.M. Gilley. 2005. Stakeholder management as a predictor of CEO compensation: Main 
effects and interactions with financial performance. Strategic Management Journal, 26(9): 
827-840. 
DiMasi, J.A., H.G. Grabowski, R.W. Hansen. 2016. Innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: New 
estimates of R&D costs. Journal of Health Economics, 47: 20-33. 
Dutta, S., O. Narasimhan, S. Rajiv. 2005. Conceptualizing and measuring capabilities: Methodology 
and empirical application. Strategic Management Journal, 26(3): 277-285. 
Ehie, I.C., K. Olibe. 2010. The effect of R&D investment on firm value: An examination of US 
manufacturing and service industries. International Journal of Production Economics, 128(1): 
127-135. 
Eisenhardt, K.M., J.A. Martin. 2000. Dynamic capabilities: What are they?. Strategic Management 
Journal, 21(10‐11): 1105-1121. 
Eisenhardt, K.M., N.R. Furr, C.B. Bingham. 2010. CROSSROADS—Microfoundations of 
performance: Balancing efficiency and flexibility in dynamic environments. Organization 
Science, 21(6): 1263-1273. 
Evanschitzky, H., M. Eisend, R.J. Calantone, Y. Jiang. 2012. Success factors of product innovation: An 

 
 
updated meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 29(S1): 21-37. 
Fang, E., J. Lee, Z. Yang. 2015. The timing of co-development alliances in new product development 
processes: Returns for upstream and downstream partners. Journal of Marketing, 79(1): 64-82. 
Farjoun, M. 2010. Beyond dualism: Stability and change as a duality. Academy of Management Review, 
35(2): 202-225. 
Flannery, M.J., K.W. Hankins. 2013. Estimating dynamic panel models in corporate finance. Journal 
of Corporate Finance, 19: 1-19. 
Floyd, S.W., P.J. Lane. 2000. Strategizing throughout the organization: Managing role conflict in 
strategic renewal. Academy of Management Review, 25(1): 154-177. 
Fremeth, A.R., J.M. Shaver. 2014. Strategic rationale for responding to extra‐jurisdictional regulation: 
Evidence from firm adoption of renewable power in the US. Strategic Management 
Journal, 35(5): 629-651. 
Fung, M.K. 2006. R&D, knowledge spillovers and stock volatility. Accounting and Finance, 46(1): 
107-124. 
García-Quevedo, J., A. Segarra-Blasco, M. Teruel. 2018. Financial constraints and the failure of 
innovation projects. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 127: 127-140. 
Goh, T.N., P.C. Low, K.L. Tsui, M. Xie. 2003. Impact of Six Sigma implementation on stock price 
performance. Total Quality Management & Business Excellence, 14(7): 753-763. 
Gupta, A.K., K.G. Smith, C.E. Shalley. 2006. The interplay between exploration and exploitation. 
Academy of Management Journal, 49(4): 693-706. 
Hammer, M. 2002. Process management and the future of Six Sigma. MIT Sloan Management Review, 
43(2): 26-32. 
Helfat, C.E., M.A. Peteraf. 2015. Managerial cognitive capabilities and the microfoundations of 
dynamic capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 36(6): 831-850. 
Hendricks, K.B., V.R. Singhal, R. Zhang. 2009. The effect of operational slack, diversification, and 
vertical relatedness on the stock market reaction to supply chain disruptions. Journal of 
Operations Management, 27(3): 233-246. 
Hendricks, K.B., V.R. Singhal. 1997. Does implementing an effective TQM program actually improve 
operating performance? Empirical evidence from firms that have won quality 
awards. Management Science, 43(9): 1258-1274. 
Hoisl, K., M. Gruber, A. Conti. 2017. R&D team diversity and performance in hypercompetitive 
environments. Strategic Management Journal, 38(7): 1455-1477. 
Howells, J. 2005. Innovation and regional economic development: A matter of perspective? Research 
Policy, 34(8): 1220-1234. 

 
 
Huang, R. 2013. Six Sigma ‘Killed’ Innovation in 3M. Retrieved 28 October 2019, 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/six-sigma-killed-innovation-in-3m/. 
Hurren, K. 2015. The Challenge of Change: 3M, Six Sigma, and Corporate Culture. Retrieved 28 
October 
2019, 
https://www.nbs.net/articles/the-challenge-of-change-3m-six-sigma-and-
corporate-culture. 
Jacobs, B.W., R. Kraude, S. Narayanan. 2016. Operational productivity, corporate social performance, 
financial performance, and risk in manufacturing firms. Production and Operations 
Management, 25(12): 2065-2085. 
Kale, P., H. Singh. 2007. Building firm capabilities through learning: The role of the alliance learning 
process in alliance capability and firm-level alliance success. Strategic Management Journal, 
28(10): 981-1000. 
Kang, J. 2016. LG Shows How Hard It Is To Make Money From Android Smartphones. Retrieved 28 
October 2019, https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnkang/2016/11/06/lg-shows-how-hard-it-is-
to-make-money-from-android-smartphones. 
Kim, Y., T.Y. Choi, T. Yan, K. Dooley. 2011. Structural investigation of supply networks: A social 
network analysis approach. Journal of Operations Management, 29(3): 194-211. 
Kiviet, J.F. 1995. On bias, inconsistency, and efficiency of various estimators in dynamic panel data 
models. Journal of Econometrics, 68(1): 53-78. 
Klein, G. 2013. Seeing What Others Don’t: The Remarkable Ways We Gain Insights. Perseus Book 
Group, USA. 
Kocina, L. 2017. What Percentage of New Products Fail and Why? Retrieved 28 October 2019, 
https://www.publicity.com/marketsmart-newsletters/percentage-new-products-fail/. 
Kortmann, S., C. Gelhard, C. Zimmermann, F.T. Piller. 2014. Linking strategic flexibility and 
operational efficiency: The mediating role of ambidextrous operational capabilities. Journal of 
Operations Management, 32(7-8): 475-490. 
Koryak, O., A. Lockett, J. Hayton, N. Nicolaou, K. Mole. 2018. Disentangling the antecedents of 
ambidexterity: Exploration and exploitation. Research Policy, 47(2): 413-427. 
Kotabe, M., C.X. Jiang, J.Y. Murray. 2011. Managerial ties, knowledge acquisition, realized absorptive 
capacity and new product market performance of emerging multinational companies: A case of 
China. Journal of World Business, 46(2): 166-176. 
Kovach, J.V., L.D. Fredendall. 2013. The influence of continuous improvement practices on learning: 
An empirical study. The Quality Management Journal, 20(4): 6-20. 
Krasnikov, A., S. Mishra, D. Orozco. 2009. Evaluating the financial impact of branding using 
trademarks: A framework and empirical evidence. Journal of Marketing, 73(6): 154-166. 

 
 
Kumar, M.R. 2012. Use of action research to institutionalize organizational learning within TQM. The 
Quality Management Journal, 19(3): 51-68. 
Kurt, D., J. Hulland. 2013. Aggressive marketing strategy following equity offerings and firm value: 
The role of relative strategic flexibility. Journal of Marketing, 77(5): 57-74. 
Lam, H.K. 2018. Doing good across organizational boundaries: Sustainable supply chain practices and 
firms’ financial risk. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38(12): 
2389-2412. 
Lam, H.K., A.C. Yeung, T.C.E. Cheng. 2016. The impact of firms’ social media initiatives on 
operational efficiency and innovativeness. Journal of Operations Management, 47-48: 28-43. 
Lev, B., S. Radhakrishnan, J. Tong. 2016. R&D volatility drivers. Working paper, New York University. 
Li, D. 2011. Financial constraints, R&D investment, and stock returns. The Review of Financial 
Studies, 24(9): 2974-3007. 
Li, H., K. Atuahene-Gima. 2001. Product innovation strategy and the performance of new technology 
ventures in China. Academy of Management Journal, 44(6): 1123-1134. 
Li, S., J. Shang, S.A. Slaughter. 2010. Why do software firms fail? Capabilities, competitive actions, 
and firm survival in the software industry from 1995 to 2007. Information Systems Research, 
21(3): 631-654. 
Linderman, K., R.G. Schroeder, A.S. Choo. 2006. Six Sigma: The role of goals in improvement teams. 
Journal of Operations Management, 24(6): 779-790. 
Linderman, K., R.G. Schroeder, S. Zaheer, A.S. Choo. 2003. Six Sigma: A goal-theoretic perspective. 
Journal of Operations Management, 21(2): 193-203. 
Linderman, K., R.G. Schroeder, S. Zaheer, C. Liedtke, A.S. Choo. 2004. Integrating quality 
management practices with knowledge creation processes. Journal of Operations Management, 
22(6): 589-607. 
Liu, X., A.C. Yeung, C.K. Lo, T.C.E. Cheng. 2014. The moderating effects of knowledge characteristics 
of firms on the financial value of innovative technology products. Journal of Operations 
Management, 32(3): 79-87. 
Liu, Y., R.T. Keller, H.A. Shih. 2011. The impact of team‐member exchange, differentiation, team 
commitment, and knowledge sharing on R&D project team performance. R&D 
Management, 41(3): 274-287. 
Lo, C.K., F. Wiengarten, P. Humphreys, A.C. Yeung, T.C.E. Cheng. 2013. The impact of contextual 
factors on the efficacy of ISO 9000 adoption. Journal of Operations Management, 31(5): 229-
235. 
Lo, C.K., M. Pagell, D. Fan, F. Wiengarten, A.C. Yeung. 2014. OHSAS 18001 certification and 

 
 
operating performance: The role of complexity and coupling. Journal of Operations 
Management, 32(5): 268-280. 
March, J.G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science, 2(1): 
71-87. 
Miller, D., X. Xu, V. Mehrotra. 2015. When is human capital a valuable resource? The performance 
effects of Ivy League selection among celebrated CEOs. Strategic Management Journal, 36(6): 
930-944. 
Miller, J.G., A.V. Roth. 1994. A taxonomy of manufacturing strategies. Management Science, 40(3): 
285-304. 
Mishra, S., S.B. Modi, A. Animesh. 2013. The relationship between information technology capability, 
inventory efficiency, and shareholder wealth: A firm-level empirical analysis. Journal of 
Operations Management, 31(6): 298-312. 
Modi, S.B., S. Mishra. 2011. What drives financial performance-resource efficiency or resource slack?: 
Evidence from US based manufacturing firms from 1991 to 2006. Journal of Operations 
Management, 29(3): 254-273. 
Mudambi, R., T. Swift. 2014. Knowing when to leap: Transitioning between exploitative and 
explorative R&D. Strategic Management Journal, 35(1): 126-145. 
Naveh, E., M. Erez. 2004. Innovation and attention to detail in the quality improvement paradigm. 
Management Science, 50(11): 1576-1586. 
Ngo, L.V., A. O’Cass. 2012. In search of innovation and customer‐related performance superiority: The 
role of market orientation, marketing capability, and innovation capability interactions. Journal 
of Product Innovation Management, 29(5): 861-877. 
Nickell, S.J. 1981. Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 49: 1417-1426. 
Nunes, P.M., Z. Serrasqueiro, J. Leitão. 2012. Is there a linear relationship between R&D intensity and 
growth? Empirical evidence of non-high-tech vs. high-tech SMEs. Research Policy, 41(1): 36-
53. 
O’brien, J.P. 2003. The capital structure implications of pursuing a strategy of innovation. Strategic 
Management Journal, 24(5): 415-431. 
Oh, H., J. Bae, I.S. Currim, J. Lim, Y. Zhang. 2016. Marketing spending, firm visibility, and asymmetric 
stock returns of corporate social responsibility strengths and concerns. European Journal of 
Marketing, 50(5/6): 838-862. 
Pandit, S., C.E. Wasley, T. Zach. 2011. The effect of research and development (R&D) inputs and 
outputs on the relation between the uncertainty of future operating performance and R&D 
expenditures. Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 26(1): 121-144. 

 
 
Parast, M.M. 2011. The effect of Six Sigma projects on innovation and firm performance. International 
Journal of Project Management, 29(1): 45-55. 
Patyal, V.S., M. Koilakuntla. 2015. Infrastructure and core quality practices in Indian manufacturing 
organizations: Scale development and validation. Journal of Advances in Management 
Research, 12(2): 141-175. 
Paul, S.M., D.S. Mytelka, C.T. Dunwiddie, C.C. Persinger, B.H. Munos, S.R. Lindborg, A.L. Schacht. 
2010. How to improve R&D productivity: The pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. 
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 9(3): 203-214. 
Peng, D.X., R.G. Schroeder, R. Shah. 2008. Linking routines to operations capabilities: A new 
perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 26(6): 730-748. 
Piao, M., E.J. Zajac. 2016. How exploitation impedes and impels exploration: Theory and evidence. 
Strategic Management Journal, 37(7): 1431-1447. 
Prajogo, D.I., A.S. Sohal. 2006. The integration of TQM and technology/R&D management in 
determining quality and innovation performance. Omega, 34(3): 296-312. 
Raithel, S., M. Sarstedt, S. Scharf, M. Schwaiger. 2012. On the value relevance of customer satisfaction. 
Multiple drivers and multiple markets. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 40(4): 
509-525. 
Roodman, D. 2009. How to do xtabond2: An introduction to difference and system GMM in Stata. The 
Stata Journal, 9(1): 86-136. 
Roth, A.V., W.E. Jackson III. 1995. Strategic determinants of service quality and performance: 
Evidence from the banking industry. Management Science, 41(11): 1720-1733. 
Rubera, G., A.H. Kirca. 2012. Firm innovativeness and its performance outcomes: A meta-analytic 
review and theoretical integration. Journal of Marketing, 76(3): 130-147. 
Rubera, G., C. Droge. 2013. Technology versus design innovation's effects on sales and Tobin’s Q: The 
moderating role of branding strategy. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 30(3): 448-
464. 
Rundquist, J. 2012. The ability to integrate different types of knowledge and its effect on innovation 
performance. International Journal of Innovation Management, 16(02): 1-32. 
Sakakibara, S., B.B. Flynn, R.G. Schroeder, W.T. Morris. 1997. The impact of just-in-time 
manufacturing and its infrastructure on manufacturing performance. Management Science, 
43(9): 1246-1257. 
Schilke, O., S. Hu, C.E. Helfat. 2018. Quo vadis, dynamic capabilities? A content-analytic review of 
the current state of knowledge and recommendations for future research. Academy of 
Management Annals, 12(1): 390-439. 

 
 
Schneider, J., J. Hall. 2011. Why most product launches fail. Harvard Business Review, 89(4): 21-23. 
Scholtes, P.R., B.L. Joiner, B.J. Streibel. 2003. The Team Handbook, 3rd ed. Oriel Incorporated, USA. 
Schroeder, R.G., K. Linderman, C. Liedtke, A.S. Choo. 2008. Six Sigma: Definition and underlying 
theory. Journal of Operations Management, 26(4): 536-554. 
Sethi, R., A. Sethi. 2009. Can quality‐oriented firms develop innovative new products?. Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 26(2): 206-221. 
Shafer, S.M., S.B. Moeller. 2012. The effects of Six Sigma on corporate performance: An empirical 
investigation. Journal of Operations Management, 30(7): 521-532. 
Shah, R., P.T. Ward. 2003. Lean manufacturing: Context, practice bundles, and performance. Journal 
of Operations Management, 21(2): 129-149. 
Simester, D. 2016. Why great new products fail. MIT Sloan Management Review, 57(3): 33-39. 
Sinha, K.K., A.H. Van de Ven. 2005. Designing work within and between organizations. Organization 
Science, 16(4): 389-408. 
Sitkin, S.B., D. Stickel. 1996. The road to hell: The dynamics of distrust in an era of quality. R.M. 
Kramer, T.R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 196-215. 
Smith, A.C., F. Sutherland, D.H. Gilbert. 2017. Reinventing Innovation: Designing the Dual 
Organization. Springer, USA. 
Stettner, U., D. Lavie. 2014. Ambidexterity under scrutiny: Exploration and exploitation via internal 
organization, alliances, and acquisitions. Strategic Management Journal, 35(13): 1903-1929. 
Su, H.C., K. Linderman, R.G. Schroeder, A.H. Van de Ven. 2014. A comparative case study of 
sustaining quality as a competitive advantage. Journal of Operations Management, 32(7-8), 
429-445. 
Suarez, F.F., M.A. Cusumano, S.J. Kahl. 2013. Services and the business models of product firms: An 
empirical analysis of the software industry. Management Science, 59(2): 420-435. 
Swift, T. 2016. The perilous leap between exploration and exploitation. Strategic Management Journal, 
37(8): 1688-1698. 
Swink, M., B.W. Jacobs. 2012. Six Sigma adoption: Operating performance impacts and contextual 
drivers of success. Journal of Operations Management, 30(6): 437-453. 
Teece, D.J. 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) 
enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13): 1319-1350. 
Terziovski, M., J.L. Guerrero. 2014. ISO 9000 quality system certification and its impact on product 
and process innovation performance. International Journal of Production Economics, 158: 
197-207. 

 
 
Vandaie, R., A. Zaheer. 2014. Alliance partners and firm capability: Evidence from the motion picture 
industry. Organization Science, 26(1): 22-36. 
Wang, J., W. Lin, Y.H. Huang. 2010. A performance-oriented risk management framework for 
innovative R&D projects. Technovation, 30(11): 601-611. 
Wintoki, M.B., J.S. Linck, J.M. Netter. 2012. Endogeneity and the dynamics of internal corporate 
governance. Journal of Financial Economics, 105(3): 581-606. 
Wong, S. 2014. Impacts of environmental turbulence on entrepreneurial orientation and new product 
success. European Journal of Innovation Management, 17(2): 229-249. 
Wu, Q., K. Muthuraman, S. Seshadri. 2019. Effect of financing costs and constraints on real investments: 
The case of inventories. Production and Operations Management, 28(10), 2573-2593. 
Wu, S.J., S.A. Melnyk, B.B. Flynn. 2010. Operational capabilities: The secret ingredient. Decision 
Sciences, 41(4): 721-754. 
Xia, Y., V.R. Singhal, G.P. Zhang. 2016. Product design awards and the market value of the firm. 
Production and Operations Management, 25(6): 1038-1055. 
Yang, T., C.H. Hsieh. 2009. Six-Sigma project selection using national quality award criteria and 
Delphi 
fuzzy 
multiple 
criteria 
decision-making 
method. Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, 36(4): 7594-7603. 
Yeung, A.C., T.C.E. Cheng, K.H. Lai. 2005. An empirical model for managing quality in the electronics 
industry. Production and Operations Management, 14(2): 189-204. 
Zhang, W. 2015. R&D investment and distress risk. Journal of Empirical Finance, 32: 94-114. 
Zhou, K.Z., C.B. Li. 2012. How knowledge affects radical innovation: Knowledge base, market 
knowledge acquisition, and internal knowledge sharing. Strategic Management Journal, 33(9): 
1090-1102. 
Zollo, M., S.G. Winter. 2002. Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities. 
Organization Science, 13(3): 339-351. 
Zu, X., L.D. Fredendall, T.J. Douglas. 2008. The evolving theory of quality management: The role of 
Six Sigma. Journal of Operations Management, 26(5): 630-650. 
 
 
 

 
 
Table 1 Distribution of Sample Firms across Industries 
Two-digit SIC Code 
Industry 
Frequency 
Percentage 
36 
Electronic and other electric equipment 
108 
23.08 
38 
Instruments and related products 
91 
19.44 
28 
Chemicals and allied products 
86 
18.38 
35 
Industrial machinery and equipment 
74 
15.81 
37 
Transportation equipment 
27 
5.77 
34 
Fabricated metal products 
18 
3.85 
26 
Paper and allied products 
12 
2.56 
30 
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products 
9 
1.92 
20 
Food and kindred products 
7 
1.50 
33 
Primary metal industries 
7 
1.50 
25 
Furniture and fixtures 
6 
1.28 
32 
Stone, clay, and glass products 
6 
1.28 
39 
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries 
6 
1.28 
Others 
Other industries 
11 
2.35 
Total 
 
468 
100 
 
 
Table 2 Examples of Announcements about Six Sigma Implementation 
Announcement 1 
Company Name 
Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE: CAT) 
Announced on 
1 April 2010 
Text extracted 
from article 
In 2001, Caterpillar launched its 6 Sigma program to drive change to 
achieve the company’s long-term strategic goals (Caterpillar uses 6 
Sigma to identify its Six Sigma initiatives). This 6 Sigma process 
was, and continues to be, extremely successful. Some of the results 
include first-year benefits that exceeded implementation cost and 
achievement of the revenue goal two years earlier than planned. 
 
Announcement 2 
Company Name 
Select Comfort (NASDAQ: SNBR) 
Announced on 
7 February 2007 
Text extracted 
from article 
Complementing our investment in new product innovation is the 
Company’s introduction of “Six Sigma” process improvement 
programs. Dedicated leaders and experts are now learning these 
data-driven, statistical processes as part of a company-wide focus to 
enhance customer satisfaction by improving our quality and 
sustaining the highest levels of consistency. 
 
Announcement 3 
Company Name 
Wabash National Corporation (NYSE: WNC) 
Announced on 
11 February 2008 
Text extracted 
from article 
In 2007, we focused on productivity enhancements within 
manufacturing assembly and sub-assembly areas, improving material 
flow and inventory levels within our supply chain, and waste 
reduction in key support areas. We deployed a Six Sigma team to 
work on key waste reduction initiatives across the enterprise. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Table 3 Distribution of Six Sigma Sample Firms across First Adoption Years 
Year 
Frequency 
Percentage 
2014 
1 
0.55 
2013 
10 
5.52 
2012 
4 
2.21 
2011 
4 
2.21 
2010 
8 
4.42 
2009 
7 
3.87 
2008 
9 
4.97 
2007 
9 
4.97 
2006 
14 
7.73 
2005 
16 
8.84 
2004 
17 
9.39 
2003 
15 
8.29 
2002 
9 
4.97 
2001 
18 
9.94 
2000 
12 
6.63 
1999 
13 
7.18 
1998 
8 
4.42 
1997 
7 
3.87 
Total 
181 
100 
 
 
 
Table 4 Distribution of Six Sigma Sample Firms across Industries 
Two-digit SIC Code 
Industry 
Frequency 
Percentage 
28 
Chemicals and allied products 
40 
22.10 
35 
Industrial machinery and equipment 
31 
17.13 
38 
Instruments and related products 
29 
16.02 
36 
Electronic and other electric equipment 
24 
13.26 
37 
Transportation equipment 
15 
8.29 
26 
Paper and allied products 
11 
6.08 
34 
Fabricated metal products 
6 
3.31 
20 
Food and kindred products 
4 
2.21 
25 
Furniture and fixtures 
4 
2.21 
30 
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products 
4 
2.21 
33 
Primary metal industries 
4 
2.21 
32 
Stone, clay, and glass products 
3 
1.66 
Others 
Other industries 
6 
3.31 
Total 
 
181 
100 

 
 
Table 5 Correlations and Descriptive Statistics 
Variables 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
1. Financial Returns 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Lagged Financial Returns 
0.763 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Firm Size 
-0.034 
-0.031 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Firm Age 
-0.077 
-0.088 
0.361 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Firm Leverage 
-0.017 
-0.016 
0.379 
0.254 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Marketing Expense 
0.080 
0.071 
-0.339 
-0.104 
-0.099 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Tangible Assets 
-0.018 
-0.033 
0.090 
0.151 
0.208 
-0.100 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Industry Tobin’s q 
0.006 
-0.016 
0.042 
-0.051 
0.023 
0.147 
-0.118 
1 
 
 
 
 
9. Industry Size 
0.073 
0.075 
0.183 
-0.085 
-0.053 
-0.063 
-0.056 
0.200 
1 
 
 
 
10. Six Sigma Implementation 
-0.042 
-0.065 
0.401 
0.290 
0.163 
-0.119 
0.184 
-0.021 
-0.044 
1 
 
 
11. Operational Efficiency 
0.287 
0.271 
0.379 
0.127 
0.086 
-0.163 
-0.132 
0.023 
-0.046 
0.131 
1 
 
12. R&D Investments 
0.171 
0.157 
-0.025 
-0.341 
-0.169 
-0.105 
-0.329 
0.184 
0.369 
-0.214 
-0.050 
1 
Mean 
0.194 
0.205 
7.011 
3.874 
0.180 
0.204 
0.184 
1.730 
10.806 
0.617 
0.534 
0.063 
Standard deviation 
0.906 
0.943 
2.045 
0.741 
0.172 
0.183 
0.124 
0.719 
1.675 
0.850 
0.172 
0.070 
Minimum 
-3.989 
-5.301 
1.252 
1.386 
0.000 
0.005 
0.001 
0.739 
4.470 
0.000 
0.002 
0.000 
Maximum 
10.343 
9.504 
12.491 
5.361 
1.635 
2.617 
0.695 
12.497 
15.108 
2.000 
0.890 
0.549 
Note: Correlations with absolute value higher than 0.049 are significant at 0.01 level. 

Table 6 System GMM Test Results 
Variables 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
Intercept 
-0.470 
(2.768) 
0.062 
(2.680) 
-0.353 
(2.584) 
0.079 
(2.515) 
Lagged Financial Returns 
0.386*** 
(0.065) 
0.393*** 
(0.065) 
0.391*** 
(0.065) 
0.399*** 
(0.065) 
Firm Size 
-0.183* 
(0.099) 
-0.192** 
(0.097) 
-0.198* 
(0.104) 
-0.195* 
(0.101) 
Firm Age 
0.045 
(0.206) 
0.011 
(0.189) 
0.096 
(0.202) 
0.038 
(0.189) 
Firm Leverage 
-0.026 
(0.490) 
-0.154 
(0.483) 
0.030 
(0.475) 
-0.121 
(0.463) 
Marketing Expense 
1.036** 
(0.432) 
0.987** 
(0.428) 
0.770* 
(0.425) 
0.777* 
(0.423) 
Tangible Assets 
0.814 
(1.274) 
0.980 
(1.272) 
0.667 
(1.207) 
0.863 
(1.186) 
Industry Tobin’s q 
0.019 
(0.151) 
-0.021 
(0.156) 
0.014 
(0.141) 
-0.015 
(0.147) 
Industry Size 
0.093 
(0.136) 
0.054 
(0.119) 
0.070 
(0.124) 
0.039 
(0.109) 
Six Sigma Implementation 
-0.202 
(0.166) 
0.178 
(0.244) 
-0.179 
(0.157) 
0.160 
(0.228) 
Operational Efficiency 
1.174*** 
(0.450) 
1.213*** 
(0.441) 
1.166*** 
(0.410) 
1.203*** 
(0.405) 
R&D Investments 
4.337* 
(2.485) 
6.149** 
(2.605) 
4.930** 
(2.156) 
6.479*** 
(2.284) 
R&D Investments 
× Six Sigma Implementation 
 
4.912** 
(2.696) 
 
4.440** 
(2.544) 
R&D Investments 
× Operational Efficiency 
 
 
5.858** 
(3.396) 
5.645** 
(3.373) 
Year Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Industry Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Number of Observations 
2920 
2920 
2920 
2920 
Wald Chi-squared 
199.48*** 
220.12*** 
207.70*** 
227.49*** 
Hansen Test 
p=0.17 
p=0.17 
p=0.19 
p=0.31 
AR1 
p<0.01 
p <0.01 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
AR2 
p=0.23 
p=0.25 
p=0.24 
p=0.25 
Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01 (one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables and two-tailed tests for 
control variables); Robust standard errors clustered by firms are in parentheses. 
 
 
 
 

 
40 
 
 
 
Table 7 Additional Test Results 
Variables 
Model 1 
High 
labor intensity 
Model 2 
Low 
labor intensity 
Model 3 
High 
geographical diversity 
Model 4 
Low 
geographical diversity 
Intercept 
-0.979 
(3.434) 
-3.570 
(2.940) 
-5.730 
(8.551) 
1.492 
(2.264) 
Lagged Financial Returns 
0.129** 
(0.062) 
0.427*** 
(0.073) 
0.298*** 
(0.085) 
0.392*** 
(0.085) 
Firm Size 
-0.057 
(0.063) 
-0.034 
(0.090) 
-0.041 
(0.084) 
-0.032 
(0.088) 
Firm Age 
-0.172 
(0.387) 
0.070 
(0.232) 
-0.465 
(0.330) 
-0.066 
(0.266) 
Firm Leverage 
-0.669 
(0.830) 
-0.272 
(0.520) 
-0.640 
(0.584) 
-0.069 
(0.689) 
Marketing Expense 
1.858* 
(1.067) 
1.207*** 
(0.414) 
0.966* 
(0.583) 
0.386 
(0.469) 
Tangible Assets 
0.318 
(1.259) 
1.072 
(1.207) 
1.395 
(1.183) 
-0.315 
(1.532) 
Industry Tobin’s q 
-0.197 
(0.222) 
0.110 
(0.143) 
0.181 
(0.143) 
-0.097 
(0.188) 
Industry Size 
0.245 
(0.153) 
-0.018 
(0.124) 
-0.038 
(0.159) 
-0.154 
(0.119) 
Six Sigma Implementation 
0.680* 
(0.383) 
-0.137 
(0.183) 
0.434** 
(0.212) 
-0.299 
(0.204) 
Operational Efficiency 
1.512*** 
(0.472) 
0.984** 
(0.403) 
1.193*** 
(0.435) 
1.046** 
(0.483) 
R&D Investments 
5.079* 
(3.000) 
2.751* 
(1.495) 
3.649** 
(1.456) 
5.527** 
(2.591) 
R&D Investments 
× Six Sigma Implementation 
5.932* 
(4.605) 
0.726 
(2.493) 
3.309** 
(1.773) 
-2.608 
(2.781) 
R&D Investments 
× Operational Efficiency 
10.576** 
(5.999) 
4.719* 
(3.124) 
5.763* 
(3.810) 
-2.064 
(3.251) 
Year Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Industry Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Number of Observations 
1124 
1796 
1302 
1618 
Wald Chi-squared 
96.34*** 
298.38*** 
145.34*** 
215.33*** 
Hansen Test 
p=0.68 
p=0.56 
p=0.98 
p=0.97 
AR1 
p<0.01 
p <0.01 
p<0.01 
p <0.01 
AR2 
p=0.55 
p=0.28 
p=0.48 
p=0.49 
Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01 (one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables and two-tailed tests for 
control variables); Robust standard errors clustered by firms are in parentheses. 
 
 

 
41 
 
 
 
Table 8 Robustness Test Results 
Variables 
Model 1 
Measure Operational 
Efficiency based on 
inventory turnover 
Model 2 
Compare different 
categories of Six 
Sigma implementation 
Model 3 
Replace Six Sigma 
Implementation with 
ISO 9000 Adoption 
Intercept 
-1.298 
(2.937) 
-0.585 
(2.198) 
-0.252 
(3.190) 
Lagged Financial Returns 
0.419*** 
(0.059) 
0.396*** 
(0.063) 
0.388*** 
(0.063) 
Firm Size 
-0.050 
(0.098) 
-0.117 
(0.113) 
-0.116 
(0.143) 
Firm Age 
-0.037 
(0.252) 
-0.036 
(0.155) 
-0.070 
(0.170) 
Firm Leverage 
-0.469 
(0.480) 
0.018 
(0.587) 
0.137 
(0.716) 
Marketing Expense 
1.208** 
(0.603) 
0.546 
(0.426) 
1.241** 
(0.531) 
Tangible Assets 
-0.100 
(1.077) 
0.358 
(0.867) 
0.683 
(0.927) 
Industry Tobin’s q 
-0.004 
(0.160) 
0.003 
(0.130) 
0.031 
(0.142) 
Industry Size 
0.129 
(0.117) 
-0.032 
(0.113) 
-0.070 
(0.148) 
Six Sigma Implementation 
0.106 
(0.223) 
 
 
Advanced Six Sigma Implementation 
 
0.408 
(0.440) 
 
General Six Sigma Implementation 
 
0.236 
(0.180) 
 
ISO 9000 Adoption 
 
 
0.440 
(0.339) 
Operational Efficiency 
1.191** 
(0.470) 
1.151*** 
(0.359) 
0.952** 
(0.369) 
R&D Investments 
4.673** 
(1.904) 
5.501** 
(2.148) 
5.997*** 
(2.117) 
R&D Investments 
× Six Sigma Implementation 
4.735** 
(2.482) 
 
 
R&D Investments 
× Advanced Six Sigma Implementation 
 
8.010* 
(5.668) 
 
R&D Investments 
× General Six Sigma Implementation 
 
2.814 
(2.317) 
 
R&D Investments 
× ISO 9000 Adoption 
 
 
4.947* 
(3.854) 
R&D Investments 
× Operational Efficiency 
9.800** 
(4.818) 
5.243** 
(3.028) 
6.702** 
(3.892) 
Year Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Industry Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Number of Observations 
2920 
2920 
2920 
Wald Chi-squared 
192.22*** 
242.58*** 
205.39*** 
Hansen Test 
p=0.34 
p=0.39 
p=0.45 
AR1 
p<0.01 
p<0.01 
p <0.01 
AR2 
p=0.14 
p=0.27 
p=0.26 

 
42 
 
 
 
Table 8 Robustness Test Results (Continued) 
Variables 
Model 4 
Include R&D 
Investments < 25% 
Model 5 
Include squared term 
of R&D Investments 
Model 6 
Include lagged R&D 
investments 
Intercept 
0.075 
(2.155) 
0.096 
(2.526) 
-0.953 
(2.232) 
Lagged Financial Returns 
0.352*** 
(0.057) 
0.399*** 
(0.065) 
0.414*** 
(0.065) 
Firm Size 
-0.175** 
(0.082) 
-0.195* 
(0.101) 
-0.105 
(0.094) 
Firm Age 
0.048 
(0.166) 
0.037 
(0.190) 
-0.008 
(0.177) 
Firm Leverage 
-0.267 
(0.422) 
-0.118 
(0.464) 
-0.116 
(0.433) 
Marketing Expense 
0.850** 
(0.375) 
0.776* 
(0.423) 
0.856** 
(0.407) 
Tangible Assets 
1.408 
(0.928) 
0.869 
(1.189) 
0.932 
(1.054) 
Industry Tobin’s q 
-0.025 
(0.149) 
-0.016 
(0.145) 
0.073 
(0.130) 
Industry Size 
0.032 
(0.097) 
0.039 
(0.109) 
0.039 
(0.096) 
Six Sigma Implementation 
0.079 
(0.200) 
0.159 
(0.228) 
0.108 
(0.214) 
Operational Efficiency 
1.476*** 
(0.365) 
1.201*** 
(0.404) 
1.082*** 
(0.386) 
R&D Investments 
5.803*** 
(2.089) 
6.498*** 
(2.296) 
4.623** 
(2.347) 
R&D Investments2 
 
-0.126 
(1.218) 
 
One-year Lagged R&D Investments 
 
 
2.169* 
(1.312) 
Two-year Lagged R&D Investments 
 
 
-0.485 
(0.372) 
R&D Investments 
× Six Sigma Implementation 
3.266* 
(2.268) 
4.420** 
(2.549) 
3.761* 
(2.455) 
R&D Investments 
× Operational Efficiency 
5.946* 
(3.848) 
5.601** 
(3.318) 
5.352** 
(3.116) 
Year Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Industry Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Number of Observations 
2855 
2920 
2909 
Wald Chi-squared 
243.54*** 
228.38*** 
250.71*** 
Hansen Test 
p=0.33 
p=0.30 
p=0.23 
AR1 
p <0.01 
p <0.01 
p <0.01 
AR2 
p=0.32 
p=0.25 
p=0.24 
 
 
 
 
 

 
43 
 
 
 
Table 8 Robustness Test Results (Continued) 
Variables 
Model 7 
Include the two-year lag 
of dependent variable 
Model 8 
Use lagged values in t-2 
to t-4 as instruments 
Model 9 
Perform random 
effect estimation 
Intercept 
0.986 
(2.424) 
0.067 
(2.588) 
-0.547*** 
(0.158) 
Lagged Financial Returns 
0.398*** 
(0.060) 
0.411*** 
(0.068) 
0.563*** 
(0.046) 
Two-year Lagged Financial Returns 
0.071 
(0.056) 
 
 
Firm Size 
-0.184 
(0.136) 
-0.185* 
(0.113) 
-0.005 
(0.011) 
Firm Age 
-0.006 
(0.223) 
0.018 
(0.194) 
-0.006 
(0.020) 
Firm Leverage 
0.195 
(0.717) 
0.173 
(0.527) 
-0.071 
(0.094) 
Marketing Expense 
0.411 
(0.509) 
0.779* 
(0.464) 
0.449*** 
(0.120) 
Tangible Assets 
1.030 
(1.006) 
0.636 
(1.277) 
0.486*** 
(0.129) 
Industry Tobin’s q 
-0.003 
(0.138) 
-0.007 
(0.190) 
-0.007 
(0.044) 
Industry Size 
-0.053 
(0.116) 
0.022 
(0.111) 
0.011 
(0.011) 
Six Sigma Implementation 
0.166 
(0.210) 
0.188 
(0.248) 
0.075** 
(0.032) 
Operational Efficiency 
1.077*** 
(0.353) 
1.391*** 
(0.482) 
0.683*** 
(0.177) 
R&D Investments 
5.703*** 
(2.084) 
7.094*** 
(2.472) 
1.034*** 
(0.387) 
R&D Investments 
× Six Sigma Implementation 
3.552* 
(2.401) 
4.510* 
(2.885) 
1.070*** 
(0.354) 
R&D Investments 
× Operational Efficiency 
6.448** 
(3.298) 
6.805** 
(4.095) 
3.300* 
(2.438) 
Year Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Industry Dummies 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Number of Observations 
2909 
2920 
2920 
Wald Chi-squared 
272.66*** 
212.92*** 
704.26*** 
Hansen Test 
p=0.14 
p=0.26 
 
AR1 
p <0.01 
p <0.01 
 
AR2 
p=0.96 
p=0.27 
 
R-squared 
 
 
0.60 
Notes: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, and ***p<0.01 (one-tailed tests for hypothesized variables and two-tailed tests for 
control variables); Robust standard errors clustered by firms are in parentheses.