TITLE: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12848
---

LBS Research Online
W Hwang, N Bakshi and V DeMiguel
Wholesale price contracts for reliable supply
Article
This version is available in the LBS Research Online repository: https://lbsresearch.london.edu/
id/eprint/938/
Hwang, W, Bakshi, N and DeMiguel, V
(2018)
Wholesale price contracts for reliable supply.
Production and Operations Management, 27 (6). pp. 1021-1037. ISSN 1059-1478
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12848
Wiley
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/p...
Users may download and/or print one copy of any article(s) in LBS Research Online for purposes of
research and/or private study. Further distribution of the material, or use for any commercial gain, is
not permitted.

Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Woonam Hwang
HEC Paris, hwang@hec.fr
Nitin Bakshi
David Eccles School of Business, The University of Utah, nitin.bakshi@eccles.utah.edu
Victor DeMiguel
London Business School, avmiguel@london.edu
Firms can enhance the reliability of their supply through process improvement and overproduction. In
decentralized supply chains, however, these mitigating actions may be the supplier’s responsibility yet are
often not contractible. We show that wholesale price contracts, despite their simplicity, can perform well in
inducing reliable supply, and we identify when and why they perform well. This could explain the widespread
use of wholesale price contracts in business settings with unreliable supply. In particular, we investigate
how the performance of wholesale price contracts depends on the interplay between the nature of supply
risk and the type of procurement process. Supply risk is classiﬁed as random capacity when events such
as labor strike disrupt the ﬁrm’s ability to produce, or as random yield when manufacturing defects result
in yield losses. The procurement process is classiﬁed as control when the buyer determines the production
quantity, or as delegation when instead the supplier does. Analyzing the four possible combinations, we ﬁnd
that for random capacity, irrespective of the procurement process type, contract performance monotonically
increases with the supplier’s bargaining power; thus, wholesale price contracts perform well when the supplier
is powerful. However, this monotonic trend is reversed for random yield with control: in that case, wholesale
price contracts perform well when instead the buyer is powerful. For random yield with delegation, wholesale
price contracts perform well when either party is powerful.
Key words : supplier reliability, random capacity, random yield, wholesale price contracts
History : October 13, 2017
1.
Introduction
In an era of outsourcing and globalization, reliability of supply is an increasingly important aspect
of supply chain management. Supply disruptions are often classiﬁed as either random capacity or
random yield (Wang et al. 2010). Random capacity disruptions aﬀect the supplier’s production
capacity, as when there is a labor strike or machine breakdown. By contrast, random yield disrup-
tions aﬀect the supplier’s production yield–for example, when ﬁrms in the semiconductor sector
or in high-tech electronics suﬀer from manufacturing defects. A critical aspect of such disruptions
is that suppliers can exert ex ante eﬀort to improve their processes and thus their reliability. For
instance, suppliers can proactively invest in labor relations to avoid strikes (Lexology 2010), or
undertake projects to improve yield (Zhang and Armer 2013). However, such eﬀort is often costly
1

2
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
and not contractible. Since suppliers capture only a fraction of the overall margin, they do not
fully internalize the consequences of suboptimal eﬀort, and this leads to a moral hazard problem.
There is a vast literature on coordinating contracts that deals with aligning incentives in a supply
chain. Indeed, we verify the conventional wisdom that the moral hazard problem just mentioned
can be resolved by using contracts that incorporate a penalty for the nondelivery of goods and
make the supplier the residual claimant. However, such coordinating penalty contracts can be
quite diﬃcult to implement. For instance, the supplier’s limited liability may induce an upper limit
on the imposed penalty, and thus impede coordination (Sappington 1983). Another problem is
that suppliers may view penalties as unfair and hence resist agreeing to such contracts (LinkedIn
Discussion 2011). Therefore, ﬁrms often prefer to use wholesale price contracts that are easier to
implement (e.g., Kalkancı et al. 2011).
For instance, wholesale price contracts are often employed in semiconductor manufacturing,
where yield issues are a serious concern. In work done jointly with managers at KLA-Tencor Cor-
poration and based on interviews with ten “fabless” companies, Chatterjee et al. (1999) report the
widespread use of wholesale price contracts for outsourcing production of integrated circuits–which
remains the preferred mode of contracting nowadays in the semiconductor industry. In conversa-
tions with the authors, a leading semiconductor foundry based in East Asia acknowledged that
it typically uses wholesale price contracts regardless of the buyer and duration of the interaction,
despite concerns about improving yield. Wholesale price contracts are also frequently used in the
agriculture industry. In ﬂoriculture, for instance, wholesalers often outsource the cultivation of
ﬂowers and plants to contract growers (MacDonald et al. 2004). Due to the nature of ﬂoriculture,
contract growers experience yield issues. Nevertheless, MacDonald et al. (2004) document that
wholesale price contracts are typically used.
Motivated by this evidence that wholesale price contracts are often preferred, we investigate
when and why such contracts perform well–that is, result in high supply chain eﬃciency.1 We
examine in particular the four cases typically observed in practice, which are characterized by
the combination of two types of supply risk and two types of procurement process. As described
previously, the two types of supply risk correspond to random capacity and random yield; the two
types of procurement process correspond to control and delegation.
The procurement process is classiﬁed as control if the buyer determines the production quantity
or as delegation if the supplier does. As with the type of supply risk, the type of procurement
process is often determined by the business context. For instance, the control scenario is observed
in the ﬂoriculture industry. Although contract growers experience yield issues, the wholesalers pro-
vide them with the inputs of seedlings, fertilizers, and chemicals—thus eﬀectively controlling the
production quantity (MacDonald et al. 2004). By contrast, we observe the delegation scenario in

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
3
Figure 1
Performance of Wholesale Price Contract As a Function of Supplier’s Bargaining Power
Increasing
Decreasing
Increasing
V-Shaped
Control
Delegation
Random Capacity
Random Yield
Procurement
Process Type
Type of Supply Risk
the semiconductor industry. Semiconductor manufacturers, such as Samsung and TSMC, often
experience severe yield issues but can identify most defects through internal testing. These manu-
facturers therefore inﬂate their production quantities beyond the buyer’s order, so that they can
meet customer demand without shipping any defects.
With regard to the four cases considered, we summarize our main ﬁndings in the 2×2 matrix in
Figure 1. The two columns correspond to the two types of supply risk, and the two rows to the two
types of procurement process. For each of the four cases, the ﬁgure indicates whether the eﬃciency
of the wholesale price contract is increasing, decreasing, or V-shaped with respect to the supplier’s
bargaining power.
Speciﬁcally, in the random capacity case—irrespective of the procurement process type—the
eﬃciency of the wholesale price contract increases monotonically with the supplier’s bargaining
power (and with the wholesale price).2 The reason is that a more powerful supplier has a bigger
margin and thus a greater incentive to invest eﬀort and thereby improve eﬃciency. This suggests
that, if the supplier is powerful, a wholesale price contract may be preferred to more complex
contracts that perform better in theory but are diﬃcult to implement in practice.
In the random yield case, however, if the buyer controls the production quantity decision then the
monotonic trend in eﬃciency associated with the wholesale price contract is reversed.3 As before,
a more powerful supplier, with his bigger margin, has a greater incentive to invest in improving
reliability. However, in addition to the supplier’s eﬀort, overproduction (inﬂating the order quantity
above demand) can also mitigate yield risk—and a more powerful supplier gives the buyer less
incentive to inﬂate the order quantity. Importantly, the buyer’s order quantity has a dominating
eﬀect on the supply chain eﬃciency compared with the supplier’s eﬀort, because the order quantity
plays a dual role: it directly inﬂuences proportional yield and indirectly generates incentives for
the supplier to invest eﬀort via a larger order size. As a result, the eﬃciency of the wholesale price
contract decreases with the supplier’s bargaining power, and thus the wholesale price contract may
be preferred when the buyer is powerful.
If, in the random yield case, the buyer delegates the production quantity decision to the supplier,
then eﬃciency exhibits a V-shaped pattern: eﬃciency is high when either the buyer or the supplier

4
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
is powerful. Speciﬁcally, eﬃciency is monotonically decreasing in the supplier’s bargaining power
(as in the control scenario) up to a threshold value, whereafter it increases monotonically. It is
intuitive that, since the supplier determines the production quantity, the buyer’s order quantity no
longer plays a dual role, but can provide the supplier with only an indirect incentive to exert eﬀort.
Therefore, even though the eﬃciency trend parallels the one observed under the control scenario up
to a threshold value of the supplier’s bargaining power, beyond that point it is no longer proﬁtable
for the buyer to inﬂate production. Then the supplier unilaterally determines both the eﬀort and
the production quantity, and thus eﬃciency is increasing in the supplier’s bargaining power as in
the random capacity case.
Overall, in the face of unreliable supply, our analysis provides guidance as to when and why the
wholesale price contract is preferable to a more complex coordinating contract.
2.
Related Literature
Supply reliability has received considerable attention in recent years. Early studies have focused
on situations in which supply reliability is exogenously given, and explored buyer-led risk man-
agement strategies such as multisourcing (Babich et al. 2007, Dada et al. 2007, Federgruen and
Yang 2008, 2009b, Tang and Kouvelis 2011, Tomlin and Wang 2005, Tomlin 2006, 2009); carrying
inventory (Tomlin 2006); or using a backup production option (Yang et al. 2009). Building upon
this research, later studies expanded the scope of attention to endogenous reliability. Some studies
investigate how buyers can intervene directly to improve suppliers’ reliability (Liu et al. 2010, Wang
et al. 2010). Others examine how buyers can indirectly induce suppliers to improve either product
quality (Baiman et al. 2000, Kaya and ¨Ozer 2009) or reliability—for example, by way of horizontal
competition (Federgruen and Yang 2009a) or investment subsidies and/or order inﬂation (Tang
et al. 2014).4
Of greater relevance to our work are papers exploring, in the case of endogenous reliability,
contractual incentives as a means to induce suppliers’ investment in reliability. However, the coor-
dinating contract invariably takes on a complex form.5 In the context of vaccine manufacturing, for
instance, Dai et al. (2016) identify the coordinating contract that can induce suppliers to deliver
products on time. This contract combines buy-back features with a rebate for timely delivery (in
eﬀect, a penalty for late delivery). Similarly, Ang et al. (2016) ﬁnd that, when facing the risk of
supply disruption, ﬁrms have to resort to coordinating contracts that impose penalties—thereby
inducing their suppliers to choose appropriate upstream network partners. Yet as discussed in the
introduction, such penalty features are diﬃcult to implement in practice.
At the same time, some theoretical and behavioral studies have argued that, in practice, simple
contracts are often preferred to complex coordinating contracts. In this strand of literature, the

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
5
popularity of simple contracts is attributed to two transaction-cost arguments: simple contracts
are (i) easier to design and negotiate (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1987, Kalkancı et al. 2011, 2014,
Lariviere and Porteus 2001) and (ii) easier to enforce legally (Schwartz and Watson 2004). A few
papers in economics and supply chain management have also explored the eﬃciency of simple
contracts. The economics papers that assess the performance of simple contracts (e.g., Chu and
Sappington 2007, Rogerson 2003) focus on their mathematical form, such as diﬀerent combinations
of a ﬁxed price and a cost reimbursement scheme. As such, they do not consider the enabling role
of operational factors. In supply chain management, Cachon (2004), Lariviere and Porteus (2001),
and Perakis and Roels (2007) investigate the performance of wholesale price contracts and the role
of operational factors in settings with demand uncertainty.
In this paper, we take our cue from and build upon the above literature. Indeed, as we mentioned
in the introduction, we observe widespread use of wholesale price contracts even in the context
of endogenous supply reliability. However, the insights obtained from the literature dealing with
demand uncertainty we mentioned above do not carry over to the case of supply uncertainty. The
latter setting, and hence our own model, poses two distinct challenges. First, besides investing in
process improvement, ﬁrms can inﬂuence yield distribution by inﬂating the production quantity;
inﬂating the order quantity does not inﬂuence the demand distribution when demand is uncertain.
Second, the contract performance critically depends on the interplay between the nature of supply
risk and the two types of procurement process (control versus delegation). We therefore focus on
the performance of wholesale price contracts when supply is unreliable.
Our objective in this research is to focus on the widely-used and easy-to-implement wholesale
price contract and understand its eﬃciency properties. While we do characterize the coordinating
contract for the various scenarios that we study, we do so for illustrating the benchmark perfor-
mance and oﬀering an alternative to the wholesale price contract when its eﬃciency is low. However,
to keep the focus of our manuscript, we do not consider other contracts with intermediate eﬃciency.
A case-in-point is the two-part tariﬀ(Feldstein 1972). This particular contract form can coordinate
the supply chain in our setting. However, the coordinating contract is such that the buyer pays
the supplier for delivered units, and the supplier makes a lump-sum payment to the buyer to “buy
out” the business and become the residual claimant. Such bidirectional payment exchanges may
be diﬃcult to implement in some situations, and they are observed mainly as slotting allowances
in the retail sector (Lariviere and Padmanabhan 1997). Moreover, capital-constrained suppliers
cannot always aﬀord to “buy out” the buyer. It is also worth noting that although two-part tariﬀs
with unidirectional payment do not coordinate in our setting, they may yield greater supply chain
eﬃciency than a wholesale price contract. For instance, for random yield with control, a two-part
tariﬀcan achieve higher eﬃciency if the ﬁrms agree on a low wholesale price (see Figure 5) and

6
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Figure 2
Sequence of Events in a Decentralized Supply Chain
Buyer orders 
q units
Supplier determines 
effort e and production 
quantity x
Random loss 
is realized
Supplier 
delivers 𝑞"
Time
Ordering/Production 
Planning Stage
Buyer fulfills 
demand
Production & Delivery Stage
Supplier and buyer 
bargain over 
wholesale price w
Bargaining Stage
adjust the lump sum payment from the buyer to the supplier to allocate the proﬁt to the ﬁrms
depending on their relative bargaining power. However, as stated before, since we identify a coordi-
nating contract for cases when wholesale price contracts perform poorly, we do not further analyze
two-part tariﬀs in this paper.
3.
Basic Model
We now describe our basic model. In §4 and §5, we show how the basic model can be applied to
the cases with random capacity and random yield, respectively. We consider a supply chain with
one supplier (he) and one buyer (she) who faces deterministic demand for a single selling season.
Both the supplier and buyer are risk neutral. Demand D is modeled as being deterministic so that
we can focus on the eﬀect of supply uncertainty; this approach is in line with a large share of the
existing literature (Deo and Corbett 2009, Dong and Tomlin 2012, G¨um¨u¸s et al. 2012, Yang et al.
2009, 2012). We will model supply uncertainty with uniform distributions in §4 and §5, and we
check the robustness of our results with general distributions in Appendix A.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the sequence of events is as follows. After observing the demand D,
the buyer and supplier bargain over the wholesale price w. Next, the buyer orders quantity q
from the supplier, and the supplier then exerts unveriﬁable eﬀort e to improve his reliability and
chooses production quantity x. Given the eﬀort e, a corresponding random loss is associated with
production; as a result, the supplier delivers ˜q ≤q units. Finally, the buyer fulﬁlls demand at unit
price p.
In principle, we would like to analyze the four cases illustrated in Figure 1: {random capacity,
random yield} × {control, delegation}. Note, however, that the supplier’s production quantity
decision is relevant only for the case of random yield with delegation. This is because it is not
optimal for the supplier to inﬂate his production quantity under random capacity and because
the supplier is not allowed to inﬂate his production quantity under random yield with control. We
therefore assume x = q until §5.2, where we study the case of random yield with delegation.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
7
We introduce our basic model in terms of the linear wholesale price contract, where the buyer
pays a wholesale price w for each delivered unit.6 The expected proﬁts for buyer and supplier can
thus be written as
πb(q,e,w) = pS(q,e) −wy(q,e),
(1)
πs(q,e,w) = wy(q,e) −c(q,e),
where y(q,e), S(q,e), and c(q,e) are the expected values for the delivered quantity, sales, and cost,
respectively. In the centralized supply chain, there is no bargaining over the wholesale price w, and
the order quantity is the same as the production quantity, denoted by q. All decisions are made by a
central planner who seeks to maximize the expected supply chain proﬁt, Π(q,e) = pS(q,e)−c(q,e).
In the decentralized supply chain, the buyer and supplier ﬁrst bargain over the wholesale price w.
To model this process, we use the Nash bargaining model with asymmetric bargaining power
(Binmore et al. 1986, Roth 1979). Let π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) be the equilibrium expected proﬁts of
the buyer and supplier, respectively, once the wholesale price w has been determined. Each ﬁrm
bargains while anticipating those expected proﬁts, and the resulting wholesale price solves the
optimization problem
max
w
π∗
s(w)απ∗
b(w)1−α,
(2)
where α ∈(0,1) is the supplier’s relative bargaining power. We assume that the ﬁrms will reach an
agreement provided the resulting expected proﬁt is nonnegative (i.e., both ﬁrms’ threat points are
zero).7
Once the wholesale price is negotiated, the buyer acts as a Stackelberg leader by deciding the
order quantity. However, the buyer faces a moral hazard problem because the supplier’s eﬀort is
not contractible. The buyer’s decision problem, which determines the ﬁrms’ equilibrium proﬁts,
π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w), can therefore be written as follows:
max
q
πb(q,e,w),
(3)
s.t.
e = argmax
e≥0
πs(q,e,w),
πs(q,e,w) ≥0.
The ﬁrst constraint ensures incentive compatibility for the supplier—in other words, the supplier
chooses the eﬀort e that maximizes his expected proﬁt. The second constraint ensures the supplier’s
participation by providing the supplier with at least his reservation proﬁt, which we normalize to
zero.

8
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
A brief discussion about this model is in order. It is prohibitively diﬃcult to solve problem (2)
analytically because this problem takes as an input the solution to problem (3). However, we can
greatly simplify the analysis by showing that we can represent the supplier’s relative bargaining
power not only by α but also—and equivalently—by the wholesale price w. Interpreting the whole-
sale price w as the supplier’s relative bargaining power allows us to just focus on problem (3)
without solving problem (2). This approach suﬃces for our analysis, because we are interested
only in how the expected proﬁts of buyer and supplier, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w), depend on their relative
bargaining power. For that purpose, we establish the following result.
Proposition 1. The optimal solution w∗to problem (2) is monotonically increasing in α if both
π∗
s(w) and π∗
b(w) are continuous in w and either π∗
s(w) is strictly increasing or π∗
b(w) is strictly
decreasing in w.8
Appendix B includes additional results showing that, for all cases we consider, the requirements
of Proposition 1 hold under some mild conditions. Proposition 1 suggests that a higher whole-
sale price w implies that the supplier has greater bargaining power. Therefore, in the rest of the
paper, we will solve only problem (3) and interpret the wholesale price w as the supplier’s relative
bargaining power.
To avoid trivial results and simplify the exposition, we make the following assumption.
Assumption 1. The following conditions hold:
(i) In the centralized supply chain, it is proﬁtable to produce a strictly positive amount even when
the supplier does not exert any eﬀort; that is, ∂Π(q,e)/∂q|q=0,e=0 > 0.
(ii) If the buyer is indiﬀerent among order quantities Q ⊂[0,D], then she chooses the largest
quantity q = supQ.
Assumption 1(i) ensures that the optimal production quantity in the centralized supply chain will
be strictly positive. Assumption 1(ii) implies that the buyer will satisfy demand provided her proﬁt
is not hurt, thus precluding outcomes that are Pareto suboptimal. We commence our analysis with
the random capacity scenario.
4.
Random Capacity
Here we model disruptions that destroy part or all of the supplier’s capacity (Ciarallo et al. 1994,
Wang et al. 2010), where the capacity loss is independent of the production quantity. Examples
include labor strikes, machine breakdowns, ﬁre, etc. In §4.1, we show how the basic model of §3
can be applied to the case of random capacity, state our assumptions, and characterize the optimal
decisions in the centralized supply chain. We analyze the decentralized setup in §4.2.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
9
4.1.
Model and Centralized Supply Chain
In the random capacity case, production quantity does not aﬀect the capacity loss. Hence the
supplier has no incentive to inﬂate his production quantity beyond the buyer’s order quantity. We
therefore assume, without loss of generality, that the production quantity x is equal to the order
quantity q (i.e., the scenario of random capacity with delegation converges to the one of random
capacity with control). Consequently, the supplier delivers a random quantity ˜q = min{q,K −ξ},
where q is the order quantity, K is the supplier’s nominal capacity, and ξ is the random capacity
loss. We assume the random loss to be ξ = ψ/(e+1), where ψ is uniformly distributed in [0,K] and
hence the support of ξ is [0,K/(e+1)]. The density and cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the random loss ξ—conditional on the eﬀort e—are g(ξ | e) = (e + 1)/K and G(ξ | e) = (e + 1)ξ/K,
respectively.
Finally, the expected delivered quantity is y(q,e) = Eξ[˜q] and the expected sales are S(q,e) =
Eξ[min{˜q,D}]. In Appendix A, we extend this model to the case where the random loss ξ follows
a general distribution.9
We assume that the supplier initiates production after the random loss is realized. Hence the
expected cost is c(q,e) = cy(q,e) + v(e), where c is the unit production cost and v(e) is the cost of
eﬀort to improve reliability. We shall also need the following technical assumption.
Assumption 2. The following conditions hold:
(i) The cost of eﬀort is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable, and satisﬁes v(0) = 0, and v′(e) > 0
and v′′(e) ≥0 for e > 0.
(ii) In equilibrium, the eﬀort level is strictly positive.
Part (i) implies that the cost of the supplier’s eﬀort is convex and increasing. Part (ii) precludes
the trivial case of zero eﬀort level, thus simplifying the exposition.
We ﬁnd that if the order quantity is smaller than demand (q ≤D) then so is the delivered
quantity ˜q, in which case the buyer is able to sell everything. As a result, the expected sales
and delivered quantities coincide (S(q,e) = y(q,e)) and increase with the order quantity q. Yet
producing a quantity that exceeds demand does not aﬀect the likelihood of satisfying that demand,
and so does not aﬀect expected sales, because the capacity loss is independent of the order quantity.
Therefore, the expected sales function S(q,e) has a kink at q = D. The technical properties of
S(q,e) and y(q,e) are summarized in Lemma 1 (see Appendix B.1).
We now characterize the optimal order quantity and eﬀort level in the centralized supply chain.
Proposition 2. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, in the centralized supply chain, there exist
unique optimal decisions (qo,eo), under which the optimal order quantity qo is equal to demand D.

10
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
The optimal order quantity qo is equal to the demand D because producing more than D does
not increase expected sales. Hence the only way to mitigate risk is for the supplier to exert eﬀort.
Given that eﬀort is unveriﬁable, we next address the eﬃciency of the wholesale price contract in a
decentralized supply chain.
4.2.
Performance of the Wholesale Price Contract
We study the wholesale price contract and show that supply chain eﬃciency is generally increasing
in the wholesale price, which is a proxy for the supplier’s bargaining power (per Proposition 1).
Therefore, a wholesale price contract may be the preferred mode of contracting for supply chains
with suﬃciently powerful suppliers—even if a theoretically superior (yet complex) contract exists.
Proposition 3. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, in the random capacity case, the eﬃ-
ciency of the wholesale price contract is monotonically increasing in w if p < 3c.
The intuition behind this observed eﬃciency trend is as follows. The buyer will typically order D
units for any “reasonable” size of the gross margin, p −c. Then, a more powerful supplier (higher
wholesale price) has a bigger margin and thus a greater incentive to invest eﬀort, and thereby
improve eﬃciency. We illustrate the eﬃciency trend visually in Panel (a) of Figure 3. Note that
the supplier with all the bargaining power will choose the maximum wholesale price w = p, and the
buyer with all the bargaining power will choose the minimum wholesale price w = c, as follows from
Proposition 1. Therefore, it suﬃces to use the wholesale price contract in achieving high supply
chain eﬃciency if the supplier is powerful.
Then which contract should ﬁrms use when the buyer has greater bargaining power? It is a well-
known result that under a moral hazard setting with risk-neutral players, the ﬁrst-best outcome is
achieved by transferring the risk to the agent and making the agent the residual claimant. We ﬁnd
that unit-penalty contracts coordinate the supply chain through this mechanism, while allowing
for ﬂexibility in the allocation of proﬁts between buyer and supplier. Under such contracts, the
buyer imposes a penalty z for each unit of shortage, while paying w for each unit delivered. The
next result formalizes our ﬁndings.
Proposition 4. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there exists ¯χ > 0 such that the following
unit penalty contracts coordinate the supply chain: w∗= p −χ and z∗= χ for χ ∈[0, ¯χ); and the
buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb = χD.
By setting the unit-penalty z equal to her unit margin p −w, the buyer transfers the entire risk to
the supplier and thereby induces the supplier’s ﬁrst-best eﬀort. Flexible proﬁt allocation is achieved
by varying the unit penalty z∗= χ, where the upper bound on the penalty ¯χ ensures that the
supplier earns nonnegative proﬁt and that the buyer does not order more than D to exploit the
high penalty fee.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
11
Figure 3
Eﬃciency of Wholesale Price Contracts under Random Capacity and Contract Choice
Panel (a) depicts the supply chain eﬃciency (vertical axis) for random capacity when the cost of eﬀort is θem and the
wholesale price (horizontal axis) ranges between the unit production cost c and the unit price p; here D = 100,K =
120,p = 10,c = 2,θ = 100, and m = 2. Panel (b) depicts the transaction cost T of the coordinating contract and
illustrates when wholesale price contracts are preferred to the coordinating contract.
2
4
6
8
10
75
80
85
90
95
100
Wholesale Price
Efficiency (%)
(a) Eﬃciency of wholesale price contracts
Wholesale   price   
Eﬃciency   
100   %   
Transac+on   cost   T   
Wholesale   price      
contract   preferred   
wt   
100   -­‐   T   %   
(b) Contract choice
Although the unit penalty contract coordinates in principle, there are complexities associated
with its implementation that may make wholesale price contacts preferable. More speciﬁcally, unit
penalty contracts have the following two sources of transaction cost.10 First, suppliers may view
penalties as unfair and may resist such contracts; this would likely increase both the length and cost
of the bargaining process (LinkedIn Discussion 2011). Second, the bounded rationality and limited
cognitive ability of individuals prevents them from fully optimizing the contractual parameters,
even with contract forms that seem to be relatively simple.11
Let T represent this transaction cost, which we express as a percentage of the centralized supply
chain proﬁt. For wholesale prices w such that the eﬃciency of the wholesale price contract exceeds
100 −T%, it is optimal—from the aggregate supply chain perspective—to use the wholesale price
contract. This is illustrated in Panel (b) of Figure 3, which shows the transaction cost T of the
unit penalty contract as well as the wholesale price wt for which the eﬃciency of the wholesale
price contract is 100 −T%. It follows that, for any wholesale price w ≥wt, it is optimal to use the
wholesale price contract from an aggregate supply chain perspective.
Moreover, one can argue that the wholesale price contract is optimal not only from the aggregate
supply chain’s perspective but also from the individual ﬁrm’s perspective. In other words: the
wholesale price contract oﬀers a Pareto improvement (with respect to the coordinating contract),
for buyer and supplier both, when transaction costs are taken into account. To see this, we should
compare the two contracts under the same level of supplier bargaining power α. We can then
show the following: if the transaction cost T is above some threshold, then there always exists

12
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
a set of wholesale prices such that the wholesale price contract achieves a Pareto improvement.
The intuition is that, in the theoretically extreme case when T approaches 100%, both ﬁrms’
expected proﬁts approach zero. Since we can always ﬁnd a wholesale price contract under which
both ﬁrms earn strictly positive proﬁts, it follows that wholesale price contracts can oﬀer Pareto
improvement when the transaction cost T is suﬃciently high. For more details, see Proposition 15
in Appendix B.4.
Next we study how our insights change in the context of random yield.
5.
Random Yield
In this section we model disruptions in which the random loss is stochastically proportional to the
production quantity; that is, a larger production quantity increases the likelihood of obtaining a
larger amount of usable output (Federgruen and Yang 2008, 2009a,b, Tang and Kouvelis 2011).
This model applies, for example, when manufacturers of semiconductor or biotech products face
uncertain yields in their manufacturing processes. The key distinguishing feature of random yield
versus random capacity is that supply risk can be mitigated not only by increasing eﬀort but also
by producing more than demand.
We study two diﬀerent cases that depend on the supplier’s decision regarding production quan-
tity. In §5.1 we examine the control scenario, in which the buyer’s order fully determines the
supplier’s production quantity decision. In §5.2 we investigate the delegation scenario, in which the
supplier independently determines his production quantity after receiving the buyer’s order. For
each case, we show how the basic model of §3 can be applied and discuss the performance of the
wholesale price contract.
5.1.
Control Scenario
In the control scenario, the supplier’s production quantity equals the buyer’s order quantity. Recall
from the introduction that, in the ﬂoriculture industry, where yield issues are an important concern,
wholesalers often outsource production to contract growers and provide them with seedlings, fertil-
izers, and chemicals; thus the wholesalers eﬀectively control contract growers’ production quantities
(MacDonald et al. 2004). More generally, Federgruen and Yang (2009a) argue that the control
scenario is commonly observed when the supplier cannot test the quality of the manufactured
products at his site. Full inspection at the supplier’s site is often impossible or impractical (e.g.,
Baiman et al. 2000, Balachandran and Radhakrishnan 2005). This is the case (i) when the test-
ing technology is proprietary, in which case the buyer deliberately limits—because of intellectual
property concerns—the supplier’s ability to detect failures (Doucakis 2007, p. 23); or (ii) when
the end product consists of multiple interacting components, each procured independently, which
rules out testing of any component in isolation by the supplier (Li et al. 2011). In such cases,

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
13
the supplier cannot ﬁnd out which product will pass the buyer’s quality test. Furthermore, the
buyer will seldom accept a delivery in excess of her order quantity because she incurs appraisal
cost. Therefore, the supplier has no choice but to deliver only the ordered quantity, and thus the
supplier’s production quantity must equal the buyer’s order quantity.
5.1.1.
Model and Centralized Supply Chain. The supplier delivers a random quantity
˜q = (1 −ξ)q, where q is the order quantity and ξ is the random proportional loss. To focus on the
eﬀect of the random proportional loss, we assume here that the supplier has no capacity constraints.
We further assume that the random loss is ξ = ψ/(e + 1), where ψ is uniformly distributed in
[0,1] and the support of ξ is [0,1/(e + 1)]. Let the density and CDF of the random proportional
loss be denoted h(ξ | e) = e + 1 and H(ξ | e) = (e + 1)ψ, respectively, and let E[ξ] = µe
y be the
expected random loss. Then the expected delivered quantity is y(q,e) = Eξ[˜q] and expected sales
are S(q,e) = Eξ[min{˜q,D}]. In Appendix A.2 we extend this model to the case where the random
loss ξ follows a general distribution.
We assume that the supplier incurs the production cost for all q units. This is a reasonable
assumption because yield and quality problems generally arise after all raw materials have been
put into production. Therefore, the cost is c(q,e) = cq + v(e). Assumption 2 applies also in this
random yield model.
An interesting property of the random yield model with control is that, in contrast with the
random capacity model, expected sales are increasing in the order quantity even when that quantity
exceeds demand (q > D). The reason is that the random loss is stochastically proportional to
the order quantity q, which means that ordering more could increase the supplier’s likelihood of
delivering D units and thus could increase expected sales. The technical properties of expected
sales, S(q,e), and of the expected delivered quantity, y(q,e), are summarized in Lemma 2 (see
Appendix B.2). We are now in a position to characterize optimal decisions in the centralized supply
chain.
Proposition 5. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, in the centralized supply chain with
random yield, there exist both an optimal order quantity qo and an optimal eﬀort level eo; moreover,
the optimal order quantity qo is strictly greater than the demand D.
The optimal decisions under random yield diﬀer qualitatively from those, described in Proposi-
tion 2, under random capacity; it is now optimal to order (or, equivalently, to produce) more than
the demand (qo > D). Therefore, the decision maker can increase expected proﬁt not only by exert-
ing additional eﬀort but also by ordering more. The reason is that, as we mentioned, expected sales
increase with order quantity even when the order quantity exceeds demand. We now investigate
how, in a decentralized setting, the need to coordinate both the buyer’s order inﬂation and the
supplier’s eﬀort results in dynamics that diﬀer from those under random capacity.

14
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
5.1.2.
Performance of the Wholesale Price Contract. Our main ﬁnding is that the
eﬃciency of the wholesale price contract generally decreases with the supplier’s bargaining power.
Therefore, the wholesale price contract is more likely to be preferred when the buyer is powerful.12
This result contrasts sharply with the result for random capacity, where the eﬃciency of the
wholesale price contract increases with w. The reason is as follows. Just as under random capacity,
a higher wholesale price increases the supplier’s incentive to invest in reliability, which in turn
increases eﬃciency. At the same time, however, increasing w also reduces eﬃciency by diminishing
the buyer’s incentive to inﬂate her order quantity. Moreover, the buyer’s order quantity has a
dominating eﬀect on the supply chain eﬃciency compared with the supplier’s eﬀort, because the
order quantity plays a dual role: it directly inﬂuences proportional yield and indirectly generates
incentives (via a larger order size) for the supplier to invest eﬀort. Note that the supplier bears no
overage cost, which makes a larger order quantity more eﬀective at inducing eﬀort. Therefore, the
supply chain eﬃciency—like the order quantity—decreases with the wholesale price.
We now discuss the results that lead us to conclude that eﬃciency is generally decreasing in the
wholesale price under random yield with control.
Proposition 6. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, for random yield with control, the eﬃ-
ciency of the wholesale price contract is monotonically decreasing in w for w ∈[wc,p] if either of
these suﬃcient conditions holds:
(i) v(e) = θe, and
wc = −(8pk2 −32c −2p) +
p
(8pk2 −32c −2p)2 + 4p(16k + 9)(7p + 32c)
2(16k + 9)
,
where k = 2 −
q
2θ
cD; or
(ii) wc = c, v(e) = θem where m > 1, and either θ or m is suﬃciently large.
Part (i) gives suﬃcient conditions for eﬃciency to be monotonically decreasing when the cost of
eﬀort is linear. In particular, it provides an explicit expression for the threshold wc. Part (ii) shows
that eﬃciency is decreasing in the entire range of wholesale prices—provided the cost of eﬀort is
suﬃciently large.
Figure 4 shows how the range of wholesale prices for which the suﬃcient condition in Propo-
sition 6(i) holds depends on the cost of eﬀort θ. The solid horizontal line represents the retail
price (p = 12). The dashed line shows the minimum feasible wholesale price, which is the minimum
wholesale price for which the supplier’s participation constraint can be satisﬁed; hence equilibria
exist only above this line. The line drawn through the square markers is the threshold wc given in
Proposition 6(i), and it shows that the suﬃcient conditions hold for a fairly wide range of wholesale
prices. Moreover, Proposition 6(i) gives only suﬃcient conditions and thus the monotonic trend

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
15
Figure 4
Threshold wc
This ﬁgure plots the threshold wc given in Proposition 6(i) when the cost of eﬀort θ varies from 0 to 80. Here the
parameters are D = 100,p = 12, and c = 6.
0
20
40
60
80
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Cost of Effort θ
Wholesale Price
 
 
Price p
Threshold wc
Minimum feasible w
Actual threshold
Figure 5
Eﬃciency of Wholesale Price Contracts under Random Yield with Control
This ﬁgure depicts the eﬃciency (vertical axis) under random yield with control when the wholesale price (horizontal
axis) ranges between the unit production cost c and the unit price p; here the parameters are D = 100,p = 10,c =
2,θ = 100, and m = 2. Note that, in the random yield case, if the wholesale price w is close to the unit production
cost c, then there is no feasible solution—because the supplier’s participation constraint cannot be satisﬁed.
2
4
6
8
10
80
85
90
95
100
Wholesale Price
Efficiency (%)
can hold also for wholesale prices even lower than wc. Indeed, the line drawn through triangu-
lar markers plots the actual threshold wholesale price—above which eﬃciency is monotonically
decreasing—and shows that the actual threshold is less than wc. We remark that we can only com-
pute the actual threshold numerically. Finally, for costs of eﬀort θ ≥40, the monotonic trend holds
over the entire range of feasible wholesale prices; this result is consistent with Proposition 6(ii).
To verify the robustness of our analytical ﬁndings, we conduct a comprehensive numerical inves-
tigation. Toward that end, we use the following cost function: c(q,e) = cq +θem, where c,θ > 0 and
m ≥1.

16
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Figure 5 plots supply chain eﬃciency as a function of wholesale price for the same set of param-
eters used to generate Figure 3. First of all, we observe a very robust decreasing trend in eﬃciency.
Recall that the supplier with all the bargaining power will choose the maximum wholesale price and
that the buyer with all the bargaining power will choose the minimum wholesale price. Therefore,
the eﬃciency is fairly high (about 98%) when the buyer is powerful but is relatively low (about
80%) when the supplier is powerful. We then repeat our experiment with diﬀerent parameter com-
binations, choosing seven values each for c, θ, and m in the following ranges: c ∈[0.1,5],θ ∈[1,100],
and m ∈[1,5]. We therefore perform our analysis with 73=343 diﬀerent combinations of parameters.
We ﬁnd that supply chain eﬃciency is monotonically decreasing for the entire range of wholesale
prices in 84.3% of all cases. The remaining 15.7% of cases exhibit a slight increase in eﬃciency
(typically less than 0.1%) for small w only, yet otherwise the general decreasing trend prevails.13
Having assessed the eﬃciency of the wholesale price contract, we now turn to the question of
which contract to use when the wholesale price contract results in low eﬃciency. The unit penalty
contract no longer coordinates because—even though it is optimal for the buyer to inﬂate her order
quantity above demand—the supplier shares none of the overage risk. One obvious way to share the
overage cost is through a buy-back agreement. Indeed, we ﬁnd that a unit-penalty with buy-back
contract coordinates the supply chain while allowing for arbitrary proﬁt allocation between the
buyer and supplier.14
Proposition 7. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there exists a continuum of unit-penalty
with buy-back contracts that satisfy the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions at (qo,eo) in opti-
mization problem (3), allowing for arbitrary proﬁt allocation.
We have established that our insights concerning random yield with control are substantially
diﬀerent from those in the case of random capacity. This underscores the pivotal role that the type
of supply risk plays in the performance of contracts under unreliable supply. Next we investigate
what happens when the buyer delegates the production quantity decision to the supplier under
random yield.
5.2.
Delegation Scenario
There are a number of contexts in which the buyer may delegate the production quantity decision
to the supplier (see e.g., Chick et al. 2008 and Tang et al. 2014). In these contexts, it is possible
that the buyer inﬂates the order quantity above demand, and the supplier further inﬂates the
production quantity. This aspect of the scenario introduces an additional source of ineﬃciency into
the supply chain: the supplier might inﬂate his production quantity, even if the buyer has already
padded her order quantity to buﬀer against yield losses. These buﬀers may accumulate and thus
exacerbate ineﬃciency. We now examine whether this is indeed the case.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
17
5.2.1.
Model and Centralized Supply Chain. The model is similar to that of the control
scenario in §5.1 except that the supplier determines his own production quantity x. Therefore, we
present only those parts of the model that diﬀer from the control scenario. The supplier delivers a
random quantity ˜q = min{q,(1 −ξ)x}, where q is the order quantity, x is the production quantity,
and ξ is the random proportional loss deﬁned in §5.1. The expected delivered quantity is y(q,x,e) =
Eξ[˜q] and the expected sales are S(q,x,e) = Eξ[min{˜q,D}]. The cost is c(x,e) = cx + v(e).
The delegation scenario diﬀers from the control scenario in that, if the order quantity is larger
than the demand (q > D) then, as in the random capacity model, expected sales become constant.
This is because, as long as q ≥D, the probability of receiving D units depends only on the pro-
duction quantity x and the eﬀort e. Therefore, ordering more than D does not directly increase
expected sales, and thus S(q,x,e) has a kink at q = D. Note, however, that a higher q does give
the supplier an incentive to choose higher x and e, which would indirectly increase expected sales.
The properties of S(q,x,e) and y(q,x,e) are summarized in Lemma 3 (see Appendix B.3).
In the centralized supply chain, the order quantity is redundant, and the decision maker chooses
only the production quantity x and the eﬀort e. Therefore, the optimal decisions in the centralized
supply chain are the same as for the control scenario discussed in §5.1 except that (a) we replace the
order quantity q with the production quantity x in Proposition 5 and (b) we refer to the optimal
production quantity as xo. We examine the decentralized setup next.
5.2.2.
Performance of the Wholesale Price Contract. We ﬁnd that the eﬃciency associ-
ated with the wholesale price contract exhibits a V-shaped pattern as the wholesale price (supplier’s
bargaining power) increases. We therefore argue that if either party has most of the bargaining
power then the wholesale price contract is likely to be preferred over more complex contracts that
could theoretically oﬀer better performance. This result contrasts with the case of random capacity
and also with the case of random yield with control.
The intuition for the V-shaped pattern is as follows. Recall that in the control scenario the
buyer’s order quantity played a dual role: It directly inﬂuenced proportional yield and indirectly
generated incentives for the supplier to invest eﬀort via a larger order size. However, since in the
delegation scenario the supplier determines the production quantity, the buyer’s order no longer
plays a dual role, but can only provide the supplier with an indirect incentive to exert eﬀort.
Therefore, the buyer whose proﬁt margin is p −w ﬁnds it proﬁtable to inﬂate the order quantity
only up to a threshold wholesale price. The eﬃciency trend for delegation parallels the one in
the control scenario up to this threshold. Above the threshold wholesale price the buyer does not
inﬂate at all and the supplier unilaterally determines his eﬀort as well as the production quantity.
Hence supply chain eﬃciency increases in the supplier’s bargaining power, or equivalently, in the
wholesale price (as in the case of random capacity), thus giving rise to the V-shape.

18
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Figure 6
Eﬃciency of Wholesale Price Contracts under Random Yield with Delegation
This ﬁgure plots supply chain eﬃciency (vertical axis) under random yield with delegation when the wholesale price
(horizontal axis) ranges between the unit production cost c and the unit price p. Parameters: D = 100,p = 10,c =
2,θ = 100, and m = 2.
2
4
6
8
10
95
96
97
98
99
100
Wholesale Price
Efficiency (%)
We now discuss the results that lead us to conclude that eﬃciency exhibits a V-shaped pattern.
First, we analytically show that if the wholesale price w is suﬃciently large, then the eﬃciency
of the wholesale price contract monotonically increases with w. This trend corresponds to the
right-hand side of the V-shape.
Proposition 8. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there exists a wd < p such that the eﬃ-
ciency associated with the wholesale price contract is monotonically increasing in w ∈[wd,p].
Second, we numerically verify the results by examining the eﬃciency pattern of the wholesale
price contract across the entire bargaining power spectrum. For this purpose, we use the same cost
function as for the numerical analysis in §5.1: c(q,e) = cq +θem, where c,θ > 0 and m ≥1. Figure 6
illustrates that eﬃciency follows a clear V-shaped pattern as a function of the wholesale price.
The lowest eﬃciency is 95.9%, at the bottom of the V-shape. When w is low, the eﬃciency rises
to 98.3%, and when w is high, it rises to 100%. We analyze 343 diﬀerent cases—using the same
parameter combinations as in §5.1—and observe an unambiguous V-shape in 88.9% of them. In
11.1% of the cases, we again observe a prominent V-shape, but with a slight increase (typically less
than 0.1%) in eﬃciency when w is very low, at the left extreme of the bargaining power spectrum,
followed by the expected V-shaped pattern.
Our results suggest that when using incentives to improve supply reliability in a decentralized
supply chain, one must consider whether the buyer controls or delegates the production quantity
decision, in addition to bargaining power and the nature of supply risk. An interesting result in
the delegation scenario is that as the supplier—the agent undertaking unveriﬁable action—earns
greater margin (and therefore payoﬀ), the eﬃciency trend is neither increasing (as with random
capacity) nor decreasing (as with random yield with control); instead, the eﬃciency follows a
V-shaped pattern.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
19
To consolidate this insight, there is still one remaining loose end—namely, which contract coor-
dinates in the delegation scenario? We ﬁnd that the unit-penalty contract coordinates the supply
chain by making the supplier the residual claimant, as it does under random capacity.
Proposition 9. Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, there exists a ¯χ > 0 such that the following
unit penalty contracts coordinate the supply chain: w∗= p−χ, z∗= χ, where 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ. The buyer’s
expected proﬁt is then πb = χD.
The unit penalty contract coordinates the supply chain with ﬂexible proﬁt allocation despite the
additional dimension of moral hazard (production quantity) as compared with the control scenario,
in which coordination requires the more complex unit-penalty with buy-back contract. The intuition
is that if the penalty fee is set equal to the margin (and is not too large), then the buyer does not
inﬂate the order, because she can earn her margin through either a sale or the penalty imposed on
the supplier. Therefore, the supplier faces exactly the same trade-oﬀs as the centralized decision
maker and thus chooses the ﬁrst-best eﬀort and production quantity.
6.
Conclusions
Our research is motivated by the widespread prevalence of wholesale price contracts in settings with
unreliable supply that could be improved by the supplier. Speciﬁcally, we investigate when and why
wholesale price contracts can be used to generate eﬃcient outcomes in a decentralized supply chain.
We characterize how the performance of the wholesale price contract depends on the interplay
between the type of supply risk (random capacity versus random yield) and type of procurement
process (control versus delegation). In this way we demonstrate that careful appreciation of the
operational features of the setting is instrumental in identifying the circumstances under which
wholesale price contracts perform well.
When a supplier invests unveriﬁable eﬀort (e.g., reliability investment), coarse intuition might
suggest that the supplier will invest more eﬀort if he can negotiate a higher share of the supply
chain proﬁt, thereby increasing eﬃciency. We ﬁnd this intuition to be correct in our setting with
random capacity. However, the scenario of random yield with control exhibits the exact opposite
trend, and for random yield with delegation, we ﬁnd that supply chain eﬃciency is no longer
monotonic in bargaining power but instead is V-shaped.
Even though they are suboptimal in theory, wholesale price contracts may be preferred to com-
plex contracts that come with a transaction cost—a phenomenon we refer to as a preference for
“appropriate” contracts. Our ﬁndings translate into simple insights that have the potential to
inform managerial decisions. To illustrate, compare the following two scenarios: (i) Nike sources
garments from Sabrina Garment Manufacturing, and (ii) Apple sources semiconductor chips from

20
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Samsung (Bloomberg Business 2015, CNN 2013). Sabrina is based in Cambodia, and has encoun-
tered labor disruptions (random capacity), whereas Samsung has to contend with random yield.
Both Nike and Apple form the bulk of their respective suppliers’ business, and thus have greater
bargaining power in the respective relationships (The Wall Street Journal 2013). Although both
ﬁrms face supply risk, our results indicate that the wholesale price contract would generate high
eﬃciency for Apple’s supply chain, but result in low eﬃciency for Nike’s.
We believe our ﬁndings oﬀer guidance regarding when and why to use the wholesale price
contract—or instead a more complex coordinating contract—and identify the role played by the
types of supply risk and procurement process in this outcome.
Appendix A:
General Model
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all the results in Appendix B (technical results), Appendix C (tables), and
Appendix D (proofs of all results) are based on the general model we deﬁne in this Appendix A.
A.1.
Random Capacity
We generalize the assumption that the random loss ξ is uniformly distributed. The random loss is ξ = fc(ψ,e),
where ψ is a random variable that captures the underlying supply risk and fc is a function that models the
dependence of the random loss on the supplier’s eﬀort e. We make the following technical assumption, which
our basic model with the uniform distribution satisﬁes.
Assumption 3. The following conditions hold:
(i) The random loss ξ has support [0,ac(e)], where both G(ξ | e) (the CDF) and ac(e) are twice continuously
diﬀerentiable with ﬁnite derivatives in e ≥0 and ξ ∈[0,ac(e)].
(ii) Either of the following holds:
(a) ac(e) = K, ∂G(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2G(ξ | e)/∂e2 < 0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,K).
(b) ac(0) = K, a′
c(e) < 0, ∂G(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2G(ξ | e)/∂e2 ≤0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,ac(e)].
Part (ii) implies that the eﬀort e mitigates the random loss ξ in the sense of ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance
(FOSD) with decreasing returns to scale. Moreover, the supplier’s eﬀort achieves the stochastic dominance
either by shifting the CDF upward while preserving the support of the random loss (as in part (a)) or by
reducing the support of the random loss (as in part (b)).
With this generalized model and Assumption 3, both Proposition 2 and Proposition 4 continue to hold.
However, Proposition 3 no longer holds; we have instead the following weaker results for monotonicity.
Proposition 10. Let Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold. Then, for random capacity, the eﬃciency of the
wholesale price contract is monotonically increasing in w for w ∈[w,p] if either of these suﬃcient conditions
holds:
(i) w is suﬃciently close to the unit price p; or
(ii) w = c and the buyer’s optimal order quantity is equal to the demand D.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
21
In part (i) we show that the supply chain eﬃciency is monotonically increasing in the wholesale price
(or in the supplier’s bargaining power) when the wholesale price is suﬃciently high. In (ii), we show that
this monotonicity result holds over the entire interval, w ∈[c,p], provided the buyer always orders D units.
We have also numerically veriﬁed that this eﬃciency trend continues to hold when the loss distribution is
triangular or of beta type; for the sake of brevity, we omit the details.
A.2.
Random Yield: Control Scenario
We generalize the assumption that the random loss ξ is uniformly distributed. The random loss is ξ = fy(ψ,e),
where ψ is a random variable that captures the underlying supply risk and fy is a function that models the
dependence of the random loss on the supplier’s eﬀort e. We make the following technical assumption, which
our basic model with the uniform distribution satisﬁes.
Assumption 4. The following conditions hold:
(i) The random loss ξ has support [0,ay(e)], where both H(ξ | e) (the CDF) and ay(e) are thrice continuously
diﬀerentiable with ﬁnite derivatives in e ≥0 and ξ ∈[0,ay(e)].
(ii) Either of the following holds:
(a) ay(e) = 1, ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 < 0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,1).
(b) ay(0) = 1, a′
y(e) < 0, ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 ≤0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,ay(e)].
Part (ii) implies that the eﬀort e mitigates the random loss ξ in the sense of FOSD with decreasing returns
to scale. Moreover, the supplier’s eﬀort achieves the stochastic dominance either by shifting the CDF upward
while preserving the support of the random loss (as in part (a)) or by reducing the support of the random
loss (as in part (b)).
With this generalized model and Assumption 4, the statements in Proposition 5, Proposition 6(ii), and
Proposition 7 continue to hold. Now, however, Proposition 6(i) no longer holds; instead we obtain the
following weaker result.
Proposition 11. Let Assumptions 1, 2, and 4 hold. Then, under random yield with control, the eﬃciency
of the wholesale price contract is monotonically decreasing in w for w ∈[wc,p], provided that wc is suﬃciently
close to p.
Proposition 11 shows that, if the wholesale price is suﬃciently high, then supply chain eﬃciency decreases
with the supplier’s bargaining power (or the wholesale price).
Moreover, we numerically verify the monotonicity result. Recall that our model assumes the loss distri-
bution to have a bounded support and to exhibit ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance as eﬀort increases. The
uniform distribution we use in the basic model exhibits FOSD as the support shrinks with greater eﬀort. We
consider two other loss distributions that have bounded and ﬁxed support: a triangular distribution and a
beta-type distribution. The triangular distribution exhibits FOSD as the mode approaches zero with greater
eﬀort, while the support remains ﬁxed. For the beta-type distribution we consider, the CDF has a closed-form
expression;15 this function exhibits FOSD as the mode approaches zero while the support remains ﬁxed (see
Jones 2009). This beta-type distribution is quite ﬂexible and encompasses a variety of bell shapes.

22
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
We conduct a comprehensive numerical analysis with the triangular and beta-type distributions, and ﬁnd
that the decreasing eﬃciency trend is robust. Speciﬁcally, we explore the triangular distribution with the
same parameter combinations as used for examining the uniform distribution16 and ﬁnd that eﬃciency is
completely monotonic in every case. For the beta-type distribution, we conduct the numerical analysis with
a narrower range of parameters to ensure feasibility, and again ﬁnd that eﬃciency is monotonic in 97.8%
of the cases.17 The remaining 2.2% of the cases exhibit a slight increase for small w, but again the general
decreasing trend persists.
A.3.
Random Yield: Delegation Scenario
The basic model for the uniform distribution in §5.2 introduces only those modeling elements that diﬀer
from the control scenario. That basic model can be immediately extended to the general model without any
changes. We need to only make the following assumption for tractability, which our basic model with the
uniform distribution satisﬁes.
Assumption 5. The expected delivered quantity y(q,x,e) is jointly concave in q and e, and also in x and
e, in the feasible region of problem (3).
Under Assumption 5, both Proposition 8 and Proposition 9 continue to hold. We conduct a comprehen-
sive numerical analysis with the triangular and beta-type distributions and with the same combinations of
parameters as used in Appendix A.2, ﬁnding that the V-shaped pattern is robust. With the triangular distri-
bution, we observe an unambiguous V-shape in 85.1% of the cases; in 1.4% of the cases, we ﬁnd a prominent
V-shape but with a slight increase in eﬃciency at the left extreme of the V. In 13.5% of the cases, eﬃciency
is just increasing. However, these are exceptional cases in which the unit production cost c is so high that
feasible solutions exist only when the wholesale price w is greater than 90% of the retail price p. For the
beta-type distribution, we observe an unambiguous V-shape in 97.1% of the cases. In 1.9% of the cases, we
ﬁnd a prominent V-shape but with a slight increase in eﬃciency at the left extreme of the V, and in 1% of
the cases, the eﬃciency was just increasing.
Appendix B:
Technical Results
B.1.
Random Capacity
The following lemma holds under the general model deﬁned in Appendix A, and it establishes both the
properties of and the relationship between expected sales and expected delivered quantity.
Lemma 1. Let Assumptions 2 and 3 hold. Then the following holds.
(i) S(q,e) = y(q,e) if q ≤D, and S(q,e) = y(D,e) if q > D.
(ii) y(q,e) is increasing and concave in both q and e.18 Also, y(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in
q and e, except when q = K −ac(e), in which case y(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable.
The next proposition holds under our basic model with the uniform distribution, and—together with
Proposition 1—allows us to interpret the wholesale price w as a proxy for the supplier’s bargaining power α.
Proposition 12. The buyer’s and the supplier’s expected proﬁts at equilibrium, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w), satisfy
the following: i) π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are both continuous in w and ii) π∗
s(w) is strictly increasing in w if p < 3c.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
23
B.2.
Random Yield: Control Scenario
The following lemma holds under the general model deﬁned in Appendix A, and it establishes both the
properties of and the relationship between expected sales and expected delivered quantity.
Lemma 2. Let Assumptions 2 and 4 hold. Then the following holds.
(i) If q ≤D, then S(q,e) = y(q,e). If q > D, then S(q,e) < y(q,e).
(ii) y(q,e) and S(q,e) are increasing and concave in both q and e.19 Also, y(q,e) and S(q,e) are thrice
continuously diﬀerentiable in q and e, except that S(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable (a) in q
when q = D, and (b) in q and e when q = D/(1 −ay(e)).
The next proposition holds under the general model deﬁned in Appendix A, and—together with Propo-
sition 1—allows us to interpret the wholesale price w as a proxy for the supplier’s bargaining power α.
Proposition 13. The buyer’s and the supplier’s expected proﬁts at equilibrium, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w), satisfy
the following: i) π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are both continuous in w and ii) π∗
b(w) is strictly decreasing in w.
B.3.
Random Yield: Delegation Scenario
The following lemma holds under the general model deﬁned in Appendix A, and it establishes both the
properties of and the relationship between expected sales and expected delivered quantity. The diﬀerence
from the control scenario is that the expected sales are constant when the buyer orders at least D units.
Hence, the expected sales S(q,x,e) have a kink at q = D.
Lemma 3. Let Assumptions 2 and 4 hold. If the supplier determines his own production quantity, then
the following holds.
(i) If q ≤D, then S(q,x,e) = y(q,x,e). If q > D, then S(q,x,e) = y(D,x,e).
(ii) y(q,x,e) is increasing and concave in both x and e. Also, y(q,x,e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable
in x and e, except that it is once continuously diﬀerentiable (a) in x when x = q, and (b) in x and e
when x = q/(1 −ay(e)).
The next proposition holds under our basic model with the uniform distribution, and—together with
Proposition 1—allows us to interpret the wholesale price w as a proxy for the supplier’s bargaining power α.
Proposition 14. The buyer’s and the supplier’s expected proﬁts at equilibrium, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w), satisfy
the following: i) π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are both continuous in w and ii) π∗
b(w) is strictly decreasing in w if p ≤2c
and v(e) = θe, where θ ≥(5/7) · cD.
B.4.
Other Results
The next lemma gives the conditions equivalent to Assumption 1(i) for each type of supply risk.
Lemma 4. Assumption 1(i) is equivalent to (i) p > c for random capacity, and (ii) p(1 −µ0
y) > c for
random yield.
The following proposition states that if the transaction cost T of a coordinating contract is suﬃciently
high, then the wholesale price contract is actually Pareto eﬃcient compared to the coordinating contract
because of the high transaction cost.

24
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Proposition 15. There exists a threshold T ′ > 0 such that if the transaction cost of a coordinating con-
tract T exceeds this threshold T ′, then there exists a set of wholesale prices for which the wholesale price
contract is Pareto eﬃcient compared to the coordinating contract.
Appendix C:
Tables
The results in these tables apply to the general model deﬁned in Appendix A. We use “+” and “−” to signify
“strictly positive” and “strictly negative”, respectively.
Table 1
Derivatives of y(q,e) under Random Capacity.
Derivatives
0 ≤q ≤K −ac(e) K −ac(e) < q ≤K
∂y(q,e)
∂q
, ∂2y(q,e)
∂q2
+,0
+,−
∂y(q,e)
∂e
, ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
0,0
+,−
Table 2
Derivatives of y(q,e) and S(q,e) under Random Yield with Control.
Derivatives
0 ≤q ≤D D < q ≤
D
1−ay(e)
D
1−ay(e) < q
∂y(q,e)
∂q
, ∂2y(q,e)
∂q2
+,0
+,0
+,0
∂y(q,e)
∂e
, ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
+,−
+,−
+,−
∂S(q,e)
∂q
, ∂2S(q,e)
∂q2
+,0
+,−
0,0
∂S(q,e)
∂e
, ∂2S(q,e)
∂e2
+,−
+,−
0,0
Notes
1Supply chain eﬃciency is the ratio of the expected proﬁt in the decentralized supply chain to the optimal expected
proﬁt in the centralized supply chain.
2We use the Nash bargaining model with asymmetric bargaining power to model the bargaining process, and
Proposition 1 establishes that the equilibrium wholesale price increases with the supplier’s bargaining power. Hence,
throughout the paper, we use wholesale price as a proxy for the supplier’s bargaining power.
3We do not directly compare the eﬃciencies of wholesale price contracts under random capacity and random yield
on a point-by-point basis, because they are two diﬀerent models. Instead, we compare only whether the eﬃciency
under each model is increasing or decreasing with the supplier’s bargaining power.
4There is also an emergent stream of literature that investigates the role of network conﬁguration in determining
supply reliability (see e.g., Ang et al. 2016, Bimpikis et al. 2013, Jain et al. 2014, Lim et al. 2013).
5Over the past two decades, coordinating contracts have received much attention in the supply chain management
literature. Numerous studies have identiﬁed coordinating contracts in diﬀerent business contexts (for a review, see
Cachon 2003).
6In the context of random yield, such contracts are also referred to as quality-based incentive pricing (Q-pricing)
contracts (Baiman et al. 2004).
7Zhou (1997) shows that the Nash bargaining model with asymmetric bargaining power can be extended to the
case when the payoﬀset (i.e., {(π∗
b (w),π∗
s(w)} in our case) is non-convex, as in our model, for the bargaining power

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
25
parameter α ∈(0,1). The supplier has all the bargaining power in the limit as α →1, whereas the buyer has all the
bargaining power in the limit as α →0.
8Monotonicity and convexity/concavity results are all used in the weak sense throughout the paper, unless stated
otherwise.
9We remark that analyses that calibrate the performance of simple contracts are typically hard problems that
require speciﬁc assumptions about the functional form of the uncertainty distributions involved (Chu and Sappington
2007, Rogerson 2003). Our context with endogenous yield, and our focus on the sensitivity analysis of supply chain
eﬃciency, pose additional analytical challenges. For these reasons, we restrict our focus (in the main text) to the case
where ξ is uniformly distributed and then extend the results to a general distribution in Appendix A.
10Coase (1960) and Dahlman (1979) argue that transaction cost consists of three components: (i) search and
information costs, (ii) bargaining and decision costs, and (iii) policing and enforcement costs. In our context, the
transaction cost we identify mostly belongs to the the second component (bargaining and decision costs).
11Ho and Zhang (2008) experimentally show that, in contrast to theoretical predictions, two-part tariﬀs may not
improve supply chain proﬁts over those obtained with wholesale price contracts in the typical setting of double
marginalization.
12Moreover, using a similar argument to that in the last paragraph of Section 4, one can argue that the wholesale
price contract is Pareto eﬃcient compared to the coordinating contract when the buyer is powerful once transaction
costs are considered.
13The reason why the decreasing monotonic trend may not hold when w is suﬃciently close to c is that both eﬀort
and quantity exhibit diminishing marginal impact (returns to scale) on expected sales and therefore on eﬃciency; the
relevant derivatives can be found in Table 2 (see Appendix C). This means that, as w increases, the marginal increase
in eﬃciency due to additional eﬀort is greater when w is close to c, and the baseline eﬀort is small; the corresponding
marginal loss in eﬃciency due to a reduced order quantity is less signiﬁcant. It follows that the monotonic trend in
eﬃciency could be contravened only if w were close to c, a conclusion in line with Proposition 6.
14Although Proposition 7 checks only the necessary KKT conditions, we numerically conﬁrm that a unit-penalty
with buy-back contract does coordinate the supply chain under the parameters used in our numerical analysis.
15Speciﬁcally, the CDF is H(ξ | e) = 1 −(1 −ξa)e, where a is a parameter and e is the eﬀort level.
16We choose seven values each for c,θ, and m in the following ranges: c ∈[0.1,5],θ ∈[1,100], and m ∈[1,5]. We
therefore perform our analysis with 73=343 diﬀerent combinations of parameters.
17The beta-type distribution generally results in higher yield losses than other distributions do, and these losses
are increasing in the parameter a in the CDF. Therefore, we use a narrower range of parameters to ensure feasible
solutions. Speciﬁcally, we choose ﬁve values each for a, c, θ, and m in the following ranges: a ∈[1,3], c ∈[0.1, ¯c],θ ∈[1, ¯θ],
and m ∈[1,5], where i) ¯c = 3, ¯θ = 100 for a = 1 and 1.5; ii) ¯c = 2, ¯θ = 50 for a = 2 and 2.5; and iii) ¯c = 1, ¯θ = 50 for
a = 3. These combinations result in 54 = 625 cases.
18The detailed derivatives are summarized in Table 1 (see Appendix C).
19Note that y(q,e) is linear in q. The detailed derivatives are summarized in Table 2 (see Appendix C).
References
Ang, E., D. A. Iancu, R. Swinney. 2016. Disruption risk and optimal sourcing in multitier supply networks.
Management Science forthcoming.
Babich, V., A.N. Burnetas, P.H. Ritchken. 2007. Competition and diversiﬁcation eﬀects in supply chains
with supplier default risk. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 9(2) 123–146.

26
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Baiman, S., P.E. Fischer, M.V. Rajan. 2000.
Information, contracting, and quality costs.
Management
Science 46(6) 776–789.
Baiman, S., S. Netessine, H. Kunreuther. 2004. Procurement in supply chains when the end-product exhibits
the weakest link property. Working Paper .
Balachandran, K.R., S. Radhakrishnan. 2005. Quality implications of warranties in a supply chain. Man-
agement Science 51(8) 1266–1277.
Bimpikis, K., D. Fearing, A. Tahbaz-Salehi. 2013.
Multi-sourcing and miscoordination in supply chain
networks. Working Paper .
Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, Asher Wolinsky. 1986. The nash bargaining solution in economic modelling.
The RAND Journal of Economics 17(2) 176–188.
Bloomberg
Business.
2015.
Samsung
said
to
win
apple
a9
chip
orders
for
next
iphone.
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-03/
samsung-said-to-win-apple-a9-chip-orders-for-next-iphone.
Cachon, G. 2004.
The allocation of inventory risk in a supply chain: Push, pull, and advance-purchase
discount contracts. Management Science 50(2) 222–238.
Cachon, G.P. 2003.
Supply chain coordination with contracts.
Handbooks in Operations Research and
Management Science 11 229–340.
Chatterjee, A., D. Gudmundsson, R. Nurani, S. Seshadri, G. Shanthikumar. 1999. Fabless-foundry partner-
ship: models and analysis of coordination issues. Semiconductor Manufacturing, IEEE Transactions
on 12(1) 44–52.
Chick, S.E., H. Mamani, D. Simchi-Levi. 2008. Supply chain coordination and inﬂuenza vaccination. Oper-
ations Research 56(6) 1493–1506.
Chu, Leon Yang, David EM Sappington. 2007. Simple cost-sharing contracts. The American Economic
Review 97(1) 419–428.
Ciarallo, F.W., R. Akella, T.E. Morton. 1994. A periodic review, production planning model with uncertain
capacity and uncertain demand-optimality of extended myopic policies. Management Science 40(3)
320–332.
CNN. 2013. Garment workers, police clash in cambodia. http://edition.cnn.com/2013/05/31/world/
asia/cambodia-garment-workers-strike/.
Coase, R. H. 1960. The problem of social cost. Journal of law and economics 3 1–44.
Dada, M., N.C. Petruzzi, L.B. Schwarz. 2007. A newsvendor’s procurement problem when suppliers are
unreliable. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 9(1) 9–32.
Dahlman, Carl J. 1979. The problem of externality. Journal of law and economics 22(1) 141–162.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
27
Dai, T., S.-H. Cho, F. Zhang. 2016. Contracting for on-time delivery in the U.S. inﬂuenza vaccine supply
chain. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 18(3) 332–346.
Deo, S., C.J. Corbett. 2009. Cournot competition under yield uncertainty: The case of the us inﬂuenza
vaccine market. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 11(4) 563–576.
Dong, Lingxiu, Brian Tomlin. 2012. Managing disruption risk: The interplay between operations and insur-
ance. Management Science 58(10) 1898–1915.
Doucakis, T. 2007. Study of supply chain disruptions at a high tech corporation. http://dspace.mit.edu/
bitstream/handle/1721.1/40097/184985741.pdf?...1.
Federgruen, A., N. Yang. 2008. Selecting a portfolio of suppliers under demand and supply risks. Operations
Research 56(4) 916–936.
Federgruen, A., N. Yang. 2009a. Competition Under Generalized Attraction Models: Applications to Quality
Competition Under Yield Uncertainty. Management Science 55(12) 2028–2043.
Federgruen, A., N. Yang. 2009b.
Optimal supply diversiﬁcation under general supply risks.
Operations
Research 57(6) 1451–1468.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1972. Equity and eﬃciency in public sector pricing: the optimal two-part tariﬀ. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 86(2) 176–187.
G¨um¨u¸s, M., S. Ray, H. Gurnani. 2012. Supply-side story: Risks, guarantees, competition, and information
asymmetry. Management Science 58(9) 1694–1714.
Ho, Teck-Hua, Juanjuan Zhang. 2008. Designing pricing contracts for boundedly rational customers: Does
the framing of the ﬁxed fee matter? Management Science 54(4) 686–700.
Holmstrom, Bengt, Paul Milgrom. 1987. Aggregation and linearity in the provision of intertemporal incen-
tives. Econometrica 55(2) 303–328.
Jain, N., K. Girotra, S. Netessine. 2014. Global sourcing: Impact of sourcing strategies on supply chain
resilience .
Jones, MC. 2009. Kumaraswamys distribution: A beta-type distribution with some tractability advantages.
Statistical Methodology 6(1) 70–81.
Kalkancı, B., K-Y. Chen, F. Erhun. 2011. Contract complexity and performance under asymmetric demand
information: An experimental evaluation. Management science 57(4) 689–704.
Kalkancı, B., K-Y. Chen, F. Erhun. 2014.
Complexity as a contract design factor: A human-to-human
experimental study. Production and Operations Management 23(2) 269–284.
Kaya, M., ¨O. ¨Ozer. 2009. Quality risk in outsourcing: Noncontractible product quality and private quality
cost information. Naval Research Logistics 56(7) 669–685.
Lariviere, M., E. Porteus. 2001. Selling to the newsvendor: An analysis of price-only contracts. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management 3(4) 293–305.

28
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Lariviere, Martin A, V Padmanabhan. 1997. Slotting allowances and new product introductions. Marketing
Science 16(2) 112–128.
Lexology. 2010. Implications of recent labor unrest for mncs operating or investing in china. http://www.
lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=f31127fe-281f-4773-9e32-a37407977212.
Li, Linlin, Izak Duenyas, Seyed Iravani. 2011. Group warranty contracts to coordinate assembly supply chains
with non-testable components. Tech. rep., Working Paper. Department of Industrial Engineering and
Management Sciences. Northwestern University.
Lim, Michael K, Achal Bassamboo, Sunil Chopra, Mark S Daskin. 2013. Facility location decisions with
random disruptions and imperfect estimation. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 15(2)
239–249.
LinkedIn Discussion. 2011. True or false: Penalties improve supplier performance. https://www.linkedin.
com/groups/True-false-penalties-improve-supplier-139021.S.42247612.
Liu, S., K.C. So, F. Zhang. 2010. Eﬀect of supply reliability in a retail setting with joint marketing and
inventory decisions. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 12(1) 19–32.
Luenberger, D.G., Y. Ye. 2008. Linear and Nonlinear Programming. Springer.
MacDonald, James, Janet Perry, Mary Ahearn, David Banker, William Chambers, Carolyn Dimitri, Nigel
Key, Kenneth Nelson, Leland Southard. 2004. Contracts, Markets, and Prices: Organizing the Produc-
tion and Use of Agricultural Commodities. United States Department of Agriculture, Washington DC,
USA.
Mas-Colell, A., M.D. Whinston, J.R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic theory. Oxford university press New York.
Perakis, G., G. Roels. 2007. The price of anarchy in supply chains: Quantifying the eﬃciency of price-only
contracts. Management Science 53(8) 1249–1268.
Rogerson, William P. 2003. Simple menus of contracts in cost-based procurement and regulation. American
Economic Review 93(3) 919–926.
Roth, Alvin E. 1979. Axiomatic models of bargaining. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sappington, D. 1983. Limited liability contracts between principal and agent. Journal of Economic Theory
29(1) 1–21.
Schwartz, A., J. Watson. 2004. The law and economics of costly contracting. The Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization 20(1) 2–31.
Tang, S., H. Gurnani, D. Gupta. 2014. Managing disruptions in decentralized supply chains with endogenous
supply process reliability. Production and Operations Management forthcoming.
Tang, S.Y., P. Kouvelis. 2011. Supplier diversiﬁcation strategies in the presence of yield uncertainty and
buyer competition. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 13(4) 439–451.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
29
The Wall Street Journal. 2013. Apple ﬁnds it diﬃcult to divorce samsung. http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887324682204578513882349940500.
Tomlin, B. 2006. On the value of mitigation and contingency strategies for managing supply chain disruption
risks. Management Science 52(5) 639–657.
Tomlin, B. 2009. Impact of supply learning when suppliers are unreliable. Manufacturing & Service Opera-
tions Management 11(2) 192–209.
Tomlin, B., Y. Wang. 2005. On the value of mix ﬂexibility and dual sourcing in unreliable newsvendor
networks. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 7(1) 37–57.
Wang, Y., W. Gilland, B. Tomlin. 2010. Mitigating supply risk: dual sourcing or process improvement?
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 12(3) 489–510.
Yang, Z.B., G. Aydın, V. Babich, D.R. Beil. 2009. Supply disruptions, asymmetric information, and a backup
production option. Management Science 55(2) 192–209.
Yang, Z.B., G. Aydın, V. Babich, D.R. Beil. 2012. Using a dual-sourcing option in the presence of asym-
metric information about supplier reliability: Competition vs. diversiﬁcation. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 14(2) 202–217.
Zhang,
L.,
H.
Armer.
2013.
Fab-wide
eﬀort
increases
yield
at
cmos
imager
facility.
http://www.appliedmaterials.com/nanochip/nanochip-fab-solutions/december-2013/
fab-wide-effort-increases-yield-at-cmos-imager-facility.
Zhou, Lin. 1997. The nash bargaining theory with non-convex problems. Econometrica 65(3) 681–685.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
1
Online Companion
Appendix D:
Proofs of All Results
We prove all results using the general model deﬁned in Appendix A, except Propositions 3, 6(i), 12, and 14,
for which we only use the uniform distribution. We ﬁrst provide proofs for the four lemmas in Appendix B,
and then provide proofs for all propositions and lemmas in the same order as they appear in the paper,
because we use the lemmas in Appendix B extensively in the proofs.
Proof of Lemma 1(i) The expected sales is S(q,e) = Eξ[min{min{q,K −ξ},D}]. If q ≤D, then S(q,e) =
Eξ[min{q,K −ξ}] = y(q,e), by deﬁnition. If q > D, then S(q,e) = Eξ[min{D,K −ξ}] = y(D,e).
□
Proof of Lemma 1(ii) We show the property with respect to q in Part (1) and with respect to e in Part
(2). The monotonicity and concavity properties are used in the weak sense, and the detailed derivatives are
summarized in Table 1.
(1) Property of y(q,e) in q: Recall that ac(e) is the maximum random loss. For any given e ≥0, let
ˆq(e) = K −ac(e), which is the capacity that is never aﬀected by the random loss. We consider the following
two cases, 0 ≤q ≤ˆq(e) and ˆq(e) ≤q ≤K, and check the continuity and diﬀerentiability at q = ˆq(e).
First, if 0 ≤q ≤ˆq(e), then q ≤K −ac(e), and the order is never aﬀected by the random loss. Thus, y(q,e) =
Eξ[min{q,K −ξ}] = q. Also, ∂y(q,e)/∂q = 1 > 0 and ∂2y(q,e)/∂q2 = 0. Thus, y(q,e) is twice continuously
diﬀerentiable, increasing, and concave in q.
Second, if ˆq(e) ≤q ≤K, then q ≥K −ac(e), and a fraction of the order quantity is aﬀected by the random
loss. Hence
y(q,e) = Eξ[min{q,K −ξ}] =
Z K−q
0
qg(ξ | e)dξ +
Z ac(e)
K−q
(K −ξ)g(ξ | e)dξ = (K −ac(e)) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
G(ξ | e)dξ,
where the last equality is obtained from integration by parts. y(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in
q by Leibniz integral rule, because G(ξ | e) and ac(e) are twice continuously diﬀerentiable in q (which are
zeros), and so is K −q. Therefore,
∂y(q,e)
∂q
= 0 · G(ac(e) | e) + G(K −q | e) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
∂G(ξ | e)
∂q
dξ = G(K −q | e) > 0.
Also, ∂2y(q,e)/∂q2 = −g(K −q | e) < 0 because K −q is in the support [0,ac(e)]. Hence, y(q,e) is twice
continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and concave in q.
Last, we check the diﬀerentiability at q = ˆq(e). We have y(ˆq(e),e) = Eξ[min{ˆq(e),K −ξ}] = ˆq(e). Also,
limq→ˆq(e)−y(q,e) = limq→ˆq(e)−q = ˆq(e), and
lim
q→ˆq(e)+ y(q,e) =
lim
q→ˆq(e)+
"
(K −ac(e)) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
G(ξ | e)dξ
#
= K −ac(e) = ˆq(e).
In addition, limq→ˆq(e)−∂y(q,e)/∂q = limq→ˆq(e)−1 = 1, and limq→ˆq(e)+ ∂y(q,e)/∂q = limq→ˆq(e)+ G(K −q | e) =
G(ac(e) | e) = 1. Thus, y(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable at q = ˆq(e).
(2) Property of y(q,e) in e: Recall that ac(e) is the maximum random loss, and K −ac(e) is the capacity
that is not aﬀected by the random loss. Assumption 3 states that either i) ac(e) = K for all e ≥0 or ii)

2
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
ac(0) = K and a′
c(e) < 0 for all e ≥0. Hence, for a given q, there may exist e′ > 0 such that q = K −ac(e′).
We assume such e′ exists, and consider two cases, 0 ≤e < e′ and e′ ≤e, and check the diﬀerentiability at
e = e′. (The case when such e′ does not exist trivially follows from this general case.)
First, if 0 ≤e < e′, then q > K −ac(e), and we know y(q,e) = (K −ac(e)) +
R ac(e)
K−q G(ξ | e)dξ from Part (1)
of this proof. y(q,e) is continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Leibniz integral rule, because G(ξ | e) and ac(e) are
continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Assumption 3, and so is K −q. Thus,
∂y(q,e)
∂e
= −a′
c(e) + a′
c(e)G(ac(e) | e) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
∂G(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ =
Z ac(e)
K−q
∂G(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ,
because G(ac(e) | e) = 1. Since ∂G(ξ | e)/∂e > 0 for all ξ ∈(0,ac(e)) by Assumption 3, and ac(e) > K −q, it is
obvious that ∂y(q,e)/∂e > 0. Again, ∂y(q,e)/∂e is continuously diﬀerentiable in e because ∂G(ξ | e)/∂e and
ac(e) are continuously diﬀerentiable by Assumption 3, and thus
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
= a′
c(e)∂G(ac(e) | e)
∂e
+
Z ac(e)
K−q
∂2G(ξ | e)
∂e2
dξ.
By Assumption 3, either i) a′
c(e) = 0, ∂2G(ξ | e)/∂e2 < 0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,K), or ii) a′
c(e) < 0, ∂G(ξ |
e)/∂e > 0, ∂2G(ξ | e)/∂e2 ≤0 for all e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,ac(e)]. Either way, we have that ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0.
Hence, y(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and strictly concave in e.
Second, if e′ ≤e, then q ≤K −ac(e). In this case, y(q,e) = q, and ∂y(q,e)/∂e = ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 = 0. Hence,
y(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and concave in e.
Last, we check continuity and diﬀerentiability at e = e′. We have y(q,e′) = q, lime→e′+ y(q,e) = lime→e′+ q =
q and
lim
e→e′−y(q,e) = lim
e→e′−(K −ac(e)) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
G(ξ | e)dξ = q,
since ac(e′) = K −q. Also, lime→e′+ ∂y(q,e)/∂e = lime→e′+ 0 = 0, and
lim
e→e′−
∂y(q,e)
∂e
= lim
e→e′−
Z ac(e)
K−q
∂G(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ = 0,
because lime→e′−ac(e) = K −q and ∂G(ξ | e)/∂e is ﬁnite by Assumption 3. Thus, y(q,e) is once continuously
diﬀerentiable at e = e′.
□
Proof of Lemma 2(i) We look at three cases. First, if q ≤D, then (1 −ξ)q ≤D, because 0 ≤ξ ≤1.
Therefore, S(q,e) = Eξ[min{(1 −ξ)q,D} = Eξ[(1 −ξ)q] = y(q,e), by deﬁnition.
Second, if q > D and (1−ay(e))q ≥D, then the demand can be always met even with the maximum random
loss. (Recall that ξ = ay(e) is the maximum random loss.) Hence, S(q,e) = Eξ[min{(1−ξ)q,D}] = Eξ[D] = D.
Thus, y(q,e) = Eξ[(1 −ξ)q] = (1 −µe
y)q > (1 −ay(e))q ≥D = S(q,e), since µe
y < ay(e).
Third, if q > D and (1−ay(e))q < D, then a fraction of the demand may not be met. Speciﬁcally, min{(1−
ξ)q,D} = D if 0 ≤ξ ≤1 −D/q and min{(1 −ξ)q,D} = (1 −ξ)q if 1 −D/q < ξ ≤ay(e). Therefore,
S(q,e) = Eξ[min{(1 −ξ)q,D}] =
Z 1−D
q
0
D · h(ξ | e)dξ +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
(1 −ξ)q · h(ξ | e)dξ.
Note that y(q,e) = Eξ[(1−ξ)q] =
R ay(e)
0
(1−ξ)q ·h(ξ | e)dξ. Hence, y(q,e)−S(q,e) =
R 1−D/q
0
((1−ξ)q −D)h(ξ |
e)dξ > 0, since (1 −ξ)q > D when ξ ∈(0,1 −D/q).

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
3
For further uses in the rest of the proofs, we simplify S(q,e). Using integration by parts, we have
S(q,e) = DH

1 −D
q | e

+ (1 −ay(e))q −D +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
q · H(ξ | e)dξ
= (1 −ay(e))q +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
q · H(ξ | e)dξ.
□
Proof of Lemma 2(ii) Since we are showing the properties of y(q,e) and S(q,e) with respect to both q
and e, we divide the proof into four parts: (1) y(q,e) with q, (2) S(q,e) with q, (3) y(q,e) with e, and (4)
S(q,e) with e. Note that the monotonicity and concavity properties are used in the weak sense.
(1) Property of y(q,e) in q: For any e ≥0, y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q, and hence y(q,e) is thrice continuously
diﬀerentiable in q. Also, ∂y(q,e)/∂q = (1 −µe
y) > 0, because 0 ≤µe
y < 1, and ∂2y(q,e)/∂q2 = 0. Thus, y(q,e)
is increasing and concave in q.
(2) Property of S(q,e) in q: We consider three cases in which we have diﬀerent functional forms: (a)
q < D, (b) D < q < D/(1 −ay(e)), and (c) D/(1 −ay(e)) < q. Also, we check once diﬀerentiability at the two
boundaries between three cases. If ay(e) = 1, the third case never happens, but the result trivially follows
from this more general case. Thus, we assume ay(e) ̸= 1.
First, if q < D, then S(q,e) = y(q,e) from part (i) of this Lemma. Thus, S(q,e) is thrice continuously
diﬀerentiable, increasing, and concave in q.
Second, if D < q < D/(1−ay(e)), then S(q,e) = (1−ay(e))q +
R ay(e)
1−D/q qH(ξ | e)dξ from the proof of part (i)
of this Lemma. S(q,e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in q by Leibniz integral rule, because H(ξ | e) and
ac(e) are thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in q (note that both are independent of q), and so is (1 −D/q).
Thus,
∂S(q,e)
∂q
= (1 −ay(e)) −D
q H

1 −D
q | e

+
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
H(ξ | e)dξ
=
Z ay(e)
1−D
q

H(ξ | e) −H

1 −D
q | e

dξ + (1 −ay(e))

1 −H

1 −D
q | e

.
The ﬁrst integral term is strictly positive, because H(ξ | e)−H(1−D/q | e) is strictly positive when 1−D/q <
ξ ≤ay(e). Also, the second term is strictly positive, because 1 −D/q < ay(e) and thus H(1 −D/q | e) < 1,
and we assumed ay(e) < 1. Therefore, ∂S(q,e)/∂q > 0. Again, using Leibniz integral rule,
∂2S(q,e)
∂q2
= D
q2 H

1 −D
q | e

−D2
q3 h

1 −D
q | e

−D
q2 H

1 −D
q | e

= −D2
q3 h

1 −D
q | e

.
Therefore, ∂2S(q,e)/∂q2 < 0, because h(1 −D/q | e) > 0 since 1 −D/q lies in the support [0,ay(e)]. Hence,
S(q,e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and strictly concave in q.
Third, if D/(1 −ay(e)) < q, then S(q,e) = D from the proof of Lemma 2(i). This is obviously thrice
continuously diﬀerentiable in q, increasing (∂S(q,e)/∂q = 0), and concave (∂2S(q,e)/∂q2 = 0).
Now, we show S(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable in q at the two boundaries. First, we look at
q = D. We have that S(D,e) = (1 −µe
y)D, limq→D−S(q,e) = limq→D−(1 −µe
y)q = (1 −µe
y)D, and

4
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
lim
q→D+ S(q,e) = lim
q→D+
"
(1 −ay(e))q +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
qH(ξ | e)dξ
#
= (1 −ay(e))D +
Z ay(e)
0
D · H(ξ | e)dξ
= (1 −ay(e))D +
 
ay(e) −
Z ay(e)
0
ξh(ξ | e)dξ
!
D =
 
1 −
Z ay(e)
0
ξh(ξ | e)dξ
!
D = (1 −µe
y)D.
Therefore, S(q,e) is continuous in q at q = D. Also, we observe that limq→D−∂S(q,e)/∂q = limq→D−(1−µe
y) =
(1 −µe
y), and
lim
q→D+
∂S(q,e)
∂q
= lim
q→D+
"Z ay(e)
1−D
q

H(ξ | e) −H

1 −D
q | e

dξ + (1 −ay(e))

1 −H

1 −D
q | e
#
=
Z ay(e)
0
H(ξ | e)dξ + (1 −ay(e)) = ay(e) −
Z ay(e)
0
ξh(ξ | e)dξ + (1 −ay(e)) = (1 −µe
y),
using integration by parts. Therefore, S(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable in q when q = D.
Second, we consider q = D/(1−ay(e)). Let ˆq(e) = D/(1−ay(e)). Then, S(ˆq(e),e) = D, limq→ˆq(e)+ S(q,e) =
D, and
lim
q→ˆq(e)−S(q,e) =
lim
q→ˆq(e)−
"
(1 −ay(e))q +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
qH(ξ | e)dξ
#
= D.
Hence, S(q,e) is continuous in q at q = D/(1 −ay(e)). Also, limq→ˆq(e)+ ∂S(q,e)/∂q = limq→ˆq(e)+ 0 = 0, and
lim
q→ˆq(e)−
∂S(q,e)
∂q
=
lim
q→ˆq(e)−
"
(1 −ay(e)) −D
q H

1 −D
q | e

+
Z ay(e)
1−D/q
H(ξ | e)dξ
#
= (1 −ay(e)) −(1 −ay(e))H(ay(e) | e) +
Z ay(e)
ay(e)
H(ξ | e)dξ = 0,
since H(ay(e) | e) = 1. Therefore, S(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable in q when q = D/(1 −ay(e)).
(3) Property of y(q,e) in e: Note that y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q = (1 −
R ay(e)
0
ξh(ξ | e)dξ)q = (1 −ay(e) +
R ay(e)
0
H(ξ | e)dξ)q by integration by parts. We ﬁnd y(q,e) is continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Leibniz
integral rule, because H(ξ | e) and ay(e) are continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Assumption 4. Therefore,
∂y(q,e)
∂e
=
"
−a′
y(e) + a′
y(e)H(ay(e) | e) +
Z ay(e)
0
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ
#
q = q
Z ay(e)
0
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ,
because H(ay(e) | e) = 1. Since ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0 when ξ ∈(0,ay(e)) by Assumption 4, we get ∂y(q,e)/∂e > 0
if q > 0, and ∂y(q,e)/∂e = 0 if q = 0. In addition, ∂y(q,e)/∂e is twice more continuously diﬀerentiable in e,
because ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e and ay(e) are twice continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Assumption 4. Thus,
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
= q
"
a′
y(e)∂H(ay(e) | e)
∂e
+
Z ay(e)
0
∂2H(ξ | e)
∂e2
dξ
#
.
Assumption 4 states that either i) a′
y(e) = 0 and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 < 0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,1), or ii) a′
y(e) < 0,
∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 ≤0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,ay(e)]. Either way, we have that ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 <
0. Therefore, y(q,e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and strictly concave in e.
(4) Property of S(q,e) in e: Following a similar structure to that of part (2), we consider three cases:
i) q ≤D, ii) D < q < D/(1 −ay(e)), and iii) D/(1 −ay(e)) < q. However, unlike part (2), the only boundary
we need to check is the one between cases ii) and iii), because the boundary between cases i) and ii) are not

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
5
determined by e. As in part (2), if ay(e) = 1, then the third case never occurs, but this is subsumed in the
more general three case scenario, so we assume ay(e) ̸= 1.
First, if q ≤D, then S(q,e) = y(q,e) by part (i) of this Lemma. Therefore, the result follows from part (3).
Second, if D < q < D/(1−ay(e)), then S(q,e) = (1−ay(e))q +
R ay(e)
1−D/q qH(ξ | e)dξ from the proof of Lemma
2(i). We ﬁnd S(q,e) is continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Leibniz integral rule, because H(ξ | e) and ay(e)
are continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Assumption 4, and so is 1 −D/q. Therefore,
∂S(q,e)
∂e
= −a′
y(e)q +
"
a′
y(e)H(ay(e) | e) +
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ
#
q = q
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ,
because H(ay(e) | e) = 1. Note that ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0 when ξ ∈(0,ay(e)) by Assumption 4. Thus,
∂S(q,e)/∂e > 0 if q > 0 and ∂S(q,e)/∂e = 0 if q = 0. In addition, ∂S(q,e)/∂e is twice more continuously
diﬀerentiable in e, because ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e and ay(e) are twice continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Assumption 4.
Thus,
∂2S(q,e)
∂e2
= q
"
a′
y(e)∂H(ay(e) | e)
∂e
+
Z ay(e)
1−D
q
∂2H(ξ | e)
∂e2
dξ
#
.
Assumption 4 states that either i) a′
y(e) = 0 and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 < 0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,1), or ii) a′
y(e) < 0,
∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0, and ∂2H(ξ | e)/∂e2 ≤0 for e ≥0 and ξ ∈(0,ay(e)]. Either way, we have that ∂2S(q,e)/∂e2 <
0. Hence, S(q,e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and strictly concave in e.
Third, if D/(1−ay(e)) < q, then S(q,e) = D, and hence ∂S(q,e)/∂e = ∂2S(q,e)/∂e2 = 0. Therefore, S(q,e)
is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable, increasing, and concave in e.
Now, we check once diﬀerentiability at e such that q = D/(1 −ay(e)). Assume there exists e′ such that
q = D/(1 −ay(e′)). If e < e′, then q < D/(1 −ay(e)), and in the neighborhood of e′ we fall into the second
case above, and thus S(q,e) = (1 −ay(e))q +
R ay(e)
1−D/q qH(ξ | e)dξ. If e ≥e′, then q ≥D/(1 −ay(e)), which is
the third case above. Hence, S(q,e) = D. At e = e′, we have S(q,e′) = D, lime→e′+ S(q,e) = lime→e′+ D = D,
and
lim
e→e′−S(q,e) = lim
e→e′−
"
(1 −ay(e))q +
Z ay(e)
1−D/q
qH(ξ | e)dξ
#
= D.
In addition, lime→e′+ ∂S(q,e)/∂e = lime→e′+ 0 = 0, and
lim
e→e′−
∂S(q,e)
∂e
= lim
e→e′−q
 Z ay(e)
1−D
q
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ
!
= 0.
Therefore, S(q,e) is once continuously diﬀerentiable at e = e′.
□
Proof of Lemma 3(i) If q ≤D, then S(q,x,e) = Eξ[min{˜q,D}] = Eξ[min{q,(1 −ξ)x,D}] = Eξ[min{q,(1 −
ξ)x}] = y(q,x,e). If q ≥D, then S(q,x,e) = Eξ[min{q,(1 −ξ)x,D}] = Eξ[min{(1 −ξ)x,D}] = y(D,x,e).
□
Proof of Lemma 3(ii) y(q,x,e) = Eξ[min{(1−ξ)x,q}] is equivalent to S(x,e) = Eξ[min{(1−ξ)x,D}] if we
set q = D. Therefore, we can obtain the stated properties of y(q,x,e) from S(x,e) in Lemma 2.
□
Proof of Lemma 4(i) For random capacity, Π(q,e) = pS(q,e) −(cy(q,e) + v(e)). Note that, when q ≤D,
S(q,e) = y(q,e) by Lemma 1 and ∂y(q,e)/∂q = G(K −q | e) by the proof of Lemma 1. Therefore, when q ≤D,

6
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
∂Π(q,0)/∂q = (p−c)∂y(q,0)/∂q = (p−c)G(K −q | 0). Thus, ∂Π(0,0)/∂q = p−c, and hence Assumption 1(i)
is equivalent to p > c.
□
Proof of Lemma 4(ii) For random yield, Π(q,e) = pS(q,e) −(cq + v(e)). By Lemma 2, when q ≤D,
S(q,e) = y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q. Therefore, when q ≤D, ∂Π(0,0)/∂q = p(1 −µ0
y) −c. Hence, Assumption 1(i) is
equivalent to p(1 −µ0
y) > c.
□
Proof of Proposition 1 The proof consists of two steps. In Step 1, we show that if either π∗
s(w) is
strictly increasing in w or π∗
b(w) is strictly decreasing in w, then we can transform the objective function
in problem (2) to a new one without aﬀecting the solution. In Step 2, we take a log transformation of
the new problem, which again does not aﬀect the solution. Then, we show that the new objective function
is supermodular. This means that the optimal solution w∗to problem (2) is increasing in α by Topkis’
monotonicity theorem.
Step 1. We only show that if π∗
s(w) is strictly increasing, then the optimal solution w∗is increasing in α.
The case when π∗
b(w) is strictly decreasing can be analogously obtained and hence we omit the proof. Let
ρ(w,α) = π∗
s(w)απ∗
b(w)1−α. Note that for all α ∈(0,1), any w that satisﬁes either π∗
s(w) = 0 or π∗
b(w) = 0
cannot be optimal, because this results in ρ(w,α) = 0 and we can always ﬁnd w such that ρ(w,α) > 0.
First, assume that π∗
s(w) is strictly increasing. Also, assume that π∗
b(w) is weakly decreasing in w except
the region w ∈(w1,w2) in which π∗
b(w) is strictly increasing. (The following proof can be easily extended
to the cases in which π∗
b(w) has multiple increasing regions.) Then, ρ(w2,α) > ρ(w,α) for all w ∈[w1,w2).
Furthermore, if there exists w0 < w1 such that π∗
b(w0) = π∗
b(w2), then ρ(w2,α) > ρ(w,α) for all w ∈[w0,w1],
since π∗
b(w) is continuous. Therefore, we can conclude that any w ∈[w0,w2) will never be optimal. Note that
if such w0 does not exist, then by continuity any w ∈[c,w2) cannot be optimal, in which case we deﬁne
w0 = c.
Deﬁne ˆπ∗
b(w) as follows.
ˆπ∗
b(w) =
(
π∗
b(w2)
if w ∈[w0,w2],
π∗
b(w)
otherwise.
That is, ˆπ∗
b(w) ﬂattens out any trough of π∗
b(w) with the constant π∗
b(w2) while maintaining all decreasing
regions in such a way that ˆπ∗
b(w) is weakly decreasing for all w. Note that ˆπ∗
b(w) is still continuous. Now, we
deﬁne a new optimization problem as follows:
max
w
π∗
s(w)αˆπ∗
b(w)1−α.
(4)
It is easy to see that problems (2) and (4) are equivalent in terms of the solutions they generate, because
w ∈[w0,w2) can never be optimal for either.
Step 2. We take a log transformation of problem (4), which preserves the solution, as follows.
max
w
ˆρ(w,α) = αlog π∗
s(w) + (1 −α)log ˆπ∗
b(w).
(5)
Let α < α′ and w < w′. Then, ˆρ(w,α) is supermodular if
(α′ log π∗
s(w′) + (1 −α′)log ˆπ∗
b(w′)) −(α′ log π∗
s(w) + (1 −α′)log ˆπ∗
b(w))
≥(αlog π∗
s(w′) + (1 −α)log ˆπ∗
b(w′)) −(αlog π∗
s(w) + (1 −α)log ˆπ∗
b(w)).
(6)

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
7
We can rearrange (6) and obtain
log π∗
s(w′)
π∗
s(w) ≥log ˆπ∗
b(w′)
ˆπ∗
b(w) .
This obviously holds because π∗
s(w) is strictly increasing and ˆπ∗
b(w) is weakly decreasing. Therefore, by
Topkis’ monotonicity theorem, the optimal solution w∗is (weakly) increasing in α.
□
Proof of Proposition 2 The proof is organized in two steps. In Step 1, we show that the optimal order
(production) quantity is qo = D regardless of eﬀort e. In Step 2, we show that eo is uniquely obtained by the
ﬁrst-order condition.
Step 1: Optimal order quantity. The expected proﬁt is Π(q,e) = pS(q,e)−(cy(q,e)+v(e)). We consider
two cases: 1) q > D and 2) q < D. If q > D, then S(q,e) = y(D,e) by Lemma 1, and hence Π(q,e) = py(D,e)−
(cy(q,e) + v(e)) < py(D,e) −(cy(D,e) + v(e)) = Π(D,e), since ∂y(q,e)/∂q > 0 by Lemma 1 and Table 1. If
q < D, then S(q,e) = y(q,e) by Lemma 1, and hence Π(q,e) = (p −c)y(q,e) −v(e) < (p −c)y(D,e) −v(e) =
Π(D,e), since ∂y(q,e)/∂q > 0, and p > c by Lemma 4. Therefore, the solution is qo = D regardless of e.
Step 2: Optimal eﬀort. With qo = D, we have Π(D,e) = (p −c)y(D,e) −v(e), since S(D,e) = y(D,e) by
Lemma 1. Π(D,e) is strictly concave in e, because y(D,e) is strictly concave in e by Lemma 1 and Table 1
and v(e) is convex by Assumption 2. Thus, the optimal eﬀort eo can be uniquely obtained by the the ﬁrst-
order condition: ∂Π(D,e)/∂e = (p−c)∂S(D,e)/∂e−v′(e) = 0. (Note that we focus only on interior solutions
by Assumption 2.)
□
Proof of Proposition 3 We prove the result with the uniform distribution and use the results from the
proof of Proposition 10. In Step 1, we obtain a suﬃcient condition under which dπb(q)/dq < 0 for q ≥D
and w ∈[c,p]. In Step 2, we show that the suﬃcient condition from Step 1 holds if c > p/3 for the uniform
distribution. Note that, in the proof of Proposition 10(i), we show that the buyer always orders at least D
units (in Step 2), and that if the buyer orders D units, the eﬃciency is monotonically increasing for all w (in
Step 3). Therefore, if c > p/3, then the buyer always orders D units, and thus the eﬃciency is monotonically
increasing for all w.
Step 1: General suﬃcient condition. If q ≥D, using the inequality (39) and the best response function
e(q) obtained by (38), we have that
dπb(q)
dq
≤(p −w)y(q,e)
∂e
· de(q)
dq
−w∂y(q,e)
∂q
= (p −w)∂y(q,e)
∂e
·
(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
v′′(e) −(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
−w∂y(q,e)
∂q
≤(p −w)∂y(q,e)
∂e
·
(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
−(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
−w∂y(q,e)
∂q
=
1
−∂2y(q,e)
∂e2

(p −w)∂y(q,e)
∂e
· ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
+ w∂y(q,e)
∂q
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2

,
where the third step holds since v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2, ∂y(q,e)/∂e > 0 and ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0 by Lemma
1 and Table 1, and ∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q = ∂G(K −q | e)/∂e > 0 by Assumption 3. Therefore, dπb(q)/dq < 0 if
(p −w)∂y(q,e)
∂e
· ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
+ w∂y(q,e)
∂q
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
< 0.

8
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
This always holds if
∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
∂y(q,e)
∂q
< −
c
p −c ·
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
∂y(q,e)
∂e
.
(7)
Step 2: Suﬃcient condition for the uniform distribution. First, we show that the optimal eﬀort
satisﬁes that q > K −ac(e). The supplier’s ﬁrst-order condition is: (w −c) ∂y(q,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0. If q ≤K −ac(e),
then
∂y(q,e)
∂e
= 0 by Table 1, while v′(e) > 0, e > 0 by Assumption 2. Therefore, the optimal eﬀort should
satisfy that q > K −ac(e), since we focus only on interior solutions (e > 0) by Assumption 2.
Second, for the uniform distribution, we have that G(ξ | e) = (e+1)ξ
K
and ac(e) =
K
e+1. Therefore, when
q > K −ac(e), or when q >
e
e+1K for uniform, the expected delivered quantity is
y(q,e) = (K −ac(e)) +
Z ac(e)
K−q
G(ξ | e)dξ =

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

K −(e + 1)(K −q)2
2K
.
Hence,
∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
∂y(q,e)
∂q
=
1
e + 1,
and
−
∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
∂y(q,e)
∂e
=
K
(e+1)3
K
2(e+1)2 −(K−q)2
2K
≥
K
(e+1)3
K
2(e+1)2
=
2
e + 1,
where the inequality holds because ∂y(q,e)/∂e > 0 and ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0 by Lemma 1 and Table 1. Therefore,
Condition (7) holds if
1
e + 1 <
c
p −c ·
2
e + 1,
or equivalently, c > p/3.
□
Proof of Proposition 4 Under a unit-penalty contract, each ﬁrm’s expected proﬁt is as follows: πb(q,e) =
pS(q,e) −wy(q,e) + z(q −y(q,e)), and πs(q,e) = wy(q,e) −z(q −y(q,e)) −(cy(q,e) + v(e)). We deﬁne ¯χ as
follows:
¯χ = min
Π(qo,eo)
D
, p(y(K,0) −y(D,0))
K −D

.
(8)
The proof is organized in four steps. In Step 1, we reformulate problem (3). In Step 2 and 3, we solve the
reformulated problem assuming q ≤D and D ≤q ≤K, respectively, because the expected sales S(q,e) has
a kink at q = D. In both Steps 2 and 3, we ﬁnd that the supply chain is coordinated with q∗= qo = D and
e∗= eo. In Step 4, we obtain the expected proﬁts.
Step 1: Reformulation. In problem (3), we replace the ﬁrst constraint with its ﬁrst-order condition,
because they are equivalent. The supplier’s expected proﬁt, πs(q,e) = (p −c)y(q,e) −χq −v(e), is strictly
concave in e, because p−c > 0 by Lemma 4, y(q,e) is strictly concave in e by Lemma 1 and Table 1, and v(e)
is convex by Assumption 2. Also, by Assumption 2, we focus only on interior solutions. Therefore, problem
(3) can be reformulated as follows:
max
q,e
pS(q,e) −py(q,e) + χq,
(9)
s.t. (p −c)∂y(q,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0,
(p −c)y(q,e) −χq −v(e) ≥0.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
9
Step 2: Solving the problem when q ≤D. The objective function in problem (9) collapses to πb(q,e) = χq,
because S(q,e) = y(q,e) by Lemma 1. We ignore the two constraints in problem (9), solve the problem, and
check the solution satisﬁes the ignored constraints. Ignoring the constraints, the optimal order quantity is
obviously q∗= qo = D regardless of e, since χ ≥0 and by Assumption 1. Now, at q = D, the ﬁrst constraint
is satisﬁed if and only if e∗= eo, since y(D,e) = S(D,e) by Lemma 1 and there exists a unique e = eo that
satisﬁes (p −c)∂S(D,e)/∂e = v′(e), which is equivalent to the ﬁrst-order condition of the centralized supply
chain. At (qo,eo), the LHS of the second constraint becomes (p −c)y(qo,eo) −χqo −v(eo) = Π(qo,eo) −χqo,
because S(qo,eo) = y(qo,eo). The second constraint is also satisﬁed, because χ ≤Π(qo,eo)/D since χ < ¯χ
where ¯χ is given by (8). Therefore, (qo,eo) is the unique solution.
Step 3: Solving the problem when D ≤q ≤K. The objective function in problem (9) becomes πb(q,e) =
py(D,e)−py(q,e)+χq, because S(q,e) = y(D,e) by Lemma 1. Again, we ignore the two constraints, solve the
problem, and check the solution satisﬁes the ignored constraints. The objective function πb(q,e) is convex in q,
because y(q,e) is concave in q by Lemma 1. Therefore, q = D is optimal regardless of e, if πb(D,e) > πb(K,e)
for any e, due to convexity of πb(q,e) in q.
The condition πb(D,e) > πb(K,e) can be rewritten as χ < p(y(K,e) −y(D,e))/(K −D) with basic arith-
metic calculations. It is easy to see that y(K,e)−y(D,e) is increasing in e, because ∂2y(q,e)/∂q∂e = ∂G(K −
q | e)/∂e > 0 by Assumption 3. Using the inequality χ < ¯χ where ¯χ is given by (8), we have
χ < p(y(K,0) −y(D,0))
K −D
≤p(y(K,e) −y(D,e))
K −D
,
for any e ≥0. Therefore, q∗= D is indeed optimal ignoring the two constraints. In Step 2, we already showed
that the two constraints are satisﬁed only if e∗= eo when q∗= D.
Step 4: Expected proﬁts. The buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q∗,e∗) = pS(qo,eo) −py(qo,eo) + χqo =
χqo = χD and the supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(q∗,e∗) = (p −c)y(qo,eo) −χqo −v(eo) = Π(qo,eo) −χqo =
Π(qo,eo) −χD, since S(qo,eo) = y(qo,eo) by Lemma 1.
□
Proof of Proposition 5 The proof is organized in three steps. In Step 1, we show the existence of a solution.
In Step 2, we show that a solution satisﬁes D < qo < D/(1−ay(eo)). Finally, in Step 3, we prove that optimal
solutions satisfy the ﬁrst-order necessary conditions.
Step 1: Existence of a solution. The expected proﬁt of the centralized supply chain satisﬁes Π(q,e) =
pS(q,e) −c(q,e) ≤pD −(cq + v(e)), because S(q,e) is bounded by D. It is easy to see that if q > pD/c, then
Π(q,e) < 0 for any e. Also, if e > v−1(pD) where v−1(·) is an inverse function of v(e), then Π(q,e) < 0 for any
q. Therefore, if an optimal solution were to exist, it should be in the compact set {(q,e) | q ∈[0,pD/c],e ∈
[0,v−1(pD)]}. Since Π(q,e) is continuous by Lemma 2, the optimal (qo,eo) does exist in the compact set.
Step 2: Range of a solution. If q ≤D, then S(q,e) = y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q by Lemma 2, and therefore
Π(q,e) = (p(1 −µe
y) −c)q −v(e). Since p(1 −µe
y) −c > 0 for any e ≥0 by Lemma 4, we have ∂Π(q,e)/∂q =
p(1 −µe
y) −c > 0 for any e ≥0. Therefore, qo > D. Also, if q ≥D/(1 −ay(e))q, then S(q,e) = D by the proof
of Lemma 2. Thus, Π(q,e) = pD −(cq + v(e)) and ∂Π(q,e)/∂q = −c < 0. Hence, qo < D/(1 −ay(eo)).
Step 3: First-order conditions. First, we obtain the ﬁrst-order condition with respect to q. Π(q,e) =
pS(q,e) −(cq + v(e)) is concave in q, because S(q,e) is concave in q by Lemma 2, and in particular strictly

10
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
concave when D < q < D/(1 −ay(e)) by Table 2. Hence the optimal order quantity qo should satisfy the
ﬁrst-order condition, p · ∂S(qo,eo)/∂q = c, unless a corner solution is optimal. But, a corner solution cannot
be optimal. Since D < qo < D/(1−ay(eo)), the only possible corner solution is qo = ∞when ay(eo) = 1. But,
limq→∞Π(q,e) = limq→∞pS(q,e) −(cq + v(e)) = −∞, since S(q,e) is bounded by D whereas the cost can be
inﬁnite. Hence, a corner solution cannot be optimal.
Second, we obtain the ﬁrst-order condition with respect to e. Π(q,e) = pS(q,e) −(cq + v(e)) is strictly
concave in e when D < q < D/(1−ay(e)), because S(q,e) is strictly concave in e when D < q < D/(1−ay(e))
by Lemma 2 and Table 2, and v(e) is convex in e by Assumption 2. Hence, the optimal eﬀort eo should satisfy
the ﬁrst-order condition, p · ∂S(qo,eo)/∂e = v′(eo). Note that, by Assumption 2, we focus only on interior
solutions.
□
Proof of Proposition 6(i) We prove the result using the uniform distribution. The proof is organized in
four steps. In Step 1, we formulate the problem with the uniform distribution, and obtain the supplier’s best
response function and the buyer’s ﬁrst-order condition. In Step 2, we obtain the expression of dΠ∗(w)/dw. In
Step 3, we obtain two inequalities, which we use to ﬁnd the upper bound of dΠ∗(w)/dw. Finally, in Step 4,
we show that dΠ∗(w)/dw < 0 if w ∈[wc,p].
Step 1: Formulating the problem with the uniform distribution. First, we obtain the expected
delivered quantity y(q,e) and sales S(q,e) for the uniform distribution. Second, we obtain the supplier’s best
response function e∗(q,w). Third, we show that the optimal order quantity always satisﬁes that D ≤q ≤
(1+ 1
e)D. Finally, we get the buyer’s ﬁrst-order condition, and obtain dq∗(w)/dw, where q∗(w) is the optimal
order quantity given w and e∗(q,w).
First, we obtain y(q,e) and S(q,e) as follows using the proof of Lemma 2:
y(q,e) =

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

q,
S(q,e) =







y(q,e),
if q ≤D,
D,
if q ≥(1 + 1
e)D,

1 −
1
2(e+1)

q −(e + 1)

1 −D
q
2 q
2,
otherwise.
Second, we obtain the supplier’s best response function e∗(q,w). The supplier’s expected proﬁt is
πs(q,e) = wy(q,e) −(cq + θe) = w

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

q −(cq + θe),
which is strictly concave in e. Hence, the optimal eﬀort is uniquely obtained by the ﬁrst-order condition,
∂πs(q,e)
∂e
= 0, which produces
e∗(q,w) =
rwq
2θ −1.
(10)
Third, we show that the buyer’s optimal order quantity always satisﬁes that D ≤q ≤(1+ 1
e)D. The buyer’s
expected proﬁt is πb(q,e) = pS(q,e) −wy(q,e). Let πb(q,w) = πb(q,e∗(q,w)) be the buyer’s expected proﬁt
given e∗(q,w). If q < D, then πb(q,w) = (p −w)y(q,e∗(q,w)) since S(q,e) = y(q,e) by Lemma 2. Therefore,
πb(q,w) increases in q because y(q,e) is increasing in both q and e by Lemma 2 and Table 2, and e∗(q,w)
is increasing in q by (10). Hence, it is optimal to order q ≥D. If q > (1 + 1
e)D, then S(q,e) = D and, thus,

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
11
πb(q,w) = pD −wy(q,e∗(q,w)), which decreases in q because of the same reason. Therefore, it is optimal to
order q ≤(1 + 1
e)D.
Last, we obtain the buyer’s ﬁrst-order condition and dq∗(w)/dw. When D ≤q ≤(1 + 1
e)D, the buyer’s
expected proﬁt is
πb(q,e) = p
"
1 −
1
2(e + 1)

q −(e + 1)

1 −D
q
2 q
2
#
−w

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

q.
(11)
By plugging the supplier’s best response function (10) in the buyer’s expected proﬁt (11), we get πb(q,w) =
πb(q,e∗(q,w)). Then, we can obtain the optimal order quantity q∗(w) from the buyer’s ﬁrst-order condition
as follows:
∂πb(q,w)
∂q
= φ(q,w) = (p −w) −(p −w)
4p wq
2θ
−3p
4
rwq
2θ

1 −D
q
2
−p
rwq
2θ

1 −D
q
 D
q = 0.
(12)
Note that
∂2πb(q,w)
∂q2
= ∂φ(q,w)
∂q
=

p −w
8(e + 1)q −3p(e + 1)
8q

−p(e + 1)D
4q2
−3p(e + 1)D2
8q3
< 0,
(13)
where e = p wq
2θ −1, because the term in the bracket is negative for all e ≥0. Therefore, πb(q,w) is strictly
concave in q, and the optimal order quantity q∗(w) is uniquely obtained from the ﬁrst-order condition (12).
Using the implicit function theorem, we have that
q∗(w)
dw
= −∂φ(q,w)
∂w
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
−1
.
(14)
Step 2: dΠ∗(w)/dw for the uniform distribution. In this step, we obtain the expression for dΠ∗(w)/dw.
Let Π∗(q,w) = πb(q,w) + πs(q,w) be the expected proﬁt of the total supply chain given the supplier’s best
response function e∗(q,w). Also, let Π∗(w) = Π∗(q∗(w),w), where q∗(w) is the buyer’s optimal order quantity.
Then, using (14),
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
+ ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
dq∗(w)
dw
=
1
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
−∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
∂φ(q,w)
∂w

.
Note that ∂φ(q,w)
∂q
< 0 by (13). Therefore, dΠ∗(w)/dw < 0 if
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
−∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
∂φ(q,w)
∂w
> 0.
(15)
We can obtain the following expressions with some basic calculations:
∂φ(q,w)
∂w
= −
1
4(e + 1)
p(2e + 1)
w
+ 2(e + 1)

< 0,
(16)
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
= ∂πb(q,w)
∂q
+ ∂πs(q,w)
∂q
= w

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

−c > 0,
(17)
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
= ∂πb(q,w)
∂w
+ ∂πs(q,w)
∂w
=
qp
(e + 1)4w
 
p −w
p
−(e + 1)2

1 −D
q
2!
,
(18)
noting that e = p wq
2θ −1. Also note that
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
> 0 because
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
= ∂πs(q,e)
∂q
= πs(q,e)+θe
q
> 0 since the
supplier’s participation constraint is satisﬁed.
Step 3: Inequalities to obtain the upper bound of dΠ∗(w)/dw. In this step, we obtain the lower
bound of ∂φ(q,w)
∂q
and the upper bound of ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
.

12
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
First, we obtain the lower bound of
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
. We showed that the buyer always orders q ≥D in Step 1.
Therefore, using (10) we have that (e + 1)2 = wq
2θ ≥wD
2θ . Using this inequality, (10), and (13), we have
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
=
p −w
8(e + 1)q −3p(e + 1)
8q
−p(e + 1)D
4q2
−3p(e + 1)D2
8q3
=
w
16θ(e + 1)
 p −w
(e + 1)2 −3p −
pwD
θ(e + 1)2 −
3pw2D2
4θ2(e + 1)4

≥
w
16θ(e + 1)
 p −w
(e + 1)2 −3p −pwD
θ
· 2θ
wD −3pw2D2
4θ2
·
4θ2
w2D2

=
w
16θ(e + 1)
 p −w
(e + 1)2 −8p

.
(19)
Second, we obtain the upper bound of ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
. Using (10), the buyer’s ﬁrst-order condition (12) can be
written as follows:
(p −w) −p −w
4(e + 1) −3p
4 (e + 1)

1 −D
q
2
−p(e + 1)

1 −D
q
 D
q = 0.
Rearranging this ﬁrst-order condition, we get

1 −D
q
3p
4

1 −D
q

+ pD
q

= (p −w)

1
e + 1 −
1
4(e + 1)2

.
Therefore,

1 −D
q

=
4q
3q + D

1 −w
p

1
e + 1 −
1
4(e + 1)2

≥
4q
3q + q

1 −w
p

1
e + 1 −
1
4(e + 1)2

=

1 −w
p

1
(e + 1)

1 −
1
4(e + 1)

≥3
4

1 −w
p

1
(e + 1),
where the second step holds because q ≥D and the last step holds because e ≥0.
Now using this result, (10), and (18), we have
∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
=
p
(e + 1)4w · 2θ(e + 1)2
w
"
1 −w
p

−(e + 1)2

1 −D
q
2#
= pθ(e + 1)
2w2
"
1 −w
p

−(e + 1)2

1 −D
q
2#
≤pθ(e + 1)
2w2
"
1 −w
p

−(e + 1)2 9
16

1 −w
p
2
1
(e + 1)2
#
= θ(e + 1)(p −w)
2w2
7p + 9w
16p

.
(20)
Step 4: Monotonicity. In this step, we show that dΠ∗(w)/dw < 0 if w ∈[wc,p]. In Step 2, we already
showed that dΠ∗(w)/dw < 0 if (15) holds. Note that if ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
< 0, then (15) always holds, because we have
∂φ(q,w)
∂q
< 0, ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂q
> 0, and ∂φ(q,w)
∂w
< 0 from Steps 1 and 2.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
13
If ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
> 0, then using the lower bound of ∂φ(q,w)
∂q
, (19), and the upper bound of ∂Π∗(q,w)
∂w
, (20), along
with (16) and (17), we have that
∂Π
∂w
∂φ
∂q −∂Π
∂q
∂φ
∂w ≥θ(e + 1)(p −w)
2w2
· 7p + 9w
16p
·
w
16θ(e + 1)
 p −w
(e + 1)2 −8p

+

w

1 −
1
2(e + 1)

−c

·

1
4(e + 1)
p(2e + 1)
w
+ 2(e + 1)

= (p −w)2(7p + 9w)
512wp(e + 1)2
−(p −w)(7p + 9w)
64w
+ p
8
2e + 1
e + 1
2
+ w
4
2e + 1
e + 1

−cp
4w
2e + 1
e + 1

−c
2
≥−(p −w)(7p + 9w)
64w
+ p
8
2e + 1
e + 1
2
+ w
4
2e + 1
e + 1

−cp
4w
2e + 1
e + 1

−c
2.
We have that e + 1 = p wq
2θ ≥
q
cD
2θ , because w ≥c and q ≥D. Therefore,
2 −
r
2θ
cD ≤2e + 1
e + 1 = 2 −
1
e + 1 < 2.
Let k = 2 −
q
2θ
cD. Then, we have that
∂Π
∂w
∂φ
∂q −∂Π
∂q
∂φ
∂w ≥−(p −w)(7p + 9w)
64w
+ p
8
2e + 1
e + 1
2
+ w
4
2e + 1
e + 1

−cp
4w
2e + 1
e + 1

−c
2
> −(p −w)(7p + 9w)
64w
+ p
8k2 + w
4 k −pc
2w −c
2
=
1
64w

(16k + 9)w2 + (8pk2 −32c −2p)w −p(7p + 32c)

.
Therefore, using the solution of the quadratic equation in the square bracket, ∂Π
∂w
∂φ
∂q −∂Π
∂q
∂φ
∂w > 0 if
w ≥wc = −(8pk2 −32c −2p) +
p
(8pk2 −32c −2p)2 + 4p(16k + 9)(7p + 32c)
2(16k + 9)
.
□
Proof of Proposition 6(ii) In this proof, we use the results from the proof of Proposition 11. The proof is
organized in four steps. In Step 1, we show some properties of the cost of eﬀort v(e) = θem with respect to θ
and m. In Step 2, we show some properties of the supplier’s best response function e∗(q,w) with respect to
θ and m. In Step 3, we obtain the upper bound of dq∗(w)/dw using the properties from the previous steps.
Finally, in Step 4, we show that the eﬃciency is decreasing if either θ or m is large enough.
Step 1: Properties of the cost of eﬀort. We show the following four properties of v(e) at the equilibrium
eﬀort e∗: limθ→∞v′′(e∗) = ∞, limm→∞v′′(e∗) = ∞, limθ→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = 0, and limm→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = 0.
First, we show that limθ→∞v′′(e∗) = ∞. The supplier’s ﬁrst-order condition is the following.
∂πs(q∗,e∗)
∂e
= w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−v′(e∗) = w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−θme∗m−1 = 0.
(21)
Therefore, θ = w
m
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
e∗1−m. Note that ∂y(q,e)
∂e
is decreasing in e since ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
< 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2
and ﬁnite by Assumption 4, and also e1−m is decreasing in e since m > 1. Hence, it is easy to see that
limθ→∞e∗= 0. Thus, using (21),
lim
θ→∞v′′(e∗) = lim
θ→∞θm(m −1)e∗m−2 = lim
e∗→0w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
(m −1) 1
e∗= ∞,
(22)

14
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
since ∂y(q,e)
∂e
> 0,e ≥0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2.
Second, we show that limm→∞v′′(e∗) = ∞. Note that limm→∞e∗< ∞, because the ﬁrst-order condi-
tion (21) cannot hold otherwise because of the following reason: w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
is ﬁnite by Assumption 4, but
limm→∞θme∗m−1 = ∞if limm→∞e∗= ∞. Therefore,
lim
m→∞v′′(e∗) = lim
m→∞w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
(m −1) 1
e∗= ∞.
(23)
Third, we show that limθ→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = 0. Using the ﬁrst-order condition (21),
lim
θ→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = lim
θ→∞
θm(m −1)(m −2)e∗m−3
θ3m3(m −1)3e∗3m−6
= lim
θ→∞
(m −2)

w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
2
(m −1)2
e∗= 0,
(24)
because ∂y(q,e)
∂e
> 0,e ≥0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2, and limθ→∞e∗= 0.
Last, we show that limm→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = 0.
lim
m→∞
v′′′(e∗)
(v′′(e∗))3 = lim
m→∞
(m −2)

w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
2
(m −1)2
e∗= 0,
(25)
since limm→∞e∗< ∞.
Step
2:
Properties
of
the
best
response
function. We show the supplier’s best response
function
e∗(q∗,w)
satisﬁes
the
following
properties:
limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0,
limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= 0, limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= 0, and limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
=
limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= 0.
First, we show that limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0. We can obtain ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
by diﬀerentiating the
ﬁrst-order condition (21) with respect to q as follows:
w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+

w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
 ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0.
(26)
Therefore,
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= −
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
.
(27)
Thus, limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0 using (22) and (23), because y(q,e) has ﬁnite derivatives
regardless of e by Assumption 4.
Second, we show that limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= 0. Using the ﬁrst-order condition (21) and
the implicit function theorem, we have
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= −
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
.
(28)
Therefore, limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= 0 using (22) and (23), because y(q,e) has ﬁnite derivatives
regardless of e by Assumption 4. Note that we can observe the following relationship between (27) and (28):
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
= q
w
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
,
(29)
where ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
= ∂y(q,e)
∂e
· 1
q because y(q,e) is linear in q.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
15
Third, we show that limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= 0. We can obtain ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
by diﬀerentiating
(26) with respect to q as follows.
w · ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2∂q
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
+

w∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)
 ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
+ w∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2∂q
 ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
+

w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
 ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= 0,
where ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q2
= 0, because y(q,e) is linear in q. Therefore,
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= −
2w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2∂q
+

w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)

∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
· ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= −
2w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
· 1
q∗
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
· ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
−
w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)

w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
3 ·

w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
2
,
where
∂3y(q,e)
∂e2∂q
= ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
1
q because y(q,e) is linear in q, and also we use (27). Therefore, we can see that
limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= 0 and limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2
= 0 using (22), (23), (24), (25), and that limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
=
limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0. Note that y(q,e) has ﬁnite derivatives regardless of e by Assumption 4.
Finally, we show that limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= 0. We can obtain ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
by diﬀerentiating
(26) with respect to w as follows.
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
+

w∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)
 e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
 ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
+

w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
 ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
+
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+ w∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2∂q
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w

= 0.
Therefore,
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= −
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+ w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2∂q
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
+
h
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
+

w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)

∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
i
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
= −
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+ 2 ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
−
q∗
w

w ∂3y(q∗,e∗)
∂e3
−v′′′(e∗)

w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
2

w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
3
,
using (27) and (29), and that
∂3y(q,e)
∂e2∂q
= ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
· 1
q because y(q,e) is linear in q. Again, we can observe
that limθ→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= limm→∞
∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= 0, using (22), (23), (24), (25), and that limθ→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
=
limm→∞
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
= 0. Note that y(q,e) has ﬁnite derivatives regardless of e by Assumption 4.
Step 3: Upper bound of dq∗(w)/dw. Using the results on limits of e∗(q∗,w) from Step 2, and using (45)
and (46), we have
lim
θ→∞
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= lim
m→∞
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= −∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
,
lim
θ→∞
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
= lim
m→∞
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
= p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
.
Hence, for any arbitrarily small ϵ > 0, there exists θ′ > 0 such that for all θ > θ′, we have that
−∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−ϵ <∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
< −∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
+ ϵ,
p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
−ϵ <∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
< p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
+ ϵ.

16
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Also, for any arbitrarily small ϵ > 0, there exists m′ > 1 such that for all m > m′, the same holds. Then,
using (44), we can obtain the following upper bound for dq∗(w)/dw:
dq∗(w)
dw
= −
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
−1
<
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−ϵ
p ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
−ϵ
,
where ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
> 0 and ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
< 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2.
Step 4: Decreasing eﬃciency. From equations (42) and (43), we have
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= dπ∗
b(w)
dw
+ dπ∗
s(w)
dw
= λ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c
 dq∗(w)
dw
.
Using the results from Step 3 and the second equation in (41) for λ, for any ϵ > 0 if θ or m > 1 is large
enough, we get the following inequality.
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= λ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c
 dq∗(w)
dw
= −p ∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e)
· ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c
 dq∗(w)
dw
< −p ∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
w ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
· ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c

∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−ϵ
p ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
−ϵ
,
(30)
where w ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c = (wy(q∗,e∗) −cq) 1
q = (πs(q∗,e∗) + v(e∗)) 1
q > 0, since y(q,e) is linear in q and the
supplier’s participation constraint is satisﬁed.
Note that the ﬁrst term in (30) tends to zero as θ →∞or as m →∞, because ∂S(q,e)
∂e
, ∂y(q,e)
∂e
, and ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
have ﬁnite bounds regardless of e by Assumption 4, and limθ→∞v′′(e∗) = limm→∞v′′(e∗) = ∞by (22) and
(23). Also, we can ﬁnd a suﬃciently small ϵ > 0 such that the second term is negative, because

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c

∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
p ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
< 0,
where ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
> 0 and ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
< 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2. Therefore, 1) there exists θ′ such that for all
θ > θ′, dΠ∗(w)
dw
< 0 for all w, and 2) there exists m′ > 1 such that for all m > m′, dΠ∗(w)
dw
< 0 for all w.
□
Proof of Proposition 7 Under a unit-penalty with buy-back contract (w,z,b), each ﬁrm’s expected proﬁt
is as follows:
πb(q,e,w,z,b) = pS(q,e) −wy(q,e) + z(q −y(q,e)) + b(y(q,e) −S(q,e)),
πs(q,e,w,z,b) = wy(q,e) −z(q −y(q,e)) −b(y(q,e) −S(q,e)) −c(q,e).
For χ ∈
h
0,
Π(qo,eo)
Π(qo,eo)+v(eo)
i
, the coordinating contract parameters are w∗= p(1 −χ) + χ(µeo
y M + c), z∗=
χ((1 −µeo
y )M −c), and b∗= p(1 −χ), where M = v′(eo)/(∂y(qo,eo)/∂e).
The proof is organized in two steps. In Step 1, we reformulate problem (3). In Step 2, we show that the
contract (w∗,z∗,b∗) satisﬁes the KKT conditions at (qo,eo).
Step 1: Reformulation. In problem (3), we can replace the ﬁrst constraint with its ﬁrst-order condition. The
supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗) = (w∗+z∗−b∗)y(q,e)+b∗S(q,e)−z∗q −(cq +v(e)), and this is
strictly concave in e because of the following reason. First, w∗+ z∗−b∗= χM = χv′(eo)/(∂y(qo,eo)/∂e) ≥0,

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
17
because χ ≥0, v′(eo) > 0 by Assumption 2, and ∂y(qo,eo)/∂e > 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2. Second, y(q,e)
and S(q,e) are both strictly concave in e by Lemma 2 and Table 2. Third, v(e) is convex by Assumption 2.
Also, by Assumption 2, we focus only on the interior solutions. Therefore, problem (3) can be reformulated
as
max
q,e
πb(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗),
(31)
s.t. ∂πs(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂e
= 0,
πs(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗) ≥0.
Step 2: KKT conditions. Assume (qo,eo) is a solution to problem (31). Then, there exist λ,µ ∈R such
that
∂πb(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂q
+ λ∂2πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂e∂q
+ µ∂πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂q
= 0,
∂πb(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂e
+ λ∂2πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂e2
+ µ∂πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗)
∂e
= 0,
where µ · πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗) = 0 and µ ≥0. Also, (qo,eo) satisﬁes the two constraints.
Note that, under the contract (w∗,z∗,b∗), each ﬁrm’s expected proﬁt is the following:
πs(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗) = χMy(q,e) + p(1 −χ)S(q,e) −χ((1 −µeo
y )M −c)q −(cq + v(e)),
πb(q,e,w∗,z∗,b∗) = pχS(q,e) −χMy(q,e) + χ((1 −µeo
y )M −c)q,
where M = v′(eo) · (∂y(qo,eo)/∂e)−1.
From the ﬁrst KKT condition, we have

pχ∂S(qo,eo)
∂q
−χM ∂y(qo,eo)
∂q
+ χ
 (1 −µeo
y )M −c

+ λ

χM ∂2y(qo,eo)
∂e∂q
+ p(1 −χ)∂2S(qo,eo)
∂e∂q

+ µ

χM ∂y(qo,eo)
∂q
+ p(1 −χ)∂S(qo,eo)
∂q
−χ
 (1 −µeo
y )M −c

−c

= 0.
Simple arithmetic calculations reveal that the ﬁrst and the third square brackets are zero, because
∂y(qo,eo)/∂q = (1 −µeo
y ), and also p∂S(qo,eo)/∂q = c by the ﬁrst-order condition of the centralized supply
chain. In addition, for the second square bracket, note that M∂2y(qo,eo)/∂e∂q = M(∂y(qo,eo)/∂e)·(1/qo) =
v′(eo)/qo, because y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q. Therefore, we have
λ

χv′(eo) 1
qo + p(1 −χ)∂2S(qo,eo)
∂e∂q

= 0.
Let λ = 0. Then, the ﬁrst condition is always satisﬁed. From the second KKT condition, we have

pχ∂S(qo,eo)
∂e
−χM ∂y(qo,eo)
∂e

+ λ

χM ∂2y(qo,eo)
∂e2
+ p(1 −χ)∂2S(qo,eo)
∂e2
−v′′(eo)

+ µ

χM ∂y(qo,eo)
∂e
+ p(1 −χ)∂S(qo,eo)
∂e
−v′(eo)

= 0.
The second square bracket disappears, because λ = 0. Simple arithmetic calculations reveal that the ﬁrst and
the third square brackets are zero, because M ·∂y(qo,eo)/∂e = v′(eo), and also p∂S(qo,eo)/∂e = v′(eo) by the
ﬁrst-order condition of the centralized supply chain. Therefore, the second KKT condition holds regardless

18
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
of µ, and thus µ · πs(qo,eo,w∗,z∗,b∗) = 0 is also satisﬁed. (We can simply set µ = 0 if the second constraint
does not bind.) Thus, the second constraint may or may not bind. Also, it is easy to check that the two
constraints are satisﬁed at (qo,eo). Therefore, KKT conditions are satisﬁed at (qo,eo).
The buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q∗,e∗,w∗,z∗,b∗) = χ(Π(qo,eo)+v(eo)), and the supplier’s expected proﬁt
is πs(q∗,e∗,w∗,z∗,b∗) = (1 −χ)Π(qo,eo) −χv(eo).
□
Proof of Proposition 8 The proof is organized as follows. From Step 1 to 4, we ignore the participation
constraint in problem (3), but in Step 5, we show that the participation constraint is always satisﬁed if w is
above some threshold.
• Step 1: The supplier’s optimal production quantity x∗and eﬀort e∗always satisfy 0 < 1 −q/x∗< ay(e∗)
for any q.
• Step 2: The supplier’s best response functions x(q) and e(q) are once continuously diﬀerentiable with
x′(q) > 0 and e′(q) > 0.
• Step 3: The buyer’s optimal order quantity q∗satisﬁes q∗≥D regardless of the wholesale price.
• Step 4: There exists w1 < p such that the optimal order quantity is q∗= D if w ∈[w1,p].
• Step 5: There exists w2 < p such that if w ∈[w2,p], then the participation constraint is always satisﬁed.
• Step 6: If q∗= D, the eﬃciency of the supply chain strictly increases in w.
Then, if we set wd = max{w1,w2}, the statement holds.
Step 1: Feasible region. First, we show that x∗> q by contradiction. If x∗≤q, then y(q,x∗,e∗) = (1 −
µe∗
y )x∗. The participation constraint is satisﬁed if πs(q,x∗,e∗) = w(1 −µe∗
y )x∗−cx∗−v(e∗) ≥0, or w(1 −
µe∗
y ) −c ≥v(e∗)/x∗> 0. However, this means that the ﬁrst-order condition can never be satisﬁed because
∂πs(q,x,e)/∂x = w(1 −µe
y) −c > 0. Hence, x∗> q, or 0 < 1 −q/x∗.
Second, we show that 1−q/x∗< ay(e∗) by contradiction. When x > q, we have ∂y(q,x,e)/∂x = (1−ay(e))+
R ay(e)
1−q/x H(ξ | e)dξ −q
xH(1 −q/x | e). If 1 −q/x∗≥ay(e∗), then ∂y(q,x∗,e∗)/∂x = 0 because H(ay(e∗) | e∗) = 1.
Therefore, the ﬁrst-order condition cannot be satisﬁed, and thus 0 < 1 −q/x∗< ay(e∗).
Step 2: Best response functions. The supplier’s best response functions are obtained by the following
ﬁrst-order conditions:
w∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
−c = 0,
w∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0.
(32)
Note that the second equation may not hold for any e ≥0 if q is small, in which case e(q) = 0 and
x′(q) = −w∂2y(q,x,e)/∂x∂q
w∂2y(q,x,e)/∂x2 ,
by the implicit function theorem. Hence, x′(q) > 0 because
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x∂q
> 0 and
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x2
< 0 (which we show
later in this step). We assume that the second equation in (32) holds in equilibrium when q ≥D, which is
our Assumption 2 of focusing on interior solutions.
Now, assume both ﬁrst-order conditions hold. The determinant of the Jacobian of the two ﬁrst-order
conditions is strictly positive, that is, w2 
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2
−w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e) > 0, with a slight abuse of notation
using y for y(q,x,e). This is because y(q,x,e) is jointly concave in x and e by Assumption 5, and thus

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
19
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2 > 0, and also ∂2y/∂x2 ≤0 by Lemma 3 and v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2. Therefore, by the
implicit function theorem, x(q) and e(q) are once continuously diﬀerentiable. (Also note that y(q,x,e) is
thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in x and e by Lemma 3, and v(e) is thrice continuously diﬀerentiable by
Assumption 2.)
Hence,

x′(q)
e′(q)

= −
"
w ∂2y
∂x2 ,
w ∂2y
∂x∂e
w ∂2y
∂e∂x, w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)
#−1
·
"
w ∂2y
∂x∂q
w ∂2y
∂e∂q
#
= −
1
w2

∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2

−w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e)
·

w ∂2y
∂x∂q

w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)

−w2 ∂2y
∂x∂e
∂2y
∂e∂q
w2 
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e∂q −
∂2y
∂x∂e
∂2y
∂x∂q


.
(33)
Because we already know the sign of the determinant of the Jacobian, we only need to check the signs
of the two components in the matrix in (33). But before we proceed, we need to obtain the derivatives of
y(q,x,e) and ﬁnd some important relationships that we use in checking the signs of x′(q) and e′(q). We have
y(q,x,e) = [(1 −ay(e)) +
R ay(e)
1−q/x H(ξ | e)dξ]x. We obtain the following derivatives:
∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
= x
Z ay(e)
1−q/x
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ > 0,
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂e∂q
= ∂H(1 −q
x | e)
∂e
> 0,
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x∂q
= q
x2 h

1 −q
x | e

> 0,
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂q2
= −1
xh

1 −q
x | e

< 0,
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x∂e
=
Z ay(e)
1−q/x
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ −q
x
∂H(1 −q
x | e)
∂e
,
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x2
= −q2
x3 h

1 −q
x | e

< 0,
where we can obtain the signs because h(ξ | e) > 0 and ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0 when ξ ∈(0,ay(e)) by Assumption 4.
Therefore, we can identify the following two relationships between the derivatives:
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x∂e
= 1
x
∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
−q
x
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂e∂q
,
and
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂x∂q
= −q
x
∂2y(q,x,e)
∂q2
.
(34)
Now, using the equations (34), we ﬁrst ﬁnd that x′(q) > 0, because
w ∂2y
∂x∂q

w∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)

−w2 ∂2y
∂x∂e
∂2y
∂e∂q ≤w2
 ∂2y
∂x∂q
∂2y
∂e2 −∂2y
∂x∂e
∂2y
∂e∂q

= w2
"
−q
x
 
∂2y
∂q2
∂2y
∂e2 −
 ∂2y
∂e∂q
2!
−1
x
∂y
∂e
∂2y
∂e∂q
#
< 0,
where the ﬁrst step holds since ∂2y(q,x,e)/∂x∂q > 0 and v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2, and the second step
holds by equations (34). The last step holds because y(q,x,e) is jointly concave in q and e in the feasible
region by Assumption 5, and thus ∂2y
∂q2
∂2y
∂e2 −

∂2y
∂e∂q
2
> 0, and also ∂y/∂e > 0 and ∂2y/∂e∂q > 0.
Second, we ﬁnd that e′(q) > 0, because
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e∂q −∂2y
∂x∂e
∂2y
∂x∂q = −q
x2 h

1 −q
x | e
Z ay(e)
1−q/x
∂H(ξ | e)
∂e
dξ < 0,
since h(1 −q/x | e) > 0 and ∂H(ξ | e)/∂e > 0 by Assumption 4.
Step 3: Lower bound for optimal order quantity. Let πb(q) be the buyer’s expected proﬁt given the
best response functions x(q) and e(q) of the supplier. When q ≤D, the buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q) =
(p −w)y(q,x(q),e(q)), because S(q,x,e) = y(q,x,e) by Lemma 3. Hence,
dπb(q)
dq
= (p −w)
∂y(q,x,e)
∂q
+ ∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
dx(q)
dq
+ ∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
de(q)
dq

> 0,

20
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
because ∂y(q,x,e)/∂x,∂y(q,x,e)/∂e > 0 by Lemma 3, and x′(q) > 0,e′(q) ≥0 by Step 2, and ∂y(q,x,e)/∂q =
H(1 −q/x | e) > 0. Therefore, it is optimal to order at least D units.
Step 4: Optimal order quantity. We show that there exists w1 < p such that, if w ∈[w1,p], then πb(q) is
strictly decreasing in q when q > D. This means that the optimal order quantity is q∗= D when w ∈[w1,p].
The buyer’s expected proﬁt when q > D is πb(q) = py(D,x(q),e(q))−wy(q,x(q),e(q)), because S(q,x,e) =
y(D,x,e) by Lemma 3. Hence,
dπb(q)
dq
= −w∂y(q,x,e)
∂q
+

p∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
−w∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
 dx(q)
dq
+

p∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
−w∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
 de(q)
dq .
When w = p, dπb(q)/dq < −w ∂y(q,x,e)
∂q
< 0 for any q > D, because ∂2y(q,x,e)/∂x∂q = (q/x2)h(1 −q/x |
e) > 0, ∂2y(q,x,e)/∂e∂q = ∂H(1−q/x|e)
∂e
> 0 by Assumption 4, and x′(q),e′(q) > 0 by Step 2. Since dπb(q)/dq
is continuous in w, and x′(q) and e′(q) are ﬁnite by Step 2, there exists w1 < p such that, when w ∈[w1,p],
dπb(q)/dq < 0 for all q > D.
Step 5: Participation constraint. We know that there exists w1 < p such that the optimal order quantity is
q∗= D when w ∈[w1,p]. When q∗= D, the supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(D,x,e) = wy(D,x,e)−(cx+v(e)).
Let π∗
s(w) = maxx,e≥0 πs(D,x,e) be the supplier’s expected proﬁt at the equilibrium given a wholesale price
w ∈[w1,p]. If w = p, then πs(D,x,e) = Π(x,e), because y(D,x,e) = Eξ[D,(1−ξ)x] in the delegation scenario
is equivalent to S(x,e) = [(1 −ξ)x,D] in the control scenario with demand D. Therefore, the supply chain is
coordinated with π∗
s(p) = Π(xo,eo). If w < p, then by the envelope theorem, dπ∗
s(w)/dw = y(D,x,e), which
is ﬁnite. Therefore, there exists w2 < p such that if w ∈[w2,p] then π∗
s(w) ≥0 by continuity, and thus the
participation constraint is satisﬁed.
Step 6: Increasing eﬃciency. We show that, when q = D, the eﬃciency is monotonically increas-
ing in w. The supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(D,x,e) = wy(D,x,e) −(cx + v(e)). Let x(w) and e(w)
be the supplier’s optimal production quantity and eﬀort as functions of w when q = D. Then, the sup-
plier’s optimal expected proﬁt is π∗
s(w) = wy(D,x(w),e(w)) −(cx(w) + v(e(w))). By the envelope theorem,
dπ∗
s(w)/dw = ∂πs(D,x,e)/∂w = y(D,x,e). Also, the buyer’s expected proﬁt at the equilibrium is π∗
b(w) =
(p −w)y(D,x(w),e(w)), since S(D,x,e) = y(D,x,e) by Lemma 3. Hence,
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −y(D,x,e) + (p −w)
∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
dx(w)
dw
+ ∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
de(w)
dw

.
Let Π∗(w) = π∗
b(w) + π∗
s(w). Then,
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= dπ∗
b(w)
dw
+ dπ∗
s(w)
dw
= (p −w)
∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
dx(w)
dw
+ ∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
de(w)
dw

.
(35)
Both functions x(w) and e(w) can be jointly obtained by the following two ﬁrst-order conditions:
w∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
−c = 0,
w∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0.
With a slight abuse of notation using y = y(D,x,e), we can apply the implicit function theorem as follows.

x′(w)
e′(w)

= −
"
w ∂2y
∂x2 ,
w ∂2y
∂x∂e
w ∂2y
∂e∂x, w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)
#−1
·
 ∂y
∂x
∂y
∂e

= −
1
w2

∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2

−w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e)
·


∂y
∂x

w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)

−w ∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂e
w

∂2y
∂x2
∂y
∂e −
∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂x


.
(36)

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
21
Let m(x,e) = w2 
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2
−w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e). Since y(q,x,e) is jointly concave in x and e by Assumption
5, we know that m(x,e) > −w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e) ≥0, because ∂2y/∂x2 ≤0 by Lemma 3 and v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2.
Now, we can rewrite (35) using (36) as follows.
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= −p −w
m(x,e)
"
w∂2y
∂e2
∂y
∂x
2
+ w ∂2y
∂x2
∂y
∂e
2
−2w ∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂e
∂y
∂x −v′′(e)
∂y
∂x
2#
= −p −w
m(x,e)

w∂2y
∂e2
 
∂y
∂x −
∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂e
∂2y
∂e2
!2
+ w
  ∂y
∂e
2
∂2y
∂e2
 
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −
 ∂2y
∂x∂e
2!
−v′′(e)
∂y
∂x
2

.
Note that
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −

∂2y
∂x∂e
2
> 0 due to joint concavity of y(q,x,e). In addition, ∂2y/∂e2 < 0 by Lemma 3
and Table 2. Also, v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2. Therefore, a simple sign check reveals that dΠ∗(w)/dw > 0,
and thus the eﬃciency is monotonically increasing in w.
□
Proof of Proposition 9 We relax problem (3) by ignoring the participation constraint, solve the problem,
and show that there exists ¯χ > 0 such that if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ, then the given penalty contract coordinates the
supply chain, and also satisﬁes the participation constraint.
The proof is organized in three steps. In Step 1, we show that the supplier’s optimal production quantity
x∗and eﬀort e∗satisfy 0 < 1 −q/x∗< ay(e∗) for any q ≥0. In Step 2, we show that the supplier’s best
response functions, x(q) and e(q), are once continuously diﬀerentiable and satisfy x′(q) > 0,e′(q) ≥0 for all
q ≥0. In Step 3, we show that there exists ¯χ > 0 such that if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ, then the given penalty contract
coordinates the supply chain and satisfy the supplier’s participation constraint.
Step 1: Feasible region. With the given contract, w∗= p −χ and z∗= χ, the supplier’s expected
proﬁt is πs(q,x,e) = py(q,x,e) −(cx + v(e)) −χq. The ﬁrst-order condition for x∗is: ∂πs(q,x∗,e∗)/∂x =
p∂y(q,x∗,e∗)/∂x−c = 0. First, we show that x∗> q by contradiction. If x∗≤q, then y(q,x∗,e∗) = (1−µe∗
y )x∗,
and thus ∂y(q,x∗,e∗)/∂x = (1 −µe∗
y ) by the proof of Lemma 3. But, we know that p(1 −µe∗
y ) −c > p(1 −
µ0
y) −c > 0 by Lemma 4. Therefore, the ﬁrst-order condition cannot be satisﬁed, and hence x∗> q, which is
equivalent to 0 < 1 −q/x∗.
Second, we show that 1 −q/x∗< ay(e∗) by contradiction as well. When x > q, we have ∂y(q,x,e)/∂x =
(1 −ay(e)) +
R ay(e)
1−q/x H(ξ | e)dξ −q
xH(1 −q/x | e) by the proof of Lemma 3. If 1 −q/x∗≥ay(e∗), then
∂y(q,x∗,e∗)/∂x = 0 because H(ay(e∗) | e∗) = 1. Therefore, the ﬁrst-order condition cannot be satisﬁed, and
thus 0 < 1 −q/x∗< ay(e∗).
Step 2: Best response functions. The supplier’s best response functions are obtained by the following
ﬁrst-order conditions:
p∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
−c = 0,
p∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0.
(37)
Note that these ﬁrst-order conditions are the same as (32) under a wholesale-price contract if we set w = p.
In Step 2 in the proof of Proposition 8, we have shown that x(q) and e(q) obtained from these two ﬁrst-order
conditions are once continuously diﬀerentiable and x′(q) > 0,e′(q) ≥0 regardless of w.
Step 3: Coordination of penalty contracts. First, we show that the buyer’s expected proﬁt, given the
supplier’s best response functions, is strictly increasing in q when q < D. Second, we show that there exists

22
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
¯χ′ > 0 such that if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ′, then the buyer’s expected proﬁt is strictly decreasing in q when q > D. Then,
we can conclude that the buyer’s optimal order quantity is q = D if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ′. Last, we show that the
supplier chooses the optimal production quantity xo and eﬀort eo when q = D. In addition, if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ =
min{¯χ′,Π(xo,eo)/D}, then the participation constraint also holds. Therefore, if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ, the supply chain
is coordinated.
First, with the given contract, w∗= p−χ and z∗= χ, and the supplier’s best response functions, x(q) and
e(q), the buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q) = p(S(q,x(q),e(q))−y(q,x(q),e(q)))+χq. If q ≤D, then πb(q) = χq,
because S(q,x,e) = y(q,x,e) by Lemma 3. Therefore, πb(q) increases in q, and thus the buyer orders at least
D units (even when χ = 0 by Assumption 1).
Second, when q ≥D, πb(q) = p(y(D,x(q),e(q)) −y(q,x(q),e(q))) + χq, because S(q,x,e) = y(D,x,e) by
Lemma 3. Hence,
dπb(q)
dq
= p

−∂y(q,x,e)
∂q
+
∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
−∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
 dx(q)
dq
+
∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
−∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
 de(q)
dq

+ χ
< −p∂y(q,x,e)
∂q
+ χ = −pH

1 −q
x | e

+ χ,
because x′(q) > 0,e′(q) ≥0 by Step 2, and ∂2y(q,x,e)/∂x∂q > 0, ∂2y(q,x,e)/∂e∂q > 0 by Step 2 in the proof
of Proposition 8.
We can see that if there exists ϵ > 0 such that H(1 −q/x | e) > ϵ for any q and we let ¯χ′ = pϵ, then
πb(q) is strictly decreasing in q > D when χ ≤¯χ′, and thus q = D is optimal. We can check the existence
of such ϵ > 0 by contradiction using the supplier’s ﬁrst-order condition: p∂y(q,x,e)/∂x −c = 0. We know
that ∂y(q,x,e)/∂x = (1−ay(e))+
R ay(e)
1−q/x H(ξ | e)dξ −q
xH
 1 −q
x | e

. Let k = 1−q/x(q). If k = 1−q/x(q) = 0,
then ∂y(q,x,e)/∂x = (1 −ay(e)) +
R ay(e)
0
H(ξ | e)dx = (1 −µe
y) > c/p by Lemma 4. Therefore, the ﬁrst-order
condition cannot be satisﬁed, and thus there exists δ > 0 such that k > δ, and this condition does not depend
on q. Therefore, we can ﬁnd ϵ > 0 such that H(1−q/x | e) > ϵ for all q, because H(ξ | e) > 0 for ξ ∈(0,ay(e)].
Last, when q = D, the supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(D,x,e) = py(D,x,e)−(cx+v(e))−χD = pS(x,e)−
(cx + v(e)) −χD = Π(x,e) −χD, because y(D,x,e) = S(x,e) by the proof of Lemma 3. Therefore, the
supplier chooses the optimal production quantity xo and eﬀort eo, because χD is a constant. In addition, if
χ ≤Π(xo,eo)/D, then πs(D,xo,eo) ≥0, and thus the supplier’s participation constraint is satisﬁed. Therefore,
if 0 ≤χ ≤¯χ = min{¯χ′,Π(xo,eo)/D}, then the supply chain is coordinated.
□
Proof of Proposition 10(i) This proof is organized in three steps. Let e(q) be the supplier’s best response
function. In Step 1, we show that, if w > c, then e(q) is once continuously diﬀerentiable, has a ﬁnite derivative,
and de(q)/dq > 0. In Step 2, we show that the buyer always orders at least D units, and if de(q)/dq is ﬁnite,
then there exists w < p such that for all w ∈[w,p], the optimal order quantity is q∗= D. Finally, in Step 3,
we show that, if q = D is ﬁxed, then the eﬃciency is strictly increasing in w.
Step 1: The supplier’s best response function e(q). The supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(q,e) = (w −
c)y(q,e)−v(e), and this is once continuously diﬀerentiable in e by Lemma 1 and Assumption 2. The optimal
eﬀort is uniquely obtained by the ﬁrst-order condition, ∂πs(q,e)/∂e = 0, because πs(q,e) is strictly concave

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
23
in e, since y(q,e) is strictly concave in e by Lemma 1 and Table 1 and v(e) is convex by Assumption 2. (Note
that we focus only on interior solutions by Assumption 2.)
Note that πs(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in the neighborhood of the optimal solution. It
is because πs(q,e) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in both q and e if q ̸= K −ac(e) by Lemma 1 and
Assumption 2, and the optimal eﬀort indeed satisﬁes q ̸= K −ac(e). If q = K −ac(e), then y(q,e) = q,
∂y(q,e)/∂e = 0, and thus the ﬁrst-order condition cannot be satisﬁed. Therefore, by the implicit function
theorem, e(q) is once continuously diﬀerentiable (Luenberger and Ye 2008), and we have
de(q)
dq
= −∂2πs(q,e)
∂e∂q
∂2πs(q,e)
∂e2
−1
=
(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e∂q
v′′(e) −(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
.
(38)
First, ∂y(q,e)/∂q = G(K −q | e) from the proof of Lemma 1, and thus ∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q = ∂G(K −q | e)/∂e
is strictly positive and ﬁnite by Assumption 3. Second, if w > c, then v′′(e) −(w −c) ∂2y(q,e)
∂e2
> 0, because
v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2 and ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0 by Lemma 1 and Table 1. Hence if w > c, then de(q)/dq is
strictly positive and ﬁnite.
Step 2: Optimal order quantity. First, we show that we can ignore the supplier’s participation constraint
in problem (3). Second, we show that the buyer’s expected proﬁt πb(q) is always increasing in q when q ≤D,
and there exists w < p such that if w ≥w, πb(q) is decreasing in q when q ≥D. Then, we can conclude that,
if w ≥w, the optimal order quantity is D.
First, the supplier’s participation constraint is always satisﬁed because of the following reason. The sup-
plier’s expected proﬁt πs(q,e) = (w −c)y(q,e) −v(e) is strictly concave in e since y(q,e) is strictly concave
in e by Lemma 1 and Table 1, and v(e) is convex in e by Assumption 2. In addition, if w ∈[c,p], then
πs(q,0) = (w −c)y(q,0) −v(0) = (w −c)y(q,0) ≥0, because v(0) = 0 by Assumption 2. Thus, the supplier’s
ﬁrst-order condition that generates a strictly positive eﬀort (by Assumption 2) always produces a set of
feasible solutions such that πs(q,e) ≥0 (due to strict concavity).
Second, we show that πb(q) is increasing in q when q ≤D, and there exists w < p such that, if w ≥w, then
πb(q) is decreasing in q when q ≥D. We ignore the participation constraint and write the buyer’s expected
proﬁt as πb(q) = pS(q,e(q)) −wy(q,e(q)). If q ≤D then πb(q) = (p −w)y(q,e(q)) because S(q,e) = y(q,e) by
Lemma 1. Thus, πb(q) is always increasing in q, since e(q) is increasing in q by Step 1, and y(q,e) is increasing
in q and e by Lemma 1 and Table 1. If q ≥D then πb(q) = py(D,e(q)) −wy(q,e(q)) since S(q,e) = y(D,e)
by Lemma 1. Then,
dπb(q)
dq
=

p∂y(D,e)
∂e
−w∂y(q,e)
∂e
 de(q)
dq
−w∂y(q,e)
∂q
≤(p −w)y(q,e)
∂e
· de(q)
dq
−w∂y(q,e)
∂q
,
(39)
because ∂y(q,e)/∂e is increasing in q, since ∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q = ∂G(K −q | e)/∂e > 0 by Assumption 3. If w = p,
then dπb(q)/dq < 0 since ∂y(q,e)/∂q > 0 by Lemma 1 and Table 1. Note that πb(q) is once continuously
diﬀerentiable for all q, because y(q,e) and e(q) are once continuously diﬀerentiable by Lemma 1 and Step 1.
Therefore, by continuity, there exists w < p such that for all w ∈[w,p], dπb(q)/dq < 0, because de(q)/dq and
∂y(q,e)/∂e are ﬁnite. Therefore, for all such w ∈[w,p], the optimal order quantity is q∗= D.
Step 3: Increasing eﬃciency. We show that, if we ﬁx q∗= qo = D, then the total expected proﬁt of the
supply chain Π(q∗,e∗) is strictly increasing in w ∈[c,p]. The proof is structured as follows. First, we show

24
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
that, if we ﬁx q∗= D, then Π(q∗,e) is strictly increasing in e ∈[0,eo]. Second, we show that the optimal eﬀort
e∗is strictly increasing in w. Lastly, we show that e∗= eo when w = p.
First, we show that Π(q∗,e) strictly increases in e ∈[0,eo]. The total supply chain proﬁt Π(D,e) = (p −
c)y(D,e)−v(e) is strictly concave in e with the ﬁrst-order condition satisfying at e = eo, because that is when
the centralized supply chain achieves the maximum proﬁt. Hence, Π(q∗,e) is strictly increasing in e ∈[0,eo].
Second, we show that the optimal eﬀort e∗strictly increases with w. The supplier’s expected proﬁt is
πs(D,e) = (w −c)y(D,e) −v(e). The optimal eﬀort e∗is obtained by the ﬁrst-order condition, since y(q,e)
is strictly concave in e by Lemma 1 and Table 1 and v(e) is convex by Assumption 2. (Note that we focus
only on the interior solutions by Assumption 2.) Hence, (w −c) ∂y(D,e∗)
∂e
−v′(e∗) = 0. Note that ∂y(D,e)/∂e
is strictly decreasing in e because ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0 by Lemma 1 and Table 1, and v′(e) is increasing in e
since v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2. Therefore, it is easy to see that the equilibrium eﬀort e∗strictly increases
with w.
Lastly, we show that e∗= eo when w = p. When w = p the supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(D,e) = (p −
c)y(D,e) −v(e), which is equivalent to the expected proﬁt of the centralized supply chain with qo = D.
Therefore, the optimal eﬀort is e∗= eo.
□
Proof of Proposition 10(ii) We have shown this in Step 3 in the proof of Proposition 10(i).
□
Proof of Proposition 11 The proof is organized in ﬁve steps. The following is the overview of the proof.
• Step 1: We reformulate problem (3) under a wholesale-price contract.
• Step 2: We show the existence of a solution to problem (3).
• Step 3: We show that there exists w1 < p such that, if w > w1, then the participation constraint in
problem (3) does not bind, and the supplier’s best response function e∗(q,w) satisﬁes ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0. In
addition, we show that the optimal order quantity q∗(w) and the optimal eﬀort level e∗(q∗(w),w) are once
continuously diﬀerentiable in w.
• Step 4: We show that, if w > w1, the expected proﬁt of the supply chain at a solution, Π∗(w) =
Π(q∗(w),e∗(q∗(w),w)), is once continuously diﬀerentiable in w. Then, we show that dΠ∗(w)/dw is strictly
negative at w = p if dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0.
• Step 5: We show that dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0.
Then, we can conclude that dΠ∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0, and, since dΠ∗(w)/dw is continuous by Step 4, there
exists w < p such that Π∗(w) is decreasing in w ∈[w,p].
Step 1: Reformulation. In problem (3), we can replace the ﬁrst constraint with its ﬁrst-order condition.
The supplier’s expected proﬁt is πs(q,e) = wy(q,e) −cq −v(e), and this is strictly concave in e, because
y(q,e) is strictly concave in e by Lemma 2 and Table 2 and v(e) is convex by Assumption 2. In addition,
by Assumption 2, we focus only on interior solutions. Note that the buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q,e) =
pS(q,e) −wy(q,e). Therefore, problem (3) can be reformulated as
max
q,e
pS(q,e) −wy(q,e),
(40)
s.t.
w∂y(q,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0,
wy(q,e) −cq −v(e) ≥0.

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
25
Step 2: Existence of a solution. We show the existence of a solution by showing that the objective
function is continuous and the feasible set is compact (i.e. closed and bounded). First, the objective function
in problem (40) is continuous in q and e by Lemma 2.
Second, to show that the feasible set is compact, we temporarily add another constraint that does not aﬀect
any solution, if a solution exists, but reduces the set of feasible solutions. We know q = 0 and e = 0 are feasible
and make the objective function zero. Hence, any set of q that makes the objective function non-negative
can be added as a constraint without aﬀecting any solution. We choose q ≤pD/((1 −µ0
y)w), because, if this
is violated, then the objective function satisﬁes pS(q,e) −wy(q,e) ≤pD −wy(q,0) = pD −w(1 −µ0
y)q < 0,
because S(q,e) ≤D and y(q,e) is increasing in e by Lemma 2.
Now, we check that the new set of feasible solutions is compact. First, the ﬁrst constraint in problem
(40) produces a closed set of feasible solutions. Second, the new temporary constraint produces a closed and
bounded set of feasible solutions for q. Finally, the second constraint in problem (40) produces a closed and
bounded set of feasible solutions for q and e, because, for any q ≥0, the feasible set for e has an upper bound
since lime→∞πs(q,e) = −∞. Therefore, the feasible set is compact, and thus a solution exists to problem
(40).
Step 3: Continuity of a solution. First, we show that there exists w1 < p such that if w > w1, then we
can ignore the participation constraint. Second, we show that the supplier’s best response function e∗(q,w)
is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in q and w, and ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0. Last, we show that, if w > w1, then
the buyer’s optimal order quantity q∗(w) is once continuously diﬀerentiable in w. (Then, it naturally follows
that e∗(q∗(w),w) is once continuously diﬀerentiable in w.)
First, we show that if w is above some threshold, the participation constraint does not bind. There exists
w1 < p such that if w > w1, then the supplier’s expected proﬁt at e = 0 satisﬁes πs(q,0) = wy(q,0) −cq =
[w(1 −µ0
y) −c]q > 0 by Lemma 4. In addition, πs(q,e) = wy(q,e) −cq −v(e) is strictly concave in e, because
y(q,e) is strictly concave in e by Lemma 2 and Table 2 and v(e) is convex by Assumption 2. Therefore, if
w > w1, then the supplier’s ﬁrst-order condition that generates an interior solution necessarily implies that
πs(q,e) > 0 (due to strict concavity). Hence, we can ignore the participation constraint.
Second, we show that the supplier’s best response function e∗(q,w) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in
q and w, and ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0. The best response function e∗(q,w) is obtained by the ﬁrst constraint in
problem (40). Note that both y(q,e) and v(e) are thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in q and e by Lemma 2
and Assumption 2. Hence, by the implicit function theorem, e∗(q,w) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in
q and w, and
∂e∗(q,w)
∂q
= −

w∂2y(q,e∗)
∂e∂q

w∂2y(q,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)
−1
,
where e∗= e∗(q,w) (Luenberger and Ye 2008). Note that w ∂2y(q,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗) < 0, because ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2 < 0
by Lemma 2 and Table 2, and v′′(e) ≥0 by Assumption 2. Also, note that y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q, and thus
∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q = (∂y(q,e)/∂e) · (1/q) > 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2. Therefore, ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0.
Last, we show that, if w > w1, then the buyer’s optimal order quantity q∗(w) is once continuously diﬀer-
entiable in w. If w > w1, we already showed that we can ignore the participation constraint, and thus the

26
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
buyer’s expected proﬁt can be represented as πb(q,w) = pS(q,e∗(q,w)) −wy(q,e∗(q,w)). The optimal order
quantity q∗(w) is obtained from the ﬁrst-order condition ∂πb(q,w)/∂q = 0. If S(q,e) and y(q,e) are twice
continuously diﬀerentiable in q and e, then, by the implicit function theorem, we can conclude that q∗(w) is
once continuously diﬀerentiable, because e∗(q,w) is twice continuously diﬀerentiable in q and w as we have
shown.
Therefore, we need to show that S(q,e) and y(q,e) are twice continuously diﬀerentiable in the neighborhood
of any possible solution (q∗,e∗) to problem (40). Any possible solution should satisfy D ≤q∗< D/(1−ay(e∗))
because of the following reason. First, if q ≤D, then πb(q,w) = (p −w)y(q,e∗(q,w)) since S(q,e) = y(q,e) by
Lemma 2. If w < p, then πb(q,w) is strictly increasing in q, because y(q,e) is strictly increasing in both q
and e by Lemma 2 and Table 2, and ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0. Hence, q ≤D cannot be optimal. When w = p, the
buyer is indiﬀerent among any q ∈[0,D], and chooses q∗= D by Assumption 1. Hence, it is always the case
that q∗≥D. Second, if q ≥D/(1−ay(e)), then πb(q,w) is strictly decreasing in q, because S(q,e) is constant
(= D) and ∂S(q,e)/∂q = 0 by Table 2, but y(q,e) is strictly increasing in both q and e by Lemma 2 and
Table 2, and also ∂e∗(q,w)/∂q > 0. Therefore, it should be the case that D ≤q∗< D/(1 −ay(e∗)).
By Lemma 2, we know that S(q,e) and y(q,e) are thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in q and e if D ≤q ≤
D/(1−ay(e)). Therefore, S(q,e) and y(q,e) are thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in the neighborhood of any
solution (q∗,e∗), and thus the optimal quantity q∗(w) is once continuously diﬀerentiable.
Step 4: Derivative of Π∗(w). Note that the total expected proﬁt of the supply chain is Π∗(w) = π∗
b(w) +
π∗
s(w), where π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are the expected proﬁts of the buyer and the supplier, respectively, at
a solution given w. First, we show that, if w is above some threshold, then π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are once
continuously diﬀerentiable in w. Second, we derive the expression for dπ∗
b(w)/dw. Third, we derive the
expression for dπ∗
s(w)/dw. Finally, we show that dΠ∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0 if dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0.
First, we show continuous diﬀerentiability of π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w). For ease of notation, let e∗(w) =
e∗(q∗(w),w). Then,
π∗
b(w) = pS(q∗(w),e∗(w)) −wy(q∗(w),e∗(w)),
π∗
s(w) = wy(q∗(w),e∗(w)) −cq∗(w) −v(e∗(w)).
In Step 3, we have shown that, if w > w1, then q∗(w) and e∗(w) are once continuously diﬀerentiable. Also,
S(q,e) and y(q,e) are once continuously diﬀerentiable by Lemma 2. Therefore, if w > w1, then π∗
b(w) and
π∗
s(w) are once continuously diﬀerentiable in w, and so is Π∗(w).
Second, we derive the expression for dπ∗
b(w)/dw. Note that π∗
b(w) is the objective function of problem (40)
at a solution (q∗,e∗) as a function of w. We assume w > w1 and ignore the participation constraint, as we
have shown in Step 3. Then, for problem (40), there exists λ ∈R such that
p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
+ λ · w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
= 0,
(41)
p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+ λ

w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)

= 0.
Then, by the envelope theorem (Mas-Colell et al. 1995),

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
27
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −y(q∗,e∗) + λ∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
= −y(q∗,e∗) +

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
 q∗
w = −p
w · ∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
q∗,
(42)
using condition (41) and the relationships ∂y(q,e)/∂q = y(q,e)/q and ∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q = (∂y(q,e)/∂e) · (1/q)
(because y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q).
Third, we derive the expression for dπ∗
s(w)/dw. Given w and the optimal order quantity q∗(w), the sup-
plier’s optimal expected proﬁt is π∗
s(w) = maxe wy(q∗(w),e) −cq∗(w) −v(e). Therefore, by the envelope
theorem,
dπ∗
s(w)
dw
= y(q∗,e∗) +

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c
 dq∗(w)
dw
.
(43)
Thus,
dΠ∗(w)
dw
= dπ∗
b(w)
dw
+ dπ∗
s(w)
dw
= −p
w · ∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
q∗+ y(q∗,e∗) +

w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c
 dq∗(w)
dw
.
Finally, we show that dΠ∗(w)/∂w|w=p < 0 if dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0. Note that q∗(p) = D from Step 3, and
y(q,e) = S(q,e) when q ≤D and both y(q,e) and S(q,e) are once continuously diﬀerentiable by Lemma 2.
Thus, ∂S(q∗(w),e∗)/∂q|w=p = ∂y(q∗(w),e∗)/∂q|w=p. Therefore,
dΠ∗(w)
dw

w=p
=

p∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−c

· dq∗(w)
dw

w=p
,
because (∂S(D,e)/∂q)D = (∂y(D,e)/∂q)D = y(D,e), since y(q,e) = (1 −µe
y)q.
We have p∂y(q∗,e∗)/∂q −c = p(1 −µe∗
y ) −c > p(1 −µ0
y) −c > 0 by Lemma 4. Hence, dΠ∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0 if
dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0.
Step 5: Derivative of q∗(w) at w = p. Recall that the buyer’s expected proﬁt is πb(q,w) = pS(q,e∗(q,w))−
wy(q,e∗(q,w)). The buyer’s optimal order quantity q∗satisﬁes
∂πb(q∗,w)
∂q
=

p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q

+ ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e

= 0,
where e∗= e∗(q∗,w). By the implicit function theorem,
dq∗(w)
dw
= −
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
−1
,
(44)
where
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q∂e
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
−
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
+ w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂q∂e
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w

+ ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q∂w

p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e

+ ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w
−
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
+ w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂w

,
(45)
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
= p
∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
+ ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q∂e
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

−w∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂q∂e
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
+ ∂2e∗(q∗,w)
∂q2

p∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂e
−w∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e

+ ∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

p
∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+ ∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

−w
∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
+ ∂2y(q∗,e∗)
∂e2
∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q

.
(46)

28
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Note that, in the expressions above, we use the relationship ∂2y(q∗,e∗)/∂q2 = 0, which holds because y(q,e) =
(1 −µe
y)q. Also, note that ∂2πb(q∗,w)/∂q2 ̸= 0.
Now, to evaluate the derivatives at w = p, we use the following relationships: ∂S(q,e)/∂e|q=D =
∂y(q,e)/∂e|q=D, ∂2S(q,e)/∂e2|q=D = ∂2y(q,e)/∂e2|q=D, and ∂2S(q,e)/∂e∂q|q=D = ∂2y(q,e)/∂e∂q|q=D. These
relationships hold, because, at q = D, S(q,e) and y(q,e) are thrice continuously diﬀerentiable in e and once
continuously diﬀerentiable in q, and also S(q,e) = y(q,e) for 0 ≤q ≤D by Lemma 2. Therefore,
lim
w→p−
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
= −∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂q
−∂e∗(q∗,w)
∂q
∂y(q∗,e∗)
∂e
,
lim
w→p−
∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
= lim
w→p−p∂2S(q∗,e∗)
∂q2
.
We have shown that ∂e∗(q∗,w)/∂q > 0 in Step 3. Therefore, limw→p−∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q∂w
< 0, because ∂y(q∗,e∗)/∂q > 0
and ∂y(q∗,e∗)/∂e > 0 by Lemma 2 and Table 2. In addition, ∂2S(q∗,e∗)/∂q2 ≤0 by Lemma 2, and thus
limw→p−∂2πb(q∗,w)
∂q2
≤0. Therefore, dq∗(w)/dw|w=p < 0. (It is possible that limw→p−∂2S(q∗,e∗)/∂q2 = 0, which
is the denominator of dq∗(w)/dw|w=p, but the result still holds.)
□
Proof of Proposition 12 We prove the result using the uniform distribution. We already showed that the
optimal order quantity is D if p < 3c in the proof of Proposition 3. Therefore, the supplier’s optimal expected
proﬁt is obtained by solving the following problem: π∗
s(w) = maxe≥0(w −c)y(D,e) −v(e). By the envelope
theorem, we have that
dπ∗
s(w)
dw
= y(D,e∗) > 0.
Furthermore, since the optimal solutions q∗and e∗are continuous in w, both ﬁrms’ expected proﬁts at
equilibrium, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are continuous in w too.
□
Proof of Proposition 13 Note that we only need to consider the case when π∗
s(w) > 0, since α ∈(0,1)
(see Step 1 in the proof of Proposition 1). We showed in the proof of Proposition 11 with the general
functional form that the optimal solution satisﬁes D ≤q∗< D/(1 −ay(e∗)) and both ﬁrms’ expected proﬁts
at equilibrium, π∗
b(w) and π∗
s(w) are continuous when π∗
s(w) > 0. Furthermore, we showed that
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −p
w · ∂S(q∗,e∗)
∂q
q∗< 0,
since ∂S(q∗,e∗)/∂q > 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 14 We prove the result using the uniform distribution. As we have shown in the
proof of Proposition 8, the buyer’s expected proﬁt has a kink at q = D and the optimal order quantity always
satisﬁes q∗≥D. Therefore, we divide the proof into two parts. Speciﬁcally, we consider the case when q∗> D
in Part (i) and q∗= D in Part (ii). In both cases, we show that dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0. Note that we only need to
consider the case when π∗
s(w) > 0, since α ∈(0,1) (see Step 1 in the proof of Proposition 1).

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
29
Part (i): q∗> D. We can reformulate problem (3) as following by i) replacing the ﬁrst constraint with the
ﬁrst-order conditions, and ii) ignoring the second constraint since we focus on the case when π∗
s(w) > 0.
max
q,x,e
pS(q,x,e) −wy(q,x,e),
(47)
s.t.
w∂y(q,x,e)
∂x
−c = 0,
w∂y(q,x,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0.
Note that (47) is a more general problem than (3) because the supplier’s proﬁt may not be unimodal. In (47),
the objective function and constraints are once continuously diﬀerentiable by Lemma 3 and Assumptions 2.
Then, there exist λ1,λ2 ∈R such that, at equilibrium (q∗,x∗,e∗),
−w∂y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂q
+ λ1 · w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x∂q
+ λ2 · w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e∂q
= 0,
(48)
p∂S(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x
−w∂y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x
+ λ1 · w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x2
+ λ2 · w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e∂x
= 0,
(49)
p∂S(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e
−w∂y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e
+ λ1 · w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x∂e
+ λ2

w∂2y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e2
−v′′(e∗)

= 0.
(50)
Note that ∂S(q,x,e)/∂q = 0 when q ≥D by Lemma 3. Hereafter we simplify the notations by using y =
y(q,x,e) and S = S(q,x,e). Note that y(q,x,e) = [(1 −ay(e)) +
R ay(e)
1−q/x H(ξ | e)dξ]x and, with some calculus,
we can show that the following relationships hold:
∂y2
∂x∂e = 1
x · ∂y
∂e −q
x · ∂2y
∂e∂q ,
∂2y
∂q2 = x2
q2 · ∂2y
∂x2 ,
∂2y
∂x∂q = −q
x · ∂2y
∂q2 = −x
q · ∂2y
∂x2 ,
∂y
∂x = y
x −q
x · ∂y
∂q .
Using the above relationships and conditions (48) and (49), we can obtain
λ1 =
∂y
∂q
∂y
∂e −∂2y
∂e∂q
 y −p x
w
∂S
∂x

∂2y
∂x∂q
∂y
∂e
,
λ2 = y −p x
w
∂S
∂x
∂y
∂e
.
By the envelope theorem,
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −y(q∗,x∗,e∗) + λ1
∂y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂x
+ λ2
∂y(q∗,x∗,e∗)
∂e
=
1
∂2y∗
∂x∂q
∂y∗
∂e
∂y∗
∂x
∂y∗
∂e
∂y∗
∂q −y∗∂2y∗
∂e∂q

+ px∗
w
∂S∗
∂x
∂y∗
∂x
∂2y∗
∂e∂q −∂2y∗
∂x∂q
∂y∗
∂e

,
where y∗= y(q∗,x∗,e∗). We know that ∂y/∂x > 0, ∂y/∂e > 0, and ∂S/∂x > 0 by Lemma 3. Also, ∂2y/∂x∂q =
q
x2 h
 1 −q
x | e

> 0. Furthermore, with the uniform distribution,
∂y∗
∂e
∂y∗
∂q −y∗∂2y∗
∂e∂q

= e∗(q∗−x∗)
1 + e∗
< 0,
∂y∗
∂x
∂2y∗
∂e∂q −∂2y∗
∂x∂q
∂y∗
∂e

= −(q∗+ e∗q∗−e∗x∗)2
2(e∗+ 1)x∗2
< 0,
since x∗> q∗, which we showed in the proof of Proposition 8. Therefore, dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0.
Part (ii): q∗= D. The proof consists of three steps. In Step 1, we simplify the expression for dπ∗
b(w)/dw.
In Step 2, we derive a suﬃcient condition under which dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0. Finally, in Step 3, we show that this
condition always holds if p ≤2c and θ ≥(5/7) · cD.
Step 1: Simplifying the expression for dπ∗
b(w)/dw. Let x(w) and e(w) be the supplier’s optimal
production quantity and eﬀort as functions of w when q = D, which can be jointly obtained by the following
two ﬁrst-order conditions:
w∂y(D,x,e)
∂x
−c = 0,
w∂y(D,x,e)
∂e
−v′(e) = 0.
(51)

30
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Using the notation y = y(D,x,e), we can apply the implicit function theorem as follows.

x′(w)
e′(w)

= −
"
w ∂2y
∂x2 ,
w ∂2y
∂x∂e
w ∂2y
∂e∂x, w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)
#−1
·
 ∂y
∂x
∂y
∂e

= −
1
m(x,e) ·


∂y
∂x

w ∂2y
∂e2 −v′′(e)

−w ∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂e
w

∂2y
∂x2
∂y
∂e −
∂2y
∂x∂e
∂y
∂x


,
where m(x,e) = w2 
∂2y
∂x2
∂2y
∂e2 −( ∂2y
∂x∂e)2
−w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e). Since y(q,x,e) is jointly concave in x and e by Assump-
tion 5, we know that m(x,e) > −w ∂2y
∂x2 v′′(e) ≥0, because ∂2y/∂x2 ≤0 by Lemma 3 and v′′(e) ≥0 by Assump-
tion 2.
The buyer’s expected proﬁt at the equilibrium is π∗
b(w) = (p −w)y(D,x(w),e(w)), since S(D,x,e) =
y(D,x,e) by Lemma 3. Hence, using the notation y∗= y(D,x∗,e∗),
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −y∗+ (p −w)
∂y∗
∂x
dx(w)
dw
+ ∂y∗
∂e
de(w)
dw

.
= −
1
m(x∗,e∗)
"
−v′′(e∗)
 
y∗· w∂2y∗
∂x2 + (p −w)
∂y∗
∂x
2!
+ y∗· w2
 
∂2y∗
∂x2
∂2y∗
∂e2 −
 ∂2y∗
∂x∂e
2!
+ (p −w)w
 
∂2y∗
∂e2
∂y∗
∂x
2
−2 ∂2y∗
∂x∂e
∂y∗
∂x
∂y∗
∂e + ∂2y∗
∂x2
∂y∗
∂e
2!#
.
The optimal solution always satisﬁes that q < x∗< (1 + 1/e∗)q, which we have shown in the proof of
Proposition 8. When q < x < (1 + 1/e)q, we have
y(q,x,e) =

1 −
1
2(e + 1) −e + 1
2

1 −q
x
2
x.
We calculate the derivatives of y = y(q,x,e) and represent y as follows, representing some of them using the
variable k = ∂y/∂x. At equilibrium, by the ﬁrst-order condition (51), k = ∂y/∂x = c/w ∈[c/p,1].
∂y
∂x = (e + 1)2q2 −e2x2
2(e + 1)x2
= k,
∂y2
∂x2 = −(e + 1)q2
x3
= −e2 + 2k(e + 1)
(e + 1)x
,
∂2y
∂e2 = −
x
(e + 1)3 ,
∂y
∂e =

1
2(e + 1)2 −(x −q)2
2x2

x = (q −x) + (1 −k)x
(e + 1) ,
∂2y
∂x∂e = (e + 1)2q2 −e(e + 2)x2
2(e + 1)2x2
= k(e + 1) −e
(e + 1)2
,
y =
e
e + 1x + (e + 1)∂y
∂e.
Using the above expressions and v′′(e) = 0, we can simplify dπ∗
b(w)/dw as follows. To simplify the notation
for the rest of the proof, we omit asterisks and regard all q, x, and e as equilibrium values.
dπ∗
b(w)
dw
= −
1
m(x,e) ·
w
(e + 1)3 · (A −B),
where
A = kw(k −2)(−(e + 1)2q + (e2 + k + ek)x),
B = (p −w)

k2x + (e2 + 2k + 2ek)((1 + e)q −(e + k)x)2
x
−2k(e(k −1) + k)((e + k)x −(e + 1)q)

.
Step 2: Deriving a suﬃcient condition for dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0. We obtain a lower bound of A −B and
show that it is strictly positive. This means that dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0, since m(x,e) > 0. An important property
we use in the rest of the proof is that, at equilibrium, (e + 1)q > (e + k)x, because ((e + 1)q)2 −((e + k)x)2 =
k(2 −k)x2 > 0 (since k ∈[c/p,1]) using the relationship k = ∂y/∂x .

Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
31
First, to obtain a lower bound of A, we observe that the following inequality holds:
−(e + 1)2q + (e2 + k + ek)x = −(2(e + 1)k + e2)x · x
q + (e2 + k + ek)x
< −(2(e + 1)k + e2)x + (e2 + k + ek)x = −k(e + 1)x < 0,
where we use the relationships k = ∂y/∂x in the ﬁrst step and q < x in the second step. Therefore, A > 0
(since k ∈[c/p,1]) and
A > kw(k −2)(−k(e + 1)x) = (2 −k)(e + 1)k2wx.
(52)
Second, we obtain a upper bound of B as follows.
B = (p −w)

k2x +
 1
x(e2 + 2k + 2ek)((1 + e)q −(e + k)x) + 2k(e(k −1) + k)

((1 + e)q −(e + k)x)

< (p −w)

k2x +
 1
x(e2 + 2k + 2ek)(1 −k)x + 2k(e(k −1) + k)

((1 + e)q −(e + k)x)

= (p −w)

k2x + (e2(1 −k) + 2k)((1 + e)q −(e + k)x)

< (p −w)

k2x + (e2(1 −k) + 2k)(1 −k)x

= (p −w)x

e2(1 −k)2 + 2k −k2
,
(53)
where we use q < x for both inequalities in (53).
Using (52) and (53), we have
A −B > (2 −k)(e + 1)k2wx −(p −w)x

e2(1 −k)2 + 2k −k2
.
Therefore, A −B > 0 if
p ≤

1 +
(2 −k)(e + 1)k2
e2(1 −k)2 + 2k −k2

w
(54)
Step 3: Showing that condition (54) holds if p ≤2c and θ ≥(5/7) · cD. We ﬁrst show that the optimal
eﬀort satisﬁes e ≤9/5, and then show that the inequality (54) always holds.
First, we show that e ≤9/5. To do so, we ﬁrst obtain the upper bound of x. We already know that
(e + 1)q > (e + k)x. Furthermore, it is easy to verify that (e + 1)/(e + k) is decreasing in e. Therefore,
x < e + 1
e + k · q ≤1
k · q ≤p
c · q = pD
c .
Using the ﬁrst-order condition (51) with respect to e and the expression for ∂y/∂e in Step 1, we have that
(q −x) + (1 −k)x
(e + 1) = θ
w
=⇒
(1 −k)x
(e + 1) > θ
w,
because q < x. Hence,
e < w(1 −k)x
θ
−1 ≤(p −c)pD
cθ
−1 ≤c · 2c · D
cθ
−1 = 2cD
θ
−1 ≤9
5,
where the second step uses w ≤p, k ≥c/p, and x ≤pD/c, the third step uses p ≤2c, and the ﬁnal step uses
θ ≥5cD
7 .

32
Hwang, Bakshi, and DeMiguel: Wholesale Price Contracts for Reliable Supply
Second, we show that the inequality (54) always holds. We observe the following inequality.

1 +
(2 −k)(e + 1)k2
e2(1 −k)2 + 2k −k2

w =

1 +
(2 −k)(e + 1)k2
(e + 1)(e −1)(1 −k)2 + 1

w
≥

1 +
(2 −k)(e + 1)k2
(e + 1)(e −1)(1 −k)2 + e + 1

w
= w +
(2 −k)
(e −1)(1 −k)2 + 1 · c2
w ≥2c ·
s
2 −k
(e −1)(1 −k)2 + 1,
(55)
where the last step uses the fact that
√w −
q
2−k
(e−1)(1−k)2+1 ·
c
√w
2
≥0. Let γ =
2−k
(e−1)(1−k)2+1. It is easy to
verify that dγ/dk ≤0 if p ≤2c (which means k = c/w ≥c/p ≥1/2) and e ≤9/5, because
dγ
dk = (e −1)(1 −k)(3 −k) −1
((e −1)(1 −k)2 + 1)2
.
Hence, γ achieves the minimum when k = 1, and therefore the inequality (55) can be simpliﬁed as follows.

1 +
(2 −k)(e + 1)k2
e2(1 −k)2 + 2k −k2

w ≥2c.
Thus, (54) always holds and A −B > 0, concluding that dπ∗
b(w)/dw < 0.
□
Proof of Proposition 15 Let Πmax be the expected proﬁt of the entire supply chain under a coordinating
contract. Since a coordinating contract has a transaction cost T ∈[0,1], expressed as a fraction of Πmax,
ﬁrms will be eﬀectively splitting the total proﬁt of (1−T)Πmax. We are only interested in the expected proﬁt
of each ﬁrm (not the contract parameters), and therefore we can formulate the bargaining problem with a
coordinating contract as follows:
max
x
xα((1 −T)Πmax −x)1−α,
where x ∈[0,(1 −T)Πmax] and ((1 −T)Πmax −x) are the expected proﬁts of the supplier and buyer,
respectively. It is easy to see that, given α, the optimal expected proﬁts of the supplier and buyer are
x = α(1 −T)Πmax and (1 −T)Πmax −x = (1 −α)(1 −T)Πmax, respectively.
As T →1, both ﬁrms’ expected proﬁts approach zero. Since we can always ﬁnd a wholesale price such
that the wholesale price contract generates strictly positive proﬁts for both ﬁrms, we can conclude that
there exists T ′ > 0 such that for all T > T ′, the wholesale price contract is Pareto eﬃcient compared to the
coordinating contract.