TITLE: Efficient Detection of Environmental Violators: A Big Data Approach
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13272
---

Production and Operations Management
Eﬃcient Detection of Environmental Violators: A Big
Data Approach
Xiangyu Chang*
Department of Information Management and E-Business, School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
xiangyuchang@xjtu.edu.cn
Yinghui Huang
Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics
School of Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Mei Li*
Division of Marketing and Supply Chain Management, Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma, mei.li@ou.edu
Xin Bo
Appraisal Center for Environment and Engineering, Ministry of Ecology and Environment, Beijing, China
Subdoha Kumar
Fox School of Business, Temple University
*Corresponding Authors
The detection of environmental violators is critical to the long-term adoption of sustainability in supply
chain management. However, there exist manufacturing facilities that report false environmental monitoring
data, thereby seriously hampering governments eﬀorts to identify true oﬀenders and to properly intervene.
We integrate waste gas data from the worlds largest Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS) with
a publicly available Violation and Punishment Dataset to build prediction models for the identiﬁcation of
environmental violators. We utilize and create innovative machine learning approaches to overcome analytical
challenges associated with empirical data. First, we use a feature engineering approach to generate features
from the raw, and possibly fraudulent, reporting data. This overcomes the challenges associated with low
ﬁdelity, irregularity, and the presence of extreme values in the raw dataset. Second, while building prediction
models, we develop new approaches to positive and unlabeled learning to overcome the challenges posed by
sparsity and mislabeled data. Our prediction model achieves satisfactory results in a related ﬁeld test. Our
study develops new techniques for big data analytics, which greatly improve the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness in
detection of environmental violators and enhance operational outcomes of environmental protection agencies.
This research is a joint eﬀort between academia and practitioners, as evidenced by the participation of the
Ministry of Ecology and Environment of Peoples Republic of China. The Ministry kindly granted us direct
data access, as well as opportunities to interview Subject Matter Experts at the Ministry, which led to
research insights incorporated in this manuscript. Our research ﬁndings have global implications, as CEMS
devices are universally adopted to monitor waste gas emissions.
Key words : Big data analytics, positive and unlabeled learning, sustainability, violator detection
History : Received: July 2019; accepted: August 2020 by Qi Feng after one revision.
1

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
2
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
1
Introduction
Environmental violation refers to ﬁrms operational activities that violate environmental law or
regulation (Karpoﬀet al. 2005). Some examples include the improper release of waste gas into the
air and the improper treatment of hazardous water. Environmental violations are severe, global,
and widespread. In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) detected a
large number of violations by businesses in 2017, which led to over $2.9 billion in criminal ﬁnes
and restitution (EPA 2019). Similarly, there were an increasing number of violations from 2016 to
2018 in Europe (ECR 2019). Environmental violation is more problematic in developing countries
(Da Silva et al. 2017, Roque et al. 2018).
China, as the worlds factory (Plambeck et al. 2012), suﬀers severely from environmental prob-
lems (Chen 2018), which led to the mandatory installation of the worlds largest Continuous
Emission Monitoring System (CEMS) by manufacturing facilities. Despite governmental eﬀorts,
inspections by the Chinese government have revealed that some manufacturers have systematically
circumvented the monitoring devices and reported false pollutant data, rendering the monitoring
mechanism useless. This falsiﬁcation of data poses an additional challenge in identifying environ-
mental violators. There is a dire need to ﬁnd an eﬃcient and eﬀective approach that can work with
low ﬁdelity in reported data and systematically detect environmental violators.
Although this is an important operational problem, it has not been suﬃciently researched in
the operations and supply chain management (O&SCM) literature. Recently, researchers have
advocated the use of data-driven analytics to solve challenging O&SCM issues (Choi et al. 2018,
Cui et al. 2018, Guha and Kumar 2018, Sanders and Ganeshan 2018, Shmueli and Yahav 2018).
In the sustainability research space, various scholars point out the need to use big data analytics
in the investigation of complex environmental issues (Singhal et al. 2018, Wang et al. 2016). In
this paper, we respond to these calls by conducting research on the detection of environmental
violators, based on big CEMS data obtained from China. Because CEMS devices are universally
adopted to monitor waste gas emissions, our research ﬁndings have global implications. In addition,
we develop and apply innovative tools to overcome challenges associated with empirical datasets.
As such, we also contribute to research in data analytics.
1.1
Research Motivation
The problem with quality of reported data has been a recurrent one. As early as the 1990s, the US
federal authorities found evidence of tampering with the results of environmental tests and ordered
thousands of environmental safety tests conducted between 1994 and 1997 to be repeated (Oppel Jr
2000). What is disconcerting is that in recent years, the number of exposed cases of inaccuracy in

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
3
reported environmental data seems to be increasing. The emissions test scandal stormed through
the automobile manufacturing industry, and auto giants such as Volkswagen (Rhodes 2016, Siano
et al. 2017) and Nissan (Hermanns et al. 2018, Gale 2018) have been found guilty of altering
auto emissions test data in order to bypass environmental regulations. Similarly, Ford is facing a
criminal probe into emissions testing fraud (AN 2019). The inaccuracy of mandatorily reported
environmental data is not isolated to one industry. In April 2019, researchers from Environment
Canada conducted an independent study and found that a number of major oilsands operations
in northern Alberta seem to be emitting signiﬁcantly more carbon pollution than companies have
been reporting (Dubinsky 2019, p. 1).
The causes of low quality in reported data vary. They certainly include intentional falsiﬁcation
of the data for proﬁt-driven reasons, as was the case for both Volkswagen and Nissan. Research
shows that when there is a conﬂict between the objective of a public policy and the internal
eﬃciency requirements of a ﬁrm, the ﬁrm may decouple (Meyer and Rowan 1977) its ceremonial
conformity to a public policy from its actual implementation of such a policy (Boxenbaum and
Jonsson 2017). In our research context, the mandatory reporting of environmental data may not be
aligned with the interests of some manufacturing facilities and decoupling may occur in the form
of falsifying reported data. In general, the falsiﬁcation of data reduces ﬁrms necessary investments
in environmental compliance and reduces the operational costs for the oﬀending ﬁrms. Besides
intentional abuse in reporting data, low quality may be caused by unintentional negligence with
regard to data, as was the case with oilsands operations in Canada where ﬁrms may have reported
inaccurate environmental monitoring data due to incorrect procedures (Dubinsky 2019).
Regardless of the causes, low quality of reported environmental monitoring data can pose severe
threats to the public. Environmental agencies rely on environmental testing data to monitor and
manage manufacturing facilities, and to intervene when necessary. The reporting of low-quality
data misguides governmental decisions and distorts the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of governmental
operations. Furthermore, the damaging eﬀect goes beyond the distortion of governmental oper-
ations. Low quality in reported data conceals the true identify of environmental violators and
harms the triple bottom line of sustainable operations (Hussain et al. 2018). Environmentally, it
endangers public health and the global ecosystems (Lee and Xiao 2020, Mendelssohn et al. 2012).
Socially, environmental violations can be one of the major causes of tension between businesses and
local residents (Calvano 2008). Economically, environmental violations not only weaken a violating
ﬁrms ﬁnancial health and stability by incurring a signiﬁcant amount of ﬁnes and penalties (Xu
et al. 2012, Zou et al. 2015), they also impede fair competition for non-violating ﬁrms (Delmas
and Keller 2005), which incur higher costs in order to abide by environmental regulations. It is

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
4
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
imperative that these violators be detected and caught. This is critical for the long-term adoption
of environment improvement initiatives (Elkington 1998).
Extant research, though it has recognized the damaging eﬀects associated with environmental
violations (Delmas and Keller 2005, Lee and Xiao 2020, Mendelssohn et al. 2012, Zou et al. 2015),
has largely neglected the important topic of mechanisms for detection of environmental violators.
A very limited number of studies on environmental violations take a legal and/or public adminis-
tration perspective, and these are restricted to the creation of laws and regulations to guide ﬁrm
behaviors (Karpoﬀet al. 2005). There are very few (if any) studies that investigate the actual
implementation of these laws or regulations, including ﬁnding powerful detection mechanisms to
discover violations in order to eﬃciently enforce such laws/regulations. Even more rare is research
that can work with a massive amount of raw environmental reporting data, detect anomalies in
reporting, and discover hidden or concealed environmental violators. As a result, such detection
relies heavily on manual inspections to catch cheaters who intentionally manipulate the environ-
mental monitoring devices and/or alter reporting data. Yet sporadic inspections are expensive and
have a low detection rate. The environmental protection agencies can beneﬁt from a more tar-
geted and systematic mechanism to eﬃciently catch violators. The focus of this study is to develop
such a mechanism. In doing so, we must overcome considerable challenges associated with the raw
empirical dataset by creating and applying new machine learning methods to enable analysis of
the dataset, and to eventually make accurate predictions based on it.
1.2
Research Questions and Contributions
Researchers in data-driven analytics have recognized both the opportunities and the challenges
brought by big data and business analytics (Choi et al. 2018, Corbett 2018, Lee and Xiao 2020,
Sanders and Ganeshan 2018). In the context of environmental research, scholars call for the use
of big data to support eﬀective and eﬃcient decision-making on sustainability issues (Wang et al.
2016). Our research answers these calls and pioneers a data-driven analytics in the context of detec-
tion of environmental violators. Below we present our key research questions and contributions.
We begin by asking our ﬁrst set of research questions (RQs). RQ (1): Given that pollutant
reduction often works against ﬁrms economic interests, how do we know if the environmental-
monitoring data reported by manufacturing ﬁrms are of high quality? Can we create a tool that can
be used to measure the quality of reported data? In our research context, we use the term reporting
data quality to denote the level of ﬁdelity (or lack of ﬁdelity) in reported environmental-monitoring
data. Although we recognize that in the generic sense, data quality could mean many things (Dey
and Kumar 2010, 2013), we adopt a narrow deﬁnition here to ﬁt our research context. We develop
a reporting data quality assessment framework that is made up of a set of reporting data quality

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
5
indicators, collectively called a reporting data quality index. This index can work with the massive,
often messy (Ozdemir and Susarla 2018), and unreliable nature of raw environmental pollutant
monitoring data, capture its key features, and measure its quality.
The unique contribution of this reporting data quality index goes beyond the detection of inac-
curacy caused by noise in big data. It is capable of detecting low ﬁdelity caused by deliberate
deceptions (Rubin and Lukoianova 2013). This is a major departure from previous research. Specif-
ically, the conventional research typically operates directly on raw data. This is feasible because
it assumes the underlying trustworthiness of the raw data. Even though incomplete, incorrect,
inaccurate, or irrelevant data may exist (Deepa and Chezian 2014), it does not undermine the
fundamental trustworthiness of the dataset. In this regard, researchers are mostly concerned with
deriving eﬃcient algorithms to prewash raw data (Dey and Kumar 2013) before further decision
analysis, such as preprocessing and ﬁltering to avoid obvious irrelevant information (Yin and Kay-
nak 2015, p. 145), and designing algorithms to compute missing data or replacing inaccurate data
(Kumar and Chadrasekaran 2011). None of these techniques would work without the underlying
assumption of overall trustworthiness of the dataset. However, this assumption does not work in
our research context, or in any other research context where attempts have been made to inten-
tionally distort the reported data, such as in the aforementioned cases of Volkswagen or Nissan.
The question then is how not to trust the raw data, yet be able to detect from it reliable clues that
inform us on the quality of reported data.
We accomplish this tall order by utilizing a feature engineering technique. Feature engineering
allows us to make use of domain knowledge to extract features from the raw data for better busi-
ness decision-making (Brownlee 2014, Kumar et al. 2018, 2019). In essence, the feature engineering
technique helps us to extract features, i.e., metadata from CEMS reporting, to generate a report-
ing data quality index. This data quality index measures the ﬁdelity of the reported data and
provides important clues to possible falsiﬁcation behavior by dishonest environmental violators.
Thus, it aﬀords us the ability to detect data quality problems associated with deliberate deceptions.
Our reporting data quality index is particularly useful in mandatory reporting situations where
there may be conﬂict of interest between the public administrative oﬃces and private reporting
ﬁrms (Marquis and Qian 2014). While we do not claim a theoretical contribution to decoupling
theory, our research ﬁndings provide an eﬀective tool to detect the existence of decoupling in an
environmental reporting context.
Our second research question builds on the reporting data quality index and is predictive in
nature. RQ (2): How can we make use of the reporting data quality index and make predictions on
environmental violators? Which predictive model works best? To answer this question, we integrate
the reporting data quality index derived from CEMS data with a publicly available Violation and

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
6
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Punishment Dataset (VPD). VPD contains a list of manufacturing facilities that, through manual
inspection, have been found to have violated environmental regulations. Thus, VPD informs us
on the conﬁrmed status of violations. Linking VPD with the data quality index, we can build
prediction models to catch cheaters, i.e., facilities with a high probability of manipulating the
reporting devices and submitting falsiﬁed emission data.
Because only a small number of cheaters have been caught by the manual inspection process,
there are two challenges in building predictive models. First, the matrix denoting the status of
the cheaters is sparse. Due to the high cost and the labor-intensive nature associated with manual
inspections, only a small number of violators exist in VPD. Second and relatedly, there also exist
a large number of unidentiﬁed true violators. In this study, we develop two new approaches to
positive and unlabeled learning (i.e., PU learning) to overcome these two challenges and improve
the predictive accuracy of our models.
Answers to our second research question make the following contributions. First, we develop an
eﬃcient and accurate prediction model that can be applied to the detection of environmental viola-
tors from CEMS data. Given that CEMS is a popular device adopted by environmental protection
agencies globally for the monitoring of pollutants (ECCC 2020, EPA 2020, Gupta 2019, Zhang
and Schreifels 2011) with market growth projected to reach $4.44 billion by 2025 (Danigelis 2018),
our ﬁndings would beneﬁt current as well as future environmental protection eﬀorts worldwide. As
such, we contribute to sustainable operations research in O&SCM by addressing the implemen-
tation side of sustainability enforcement. Second, methodology-wise, we develop new algorithms
that contribute to the analysis of positive and unlabeled data (Li and Liu 2003). These algorithms
are extremely helpful in detecting patterns in an empirical dataset that contains a large amount
of unlabeled data. Third, our research also has signiﬁcant managerial implications. Our prediction
of oﬀenders fundamentally improves the monitoring and detection mechanism for environmental
protection agencies. The new detection process can potentially lead to substantial cost reduction
and improved detection eﬃciency.
2
Literature Review
Here, we brieﬂy discuss the literature in the following streams: (a) sustainable operations,
(b) challenges in deriving business insights from big data, and (c) descriptive, predictive, and
prescriptive data analytics. The goal of this section is to not only review existing literature, but
also to highlight our contributions with respect to existing literature. At the end of the section,
we contrast explanatory models and data-driven predictive models, and explicitly ground our
research in the latter stream.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
7
2.1
Existing Research on Sustainable Operations
Online Appendix 1 summarizes existing research on sustainability and environmental violations.
As Online Appendix 1 shows, although there are an increasing number of publications on environ-
mental sustainability in the O&SCM ﬁeld (Bernard et al. 2018, Goebel et al. 2018, Hussain et al.
2018, Porteous et al. 2015, Xia et al. 2018), the key focus has been on answering the question of
how to promote sustainability throughout the supply chain, and limited research has also addressed
the possible negative consequences of non-compliance (Xu et al. 2012, 2016, Zou et al. 2015). With
the damaging eﬀects of non-compliance in mind, research has also shed light on the mechanisms
to contain such behaviors (Gray and Shimshack 2011). Besides empirical research summarized in
Online Appendix 1, there are also important review papers that identify new research opportu-
nities (Lee and Tang 2018, Tang 2018), as well as conceptual papers that explain novel concepts
in sustainability (Arenas and Rodrigo 2016, Joglekar et al. 2016, Murray et al. 2017, Nonet et al.
2016, Sodhi 2015).
A careful examination of the existing literature revealed a serious gap. Although past studies have
gained a preliminary understanding of what drives environmental compliance and the importance
of environmental monitoring and enforcement (Gray and Shimshack 2011), there is very little
research on how to eﬀectively operationalize environmental monitoring and enforcement eﬀorts.
Speciﬁc to our research context, we are not aware of any research that focuses on the eﬀective
detection of environmental violators. As a result, environmental violation detection operates largely
on an ineﬃcient inspection basis, which results in a low detection ratio and high monitoring costs.
We believe that public policy enforcement can beneﬁt from tools and principles in operations
management research to improve the eﬃciency of violation detection. Speciﬁc to our research, we
borrow tools from big data analytics to improve eﬃciency in violation detection.
2.2
Challenges in Deriving Business Insights from Big Data
Big data is commonly characterized by four Vs: volume, variety, velocity (Choi et al. 2018, Mishra
et al. 2018, Rozados and Tjahjono 2014), and a somewhat recent addition, veracity (Guha and
Kumar 2018). Among the four characteristics, the ﬁrst V, volume, is arguably the most deﬁning
feature of big data (Labrinidis and Jagadish 2012).
Volume refers to the large number of observations available for analysis. While volume of
data presents the potential for deriving useful business insights, the transformation is not auto-
matic (Jagadish et al. 2014). As raw data are accumulating at unprecedented rates, they need to be
organized, prepared, and analyzed before business intelligence can be extracted from the data. In
this regard, researchers have observed a growing gap between data and users (Kepner et al. 2014)

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
8
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
and call for innovative ways to address this challenge. In our research, we take a massive amount
of raw reporting data on environmental monitoring and apply a feature engineering technique to
derive a set of key features of such data. These key features make up the data quality index. This
index measures the ﬁdelity of reported data and is instrumental in data consumers evaluation of
the credibility of reporting ﬁrms. More importantly, this reporting data quality index serves as a
good predictor for the detection of environmental violators. Thus, our research helps transform a
massive amount of raw data into meaningful operations management decision insights.
2.3
Descriptive, Predictive, and Prescriptive Data Analytics
Due to the newness of big data analytics in O&SCM, the deﬁnitions for some terms are still
evolving. Yet, a common way to describe and distinguish big data analytics is to divide it into
descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive categories. Deka (2016) provides detailed descriptions of
the three terms.
Descriptive analytics is past-oriented. The objective is to analyze historical data in order to
identify patterns. For example, Foster et al. (2018) perform cluster analysis to identify patterns that
impact emergency room physicians’ performance. Li et al. (2016) use inverse covariance estimation
technique to detect operational patterns associated with high performing manufacturing ﬁrms.
Predictive analytics also analyzes past data, with the intention to predict future outcomes. For
example, Cui et al. (2018) mine social media data to make predictions on future sales. Similarly,
Boone et al. (2018) use Google trends information to improve sales forecasts. Finally, prescriptive
analytics provides recommendation for future actions. IBM treats prescriptive analytics as the ﬁnal
phase of big data analytics as it evaluates and determines new ways to operate (Deka 2016).
Online Appendices 2 and 3 summarize research that utilizes big data analytics to solve O&SCM
challenges. The existing O&SCM research on descriptive, predictive, and prescription analytics
typically focuses on one of the elements (Cui et al. 2018, Lau et al. 2018, Li et al. 2020). Very few
studies have touched on all three aspects. One exception is Swaminathan (2018) who describes,
conceptually, how all three types can be used in humanitarian operations. In this paper, we build
on Swaminathan (2018) and illustrate how we operate descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive ana-
lytics on empirical datasets to solve an important environmental enforcement problem. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst utilize descriptive analysis to describe the features of the reporting data. These features are
critical to the detection of environmental violators, as they serve as the inputs to our prediction
models. Second, we build prediction models utilizing recent machine learning techniques. We also
develop new PU learning models to overcome challenges in our empirical datasets and produce the
best-ﬁtting one for the most accurate and eﬃcient detection of environmental violators. Lastly,

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
9
as a part of the validation eﬀorts of our prediction model, we prescribe a new data-driven busi-
ness process to catch environmental violators. This new process achieved satisfactory results in a
related ﬁeld test. Although our research centers on the prediction model, we have demonstrated
the complete range of descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive elements of big data analytics. As
far as we know, we are the ﬁrst to do so in research on sustainable operations management.
2.4
Data-Driven Prediction Models vs. Explanatory Models
We take note here that unlike the traditional research mode with a primary focus on building
explanatory models that identify casual relationships among model constructs, a distinctive feature
of data-driven predictive analytics is its focus on prediction (Boone et al. 2018, Cui et al. 2018)
and its application in decision-making. In this regard, the seminal work of Shmueli and Koppius
(2011) provides a detailed explanation of the diﬀerences between explanation models and prediction
models in terms of analysis goal, variables of interest, model building optimized function, model
building constraints, and model evaluation. Similarly, Kitchin (2014) echoes the view of Shmueli
and Koppius (2011). In his inﬂuential piece on data-driven analytics, Kitchin (2014) treats big
data analytics as disruptive innovations, and therefore calls for a paradigm shift on how research
is done with big data. In line with Boone et al. (2018), Cui et al. (2018), Shmueli and Koppius
(2011), and various other papers published in the two special issues of Production and Operations
Management on Big Data Analytics, our research focus is prediction and its impacts on decision-
making. We do not intend to build explanatory models or to claim casual relationships between
predictors and outcome variables. Thus, we root our study in the general framework of data-driven
analytics. Below we explain our research context.
3
Research Background and Research Data
3.1
Research Background
China has experienced phenomenal development triggered by the economic reform in the late
1970s (Chow 1993, Holz 2008, Singhal and Singhal 2019). As an emerging economy, China initially
formulated a policy that prioritized economic development, which resulted in rapid deterioration
of the environment (Fang et al. 2009), including massive air and water pollution (Ebenstein 2012,
Ji et al. 2014). In recent years, the central government has made strategic decisions to reduce
pollution and improve the environment (Li et al. 2015).
One of the key resolvents to ongoing environmental deterioration in China is the mandatory
installation of CEMS in polluting facilities, following the lead of the United States (Pan et al.
2005, Zhang and Schreifels 2011). CEMS is employed worldwide (ECCC 2020, EPA 2020, Gupta
2019) to directly and continuously monitor, record, and report the emissions measurement and

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
10
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
operating parameters for required pollutants, such as concentration of emissions and discharge
ﬂow. By the end of 2016, the total number of CEMS installed in China exceeded 29,000. The
installation of CEMS in China covers various industries such as thermal power, iron and steel,
metallurgical, aluminum, chemical, waste-water treatment, and paper-making industries (Tang
et al. 2019). The Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the Peoples Republic of China (MEEC)
mandates pollutant-producing facilities to continuously report pollutant monitoring data (Karplus
et al. 2018). Under this monitoring system, if the average hourly concentration of a pollutant
exceeds a preset limit ﬁve times, an inquiry will be made by the agency. Without a reasonable
explanation, a public investigation will be opened and possibly a penalty will be issued. Over the
years, this CEMS dataset has accumulated a tremendous amount of data.
Even with the worlds largest and most comprehensive monitoring system, there exist many
violations. There are ﬁrms that circumvent the monitoring devices and release more pollutants than
the allowance. Some examples include destroying monitoring devices, modifying monitoring data,
and diluting pollutant intake. This type of violation is so severe and prevalent that the Chinese
government had to set up an additional manual inspection mechanism to catch the cheaters. Each
year, employees from MEEC are pulled from their regular posts to conduct inspections at the
provincial level. This prevents them from carrying out their normal job duties. At the same time, it
incurs a high travel-related cost. Due to the high costs and resource drain associated with manual
inspection, it is largely carried out on a random basis with occasional inspections based on tips
received from anonymous phone calls.
Overall, the current inspection mechanism is expensive and has a low detection rate. However,
we note that over the years, these inspections have resulted in the accumulation of a list of com-
panies that seemingly report normal, passing-grade pollutant data, yet are caught violating the
environmental regulations. This dataset of environmental violators is publicly available. Yet we
are not aware of any research that integrates this dataset with the big CEMS data and explores
a possible connection between these two sets of data. Our research makes the ﬁrst attempt to
take full advantage of the integration of these two datasets and build prediction models to identify
violators. Below we describe these two datasets.
3.2
Data Description
As discussed earlier, we utilized two datasets: The ﬁrst is the CEMS dataset and the second is the
VPD. Brieﬂy, the ﬁrst dataset includes all the information on daily gas pollutants emission activity,
reported by manufacturing facilities. The second dataset includes the list of ﬁrms that have been
detected as environmental violators through inspections and subsequently penalized by MEEC.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
11
Table 1
Summary Statistics for Factories and Pollutants Included in CEMS Dataset
Measure
Pollutants
Smoke Dust
SO2
NOx
COD
Ammonia-nitrogen
Number of discharge outlets 18,257
18,257
18,257
11,770
11,770
Number of emission records
159,977,477
159,977,477
159,977,477
122,854,626
122,854,626
Average concentration
77.63
21.05
118.87
46.77
3.13
Median concentration
24.29
10.6
70.09
27.59
0.98
Standard Deviation
143.90
59.54
141.80
69.31
10.60
Table 2
A Simpliﬁed Example of CEMS Record
Factory ID Outlets ID Nature of Factory
Pollutant
Time
Concentration
Flow
10000002
003
Small scale, Private
NOx
05/12/2016,
22.80
43.06
enterprise, Non-key-control
11:00
10000001
002
Large II scale, State-owned
SO2
05/12/2016,
18.06
26.17
factory, Province-control
11:00
3.2.1
CEMS Dataset
The CEMS dataset is provided by MEEC and obtained directly
from the national CEMS monitoring data platform. The dataset includes CEMS hourly pollution
emission data for all industries in 30 province-level regions of mainland China from January 1,
2016 to June 30, 2017. In total, the CEMS dataset includes monitoring data from 7,643 factories.
There are 725,641,683 emission monitoring records for ﬁve major pollutants: smoke dust, SO2,
NOx, COD, and Ammonia-nitrogen. The summary statistics of CEMS data are listed in Table 1.
The CEMS records the maximum, minimum, and average value of emissions concentration
(mg/m3 for gaseous pollutants) hourly, and then automatically revises updated concentration and
ﬂow. In addition, the CEMS also measures necessary operating parameters, such as the oxygen
content for boilers, which provide valuable information on the state of the equipment. It is worth
mentioning that the combination of pollutants being constantly monitored by CEMS varies by
industry, but it covers all major pollutants for each industry. The thermal power industry, for
example, is required to report the emissions data for smoke dust, SO2, and NOx, whereas municipal
sewage plants report data for emissions of COD and Ammonia-nitrogen instead. The CEMS assigns
a unique ID number for each discharge outlet. Thus, we are able to match factory information with
its corresponding hourly monitoring records through the ID number. A snapshot of the CEMS
dataset is provided in Table 2. Note that in the actual dataset, billions of records are generated
each year, including both gas and water pollutants. Our study mainly utilizes gas pollutant data.
The nature of the factory column tracks three types of information including scale of the factory
(from small to super large), registration type, and emission control level (state-controlled, province-
controlled, city-controlled, and non-key polluting facilities). Since the reporting of gas pollutant
data is mandatory in China, missing data are at a minimum. We only encountered 8 missing records
in registration type, 7 missing records in the scale of factories, and 64 missing records in control
level. We subsequently removed these missing records.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
12
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
3.2.2
VPD
To build prediction models, we integrate the CEMS dataset with VPD. The
manual inspection mechanism has helped MEEC to detect a number of violators and subsequently
penalize them. We assemble VPD from the publicly available online data platform hosted by
MEEC. All environmental-related administrative penalties are released on the platform quarterly
(http://www.mee.gov.cn/gkml/?ClassInfoId=119), allowing us to link the CEMS data with fac-
tories actual status of compliance with environmental policies. VPD contains 372 factories with
administrative penalties issued during 2016-2017, which includes 118 factories with waste gas pol-
lution violations.
4
Problem Formulation and Empirical Challenges
Our objective is to create a predictive model for the eﬃcient detection of environmental violators.
This predictive model utilizes each ﬁrms CEMS reporting data and matches them against violation
status as stored in VPD. On the surface, this problem can be formulated as a classic binary
classiﬁcation problem as denoted below.
Suppose that there are n factories in the CEMS database, and the i-th factory has been recorded
ni times as ri = (ri1,ri2,...,rini). According to the VPD, we assume that liti = 1 if the i-th factory
is punished at timestamp ti, where i ∈{1,...,n} and ti ∈{1,...,ni}. At ﬁrst glance, one can assume
this is a supervised classiﬁcation problem by considering ri as the feature of the i-th factory and
liti as the corresponding label. However, this classic machine learning approach faces the following
challenges posed by the special characteristics of the CEMS dataset.
Irregularity. First, diﬀerent pollutant-producing factories began to operate the CEMS devices
at diﬀerent time intervals. This diﬀerence in turn leads to a diﬀerent number of records produced
by diﬀerent factories. This irregularity presents a challenge for classical models such as Logistics
Regression, AdaBoost, and Random Forest, which all require a regular table as their input (Fried-
man et al. 2001). Therefore, it would be a violation of model assumption to directly apply classic
supervised machine learning models to the raw data.
Outlier. An outlier is an observation point that is distant from other observations, and an
outlier can prevent researchers from obtaining robust results (Huber 2004). Outliers exist in the
CEMS dataset. They can be caused by measurement error, unstable operation, or abnormal pro-
duction process. The frequent existence of outliers also poses a problem for the direct application
of classic supervised learning method, i.e., the robustness of the ﬁndings can be jeopardized (Lecu´e
et al. 2020).
Sparsity. One critical challenge in applying the classic supervised machine learning model is
that the punishment label liti is very sparse. Although we have millions of records on the predictors
obtained from the CEMS dataset, we only have a very limited number of records of outcome

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
13
variables, i.e., liti = 1 for the factories that were caught by MEEC. This creates severe sparsity in
the matrices.
Missing Label. Related to the problem above, the sparsity of the data matrix also means that
there may exist many violators who report falsiﬁed environmental monitoring data yet have not
been caught, due to the resource constraints associated with the manual random inspection process.
If we treat the violation status of a ﬁrm purely based on information from VPD (i.e., if a facility
exists in VPD, set violation status = 1, and −1 otherwise), it is very likely we would have mislabeled
many facilities as −1 although they have in fact violated environmental regulations (but have not
been caught by the inspection). In other words, if a facility is caught by MEEC, it is a violator.
However, if a facility is not caught by MEEC, it does not mean it is a non-violator. Thus, this leads
to a number of missing labels in the raw data. If we were to label non-punished facilities with the
label liti = −1, it may result in large biases in decision-making due to the incorrect labeling.
Lack of Fidelity in Reporting Data. As we allude to earlier, a major problem in the raw
CEMS reporting data is the low ﬁdelity caused by intentional manipulation of the reporting devices.
This problem undermines the underlying trustworthiness of the raw data. Therefore, it is not
advisable to operate directly on the raw data. Rather, we need to ﬁnd some reliable clues, not from
the raw data itself, but from the features derived from the raw data, to detect violators.
To overcome these challenges, we endeavor to leverage two methods. First, we use feature engi-
neering to abstract features of the reported raw data and use these features to construct a new
CEMS data quality assessment framework. This is consistent with Cormack et al. (2007) and Garla
and Brandt (2012), who show that utilizing features instead of raw data results in better predictive
power in their respective research contexts. Our data quality assessment framework incorporates
six data quality features that can be used to evaluate the ﬁdelity of the raw data reported. These
six data features can overcome the low ﬁdelity, irregularity, and outlier issues for CEMS data.
Second, we propose two new PU learning methods to conquer the sparsity and missing label issues
associated with raw CEMS data. The details are provided in the following two sections.
5
CEMS Data Quality Assessment Framework
In this section, we propose a new data quality assessment framework that includes a number of
features derived from CEMS data. We derive these features from two sources. One is through
surveying existing data quality literature. The other is through domain knowledge gained from
qualitative interviews with subject matter experts (SMEs). Below we describe the construction of
this data quality assessment framework.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
14
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
5.1
Data Quality Literature and Qualitative Interviews
Existing literature has long recognized that data quality is a multi-dimensional concept (Ballou and
Pazer 1985, Dey and Kumar 2010, Wang and Strong 1996). Many authors have provided deﬁnitions
of the dimensions of data quality from diﬀerent perspectives.
Strong et al. (1997) deﬁne data
quality as the ﬁtness for use by data consumers. Ballou and Pazer (1985) suggest that accuracy,
completeness, consistency, and timeliness are the dimensions of data quality.
Wang and Strong
(1996) provide an analysis from the perspective of those who use the data, and group various
attributes of data quality into intrinsic, contextual, representational, and accessibility data quality
classes. A detailed review is provided by Keller et al. (2017). To ﬁt our research context, we take in
the elements discussed in existing literature such as completeness, consistency (Ballou and Pazer
1985), and ﬁtness for use by data consumers (Strong et al. 1997).
We also supplement the literature review ﬁndings with domain knowledge gained from qualita-
tive interviews with SMEs from MEEC as well as the CEMS device manufactures. These planned
interviews took place over the course of one and a half years and were scheduled quarterly. Thus,
we met and interviewed SMEs at six diﬀerent times throughout the project, with the ﬁrst four
interviews focusing on learning from SMEs and the last two interviews focusing on soliciting feed-
back on our proposed big data analytical approaches. At each interview, which typically lasted 2–3
hours, there were at least six experts (this was a legal requirement by the project sponsor, MEEC,
to ensure the quality of the interviews). Because we wanted to obtain a comprehensive view of
the issue at hand, we rotated SMEs throughout the project. Altogether we interviewed 10 unique
SMEs. These experts were composed of two groups. One group included employees holding senior
positions at MEEC, such as the Deputy Director of the Appraisal Center for Environment and
Engineering, and the Director of Technology Support Center for Regulatory Modeling. These senior
employees work out of MEEC headquarters in Beijing. (On occasion, we also invited employees
holding a senior position at the provincial level.) These senior employees all have more than 10
years of work experience in the industry. This group of SMEs have a comprehensive view of the
issue at a national level and shared information regarding the severity of the problem, its damages,
the high costs associated with manual inspection, etc.
The second group included specialists from the CEMS device manufacturers (we selected special-
ists with at least 5 years of work experience), and the front-line employees for the environmental
protection agencies at the provincial level and/or municipal level. Because there are many diﬀerent
manufacturers of CEMS devices, interviews with equipment specialists from device manufacturers
informed us on conditions aﬀecting the stability of these devices. Interviews with the front-line

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
15
employees from the environmental protection agencies provided experiential insights on some com-
monly used methods to manipulate the CEMS device in order to produce fraudulent reports. They
also provided insights on the indications of such fraudulent activities.
We conducted the interviews with a semi-structured format (Bartlett et al. 2006). A semi-
structured interview allows the researchers to control the research focus, yet at the same time allows
the emergence of new ideas (Cachia and Millward 2011). The discussions were centered around the
following key questions: First, which of the abnormal data in the dataset are caused by defects
of the CEMS devices themselves, and which are true anomalies? Second, do these abnormal data
represent fraudulent activities in reporting? And third, what are the underlying reasons causing
the abnormal reporting? Information collected through these interviews proved to be instrumental
in the development of the reporting data quality index. Besides the three key questions, we also
allowed SMEs to expand on related topics. At the end of each interview, each attending SME
signed oﬀon the interview notes.
Our interview data suggest that at times, environmental violators do not want to be monitored
by the government. When the mandatory monitoring requirements are enforced, these violators
do not willingly upload high quality reporting data. For example, one of the SMEs informed us
that many companies with environmental violations would deliberately cut oﬀthe power of CEMS
devices when releasing toxins, and the monitoring device would temporarily fail, resulting in a
data upload value of 0 or NA (not applicable). Therefore, a useful reporting data quality in our
research context must factor in data quality issues caused by deliberate attempts to alter data.
We combined these interview ﬁndings with data quality dimensions reported in past literature and
came up with a new set of domain-knowledge-driven features derived from raw reporting data.
These features can inform us on the reporting data quality suitable to our research context.
5.2
Feature Engineering and Composition of Reporting Data Quality Index
Feature engineering refers to the process of utilizing domain knowledge to extract attributes (i.e.,
features) from raw data, and it can be done either automatically, semi-automatically, or by manual
selection (Gaber et al. 2020). Arguably a manual feature selection based on domain knowledge is
preferred (Moro et al. 2014). Our research utilizes manual selection of features. We combine ﬁndings
from existing research and qualitative interviews with SMEs, and develop a reporting data quality
index. This index is composed of a set of six features that describe the characteristics of reported
raw data. These data features can be categorized into three dimensions: Accuracy, Completeness,
and Industry Particularity. The accuracy dimension captures the validation of the data, and thus is
represented and measured by the abnormal ratio and zero ratio of CEMS data. The completeness
dimension refers to the extent to which data are not missing when the CEMS is in operation, and

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
16
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Accuracy
Dimension
Weighted CEMS Data
Quality
CEMS Data Quality
Completeness
Dimension
Abnormal
Ratio
Industry
Particularity
Dimension
Fluctuation
Rate
Zero Ratio
Suspension
Ratio
Null Ratio
Over-standard
Rate
Defining weight distribution of evaluation
indexes according to the use of CEMS data
Figure 1
Reporting Data Quality Framework
is quantiﬁed by suspension ratio and null ratio. The third dimension is industry characteristics. It
takes into consideration variations among industries, and measures whether the data collected are
true and credible in speciﬁc industry scenarios. The framework is presented in Figure 1 and the
detailed explanations for each of the six features are shown below.
5.2.1
Accuracy Dimension: Abnormal Ratio
There exist negative values and abnor-
mally large values in CEMS data. One of the key reasons is that some facilities failed to properly
conduct routine calibration and reconditioning of CEMS devices. These abnormal records are not
valid measurements for emissions. We use the accumulated period, which refers to the total length
of negative values and abnormally large values in CEMS monitoring records, and its proportion in
accumulated running time as an indication of CEMS data quality.
q1 = Accumulated Abnormal Period
Accumulated Running Time .
(1)
Based on this formulation, we note that a large abnormal ratio signals carelessness in maintaining
reporting devices and can lead to reduction in the quality of reported data.
5.2.2
Accuracy Dimension: Zero Ratio
Zero values refer to scenarios in which the emis-
sion concentrations recorded by CEMS are exactly equal to zero. In reality, even if the true emission
concentration is very low, the data should ﬂuctuate around zero rather than stick to the zero posi-
tion. Furthermore, one of the SMEs provided us one possible reason why continuous zero values
are recorded: The manufacturing facility cuts oﬀthe power of CEMS devices when it is releasing
toxins. Thus, the continuous appearance of zero values is an indicator of possible tampering with

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
17
environmental monitoring devices. We use the accumulated zero value period, which refers to the
total length of zero values in CEMS monitoring records, and its proportion in accumulated running
time, as an indication of CEMS data quality.
q2 = Accumulated Zero Value Period
Accumulated Running Time
.
(2)
This second indicator, q2, is another measurement of the accuracy dimension of CEMS data,
factoring potential behavioral issues of the reporting facility.
5.2.3
Completeness Dimension: Suspension Ratio
We denote a suspension ratio (q3)
to reﬂect the stability of the device operation as follows:
q3 = 1 −Accumulated Running Time
Supposed Running Time
.
(3)
The “supposed running time” in the above equation refers to the length of time from the beginning
to the end of normal operation of CEMS devices during a data quality observation period. If the
suspension rate is greater than 0, we can postulate that the device was temporarily suspended for
a period of time. High suspension rate implies that CEMS devices might be suﬀering from unstable
daily operation, while a rate close to zero signals stable operations.
5.2.4
Completeness Dimension: Null Ratio
There exist NA (not available) values in
the CEMS data, which means that the CEMS equipment could not upload valid data. Thus, we
can use the following null ratio (q4) to reﬂect facilities daily operations behavior:
q4 =
Accumulated Null Period
Accumulated Running Time.
(4)
Here, “accumulated null period” refers to the total length of null value in CEMS monitoring records.
A high null ratio may indicate that the factories do not follow the regular maintenance procedures
and quality assurance activities for CEMS, which can be regarded as a signal of unhealthy routine
operation. We cannot rule out the possibility that the CEMS device was sabotaged by the facility
in order to avoid emission monitoring by the authorities.
5.2.5
Industry Particularity Dimension: Over-standard Rate
The over-standard
rate, which is denoted by q5, is a ratio that measures proportion of time that a reporting device
exceeds an emission standard.
q5 = Accumulated Out of Control Period
Valid Time
.
(5)
To eliminate the impact of abnormal records, we remove the period when abnormality occurred
from the accumulated running time. Therefore, the valid time is deﬁned as the accumulated running
time minus the abnormal period and zero value period. The deﬁnition of out-of-control period
is the number of hours that the average emission concentration exceeds corresponding emission
standards. The over-standard rate gives a snapshot of reporting facilities intentions to comply with
environmental policies.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
18
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
5.2.6
Industry Particularity Dimension: Fluctuation Rate
We noticed instances of
extremely high or extremely low ﬂuctuation of CEMS. For instance, the emission concentration
reported appears to be a constant for an extended period. In this case, the variance of emission
concentration may be lower than the industrial standard variance. In addition, a high ﬂuctuation
may occur when the CEMS probe suﬀers from poor quality and becomes oversensitive, resulting
in drifts in measured values. We deﬁne the ﬂuctuation rate as follows:
q6 = |Variance −Industry-standard Variance|
Normalization Constant
.
(6)
Here, the industrial standard variance is a self-selected reference value, and one can easily choose
the average variance or median or other reasonable values for diﬀerent industries.
As we discussed earlier, the lack of ﬁdelity, irregularity, and the existence of many outliers in
the raw data prevent us from operating directly on the raw data. We overcome these challenges
by deriving a set of features based on domain knowledge. Speciﬁcally, transforming raw data into
a uniform set of features ensures that the number of features is the same across diﬀerent factories.
In addition, aggregating the raw data to obtain the six data features signiﬁcantly reduces the
variability of raw data, which can improve the robustness of the learning models. In summary,
although operating on features may lose some information in the raw data (remember that some
facilities have manipulated the raw data so some reported raw data is not trustworthy), it enables
us to utilize machine learning approaches to build predictive models (see Section 7). Below we
describe method innovations that enable us to build such predictive models.
6
Research Method: PU Learning Framework
6.1
Why PU Learning?
Violator detection, in essence, is a binary classiﬁcation problem. Our objective is to predict (classify)
a facility as either a violator or not a violator. In a traditional binary classiﬁcation problem, the
decision function is trained by a dataset that contains both positive and negative samples, and
that is fully labeled. However, in the combined datasets of CEMS data and VPD, only the limited
number of facilities that have been caught by manual inspection are labeled as positive samples,
and the rest are unlabeled. This causes the aforementioned sparsity and missing label issues in the
dataset, and makes the classiﬁcation problem diﬃcult.
Fortunately, PU learning (Bekker and Davis 2020), or learning from positive and unlabeled data,
can overcome some of the challenges with our datasets. PU learning is an emerging machine learning
method that has drawn considerable attention recently (Jaskie and Spanias 2019). In PU learning,
each unlabeled sample could belong to either the positive or negative class. This fundamental

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
19
assumption is consistent with the context of environmental violator detection. The factories that
are caught represent the labeled samples while others are the unlabeled samples.
We transform our dataset into the PU dataset as a triplet (X,Y,L) with X = (X1,X2,...,X6)⊤∈
R6, a vector involving 6 data quality indicators, where Y is the true class label to present whether
the factory is a violator, and L is a binary variable recording whether the factory was caught by
MEEC. Obviously, the class label Y cannot be observed, but information about it can be derived
from the value of L. For example, if the factory was caught by MEEC, then this factory must be
a violator, which means L = 1 and implies
P(Y = 1|L = 1) = 1.
However, if L = −1, we cannot know if the factory is a violator or not. That is, information on Y
is missing.
PU learning methods are commonly divided into two categories according to labeling mechanism-
based and labeling mechanism-free schemes (Bekker and Davis 2020). First, labeling mechanism-
based PU learning generally treats the unlabeled samples as negative samples. We then build a
decision function (classiﬁer). Obviously this classiﬁer is biased, as it assumes all unlabeled samples
to be negative. To correct this bias, a labeling mechanism is built, which is incorporated into the
training process. Second, labeling mechanism-free PU learning is generally built on the separability
assumptions of the positive and negative samples. In other words, negative samples are very far
from the positive samples in an unknown feature space. According to this separability property,
reliable negative samples could be selected from the unlabeled samples. Thus, using supervised
learning approaches on the labeled positive samples and selected reliable negative samples can
obtain a decision function. In the next two subsections, we propose two kinds of PU learning
approaches to the environmental violator detection problem, and show their eﬀectiveness.
6.2
Labeling Mechanism-Based PU Learning for Violator Detection
The basic idea of labeling mechanism-based PU learning is to treat all unlabeled samples as nega-
tives, and then design a new supervised learning strategy that can correct the learning bias due to
the incorrect labeling, based on assuming the labeling mechanism is known. It should be mentioned
that the labeled samples, which are in VPD, represent the factories that have been actually caught
in a random inspection by MEEC. This randomness in inspection ensures that the labeling of facili-
ties satisﬁes the selected completely at random (SCAR) assumption (Elkan and Noto 2008). That is,
P(L = 1|X,Y = 1) = c,

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
20
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
which means any violators are caught completely at random, independent from their features.
The value c is called label frequency, which denotes the probability of being caught. Based on this
SCAR assumption, we can compute that
P(L = 1|X,Y = 1) = P(L = 1,Y = 1|X)
P(Y = 1|X)
= P(L = 1|X)
P(Y = 1|X) = c.
Therefore, P(L = 1|X) = cP(Y = 1|X). This formulation is critically important. It means that we
can obtain P(Y = 1|X) by the following steps. First, we estimate P(L = 1|X), and then P(Y = 1|X)
can be corrected by using P(L = 1|X) divided by constant c. Estimating P(L = 1|X) is the common
target of any supervised learning method that is trained with positive and unlabeled samples. The
correction step is consistent with the insight of labeling mechanism-based PU learning. Based on
this assumption, Zhang and Lee (2005) provide a new version of naive Bayes to handle the positive
and unlabeled text data. Lee and Liu (2003) propose a weighted logistic regression. Elkan and Noto
(2008) use a similar approach to obtain biased support vector machines. These methods are eﬀective
for their speciﬁc datasets. However, there has not been any justiﬁcation of such methods. In this
study, we propose a new PU learning framework and provide mathematical proof of its legitimacy
for datasets that satisfy the SCAR assumption. Then, two new PU learning schemes are proposed.
Let us refer back to solving the binary classiﬁcation problem with input and output pair (X,Y )
by supervised learning approaches, where X ∈X is a feature representation of a sample and Y ∈
{−1,1} is the corresponding label. The aim of supervised learning for binary classiﬁcation problems
is to ﬁnd a proper decision function (classiﬁer) by minimizing the so-called expected risk (Bousquet
et al. 2004), i.e.,
min
f
EY |X[ℓ(Y,f(X))|X],
(7)
where ℓ: X × {−1,1} →R is a well-deﬁned loss function to quantify the misclassiﬁcation error.
Given X, it is natural to perform classiﬁcation by comparing P(Y = 1|X) and P(Y = −1|X), i.e.,
a reasonable decision function is
f(X) = sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)),
which is called a Bayesian classiﬁer (or Bayesian decision boundary) of the binary classiﬁcation
problem (Lin 2004). According to Lin (2004) and Bartlett et al. (2006), a commonly accepted
standard of the loss function ℓin supervised learning is to require that the population minimizer
of expected risk with the speciﬁc loss function results in the Bayesian classiﬁer. That is to say that
the minimizer of EY |X[ℓ(f(X),Y )|X] has the same sign as sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)). The
loss function that satisﬁes this unique property is called Fisher consistent (Lin 2004).
In this paper, we have shown that the violator detection problem is consistent with the PU
learning framework due to the sparsity and missing label issues. However, a commonly accepted

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
21
way to handle the violator detection problem is to treat it as a classical binary classiﬁcation
problem, i.e., the unlabeled samples are considered as negative samples. In the following, we provide
Theorem 1 to show that this naive approach can result in biased decision-making. Note that all
the proofs in this paper are listed in Appendix A.
Theorem 1. Suppose that the SCAR labeling mechanism is satisﬁed for positive sample Y = 1 and
labeled sample L = 1, i.e., P(L = 1|X) = cP(Y = 1|X), then the Bayesian classiﬁer for the binary
classiﬁcation problem can be derived as
f(X) = sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)) = sign
2 −c
c
P(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X)

.
Theorem 1 actually implies that applying any Fisher consistent loss functions for the PU dataset
directly leads to a large bias. We know that the optimal Bayesian classiﬁer is P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y =
−1|X) and Fisher consistent loss has the same sign as the Bayesian classiﬁer. However, learning
with a PU dataset directly results in the Bayesian classiﬁer P(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X), which
is not equal to P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X) according to the result of Theorem 1. Therefore,
Theorem 1 provides the theoretical reason why directly training a classiﬁer on a PU dataset is
biased. Note that Elkan and Noto (2008), Lee and Liu (2003), and Zhang and Lee (2005) all use
the sample weighting strategy to correct the learning bias. However, they were not able to explain
the theoretical reason for such corrections. Sharing the same insight, we would like to propose a
new weighting strategy to correct the learning bias in PU learning. The fundamental idea of this
strategy is to use the result of Theorem 1 to construct a weighting function that can transfer some
loss functions to be Fisher consistent.
Let us denote a weighting function
g(Y ) =
n 2 −c if Y = 1,
c,
if Y = −1.
(8)
It is well known that the loss function (logistic loss) for logistic regression is ℓ(Y,f(X)) = log(1 +
exp(−Y f(X))), and the loss function (exponential loss) of AdaBoost is ℓ(Y,f(X)) = exp(−Y f(X)).
Both are Fisher consistent (Friedman et al. 2000). The next two theorems show how to correct the
above two losses to be Fisher consistent for PU learning by using weighting function g(Y ). For the
logistic regression,
Theorem 2. Suppose that the SCAR labeling mechanism is satisﬁed, i.e., P(L = 1|X) = cP(Y =
1|X), and further denote f ∗
1 (X) = arg minEL|X[g(L)ℓ(f(X),L)|X] where ℓ(f(X),L) = log(1 +
exp(−Lf(X))), then we have
sign(f ∗
1 (X)) = sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)).
For the AdaBoost,

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
22
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Theorem 3. Suppose that the SCAR labeling mechanism is satisﬁed, i.e., P(L = 1|X) =
cP(Y = 1|X), and further denote f ∗
2 (X) = arg minEL|X[g(L)ℓ(f(X),L)|X] where ℓ(f(X),L) =
exp(−Lf(X)), then
sign(f ∗
2 (X)) = sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)).
Theorems 2 and 3 show that incorporating the weighting function g(Y ) into the training stage
of logistic regression and AdaBoost can correct the decision bias that comes from the PU dataset
if the SCAR assumption is satisﬁed. In practice, the real distribution of the PU dataset cannot
be obtained, so we have to use the empirical risk minimization (9) (Bousquet et al. 2004) to take
the place of expected risk minimization (7) in the training stage. Then we propose the following
algorithms for the PU logistic regression and AdaBoost. To implement Algorithm 1, we need to
set the parameter c in the weighting function g(Y ). The tuning of the parameter will be addressed
in Section 7.
Algorithm 1 Labeling Mechanism-Based PU Learning Algorithm for Violator Detection
1: Transform R into X = (x1,x2,...,xn)⊤∈Rn×6 by the proposed data quality assessment frame-
work, where xi = (xi1,...,xi6)⊤,i = 1,...,n is the data quality indicators of the i-th factory.
2: Compute
ˆf ∈min
f
n 1
n
n
X
i=1
g(liti)ℓ(f(xi),liti)
o
,
(9)
where g(L) is deﬁned by (8), and ℓ(f(X),L) = exp(−Lf(X)) and ℓ(f(X),L) = log(1 +
exp(−Lf(X))) are used for logistic regression and AdaBoost, respectively.
6.3
Labeling Mechanism-Free PU Learning for Violator Detection
The separability assumption is the fundamental basis of labeling mechanism-free PU learning. This
assumption considers that all the positive samples are very similar to the labeled samples and the
negative samples are very diﬀerent from them in an unknown feature space (Bekker and Davis
2020). Based on this assumption, PU learning can be formulated as a two-step technique as follows.
• Step 1: Constructing a reasonable approach to identify reliable negative samples from the
unlabeled samples in a feature space.
• Step 2: Applying supervised learning techniques with the positive and reliable negative samples
to obtain the decision function (classiﬁer).
In the ﬁrst step, the key objective is to deﬁne a proper feature space so that positive and negative
samples in the new feature space are clearly separated, and then the unlabeled samples, which are
far away from labeled samples, are selected as reliable negatives. Thus, how to deﬁne a proper
feature space that leads to the separability assumption becomes a crucial problem in labeling

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
23
mechanism-free PU learning. In the existing PU learning literature (Chaudhari and Shevade 2012,
Fung et al. 2005, Liu and Peng 2014), this problem is handled by applying domain knowledge. For
example, many PU learning approaches have addressed text classiﬁcation problems, therefore many
feature engineering techniques, such as TFIDF (Term Frequency Inverse Positive-Negative Docu-
ment Frequency) and word embedding, provide a new feature space for the texts. In this situation,
a natural way to select negative samples is to use a clustering technique (Chaudhari and Shevade
2012, Fung et al. 2005, Li and Liu 2003, Liu and Peng 2014, Lu and Bai 2010), such as k-means clus-
tering, because in the feature space, the positive and negative samples are assumed to be separable.
In the second step, the labeled positive and reliable negative samples are employed to train a
decision function. Obviously, any supervised learning method, such as support vector machines (Li
and Liu 2003), logistic regression (Lee and Liu 2003), and naive Bayes (Lu and Bai 2010), could
be used in this context. Finally, to obtain more reliable negative samples and to enhance the
robustness of the classiﬁer, previous research also apply an iterative strategy (Li and Liu 2003). In
this iterative strategy, researchers utilize the obtained classiﬁers to classify the remaining unlabeled
data, in the hope of providing more reliable negative samples. This results in an updated classiﬁer.
This iterative process repeats itself until a satisfactory result is obtained.
Using a similar insight, we propose the following labeling mechanism-free PU learning algorithm
(Algorithm 2) for violator detection. Given raw CEMS data R = {r1,r2,...,rn} and VPD l =
(l1t1,...,lntn) where liti = 1 means the i-th factory is punished at timestamp ti, we denote factory
index set as I = {1,2,...,n}, labeled positive sample index set as L = {i : liti = 1}, and unlabeled
sample index set as U = {i : liti = −1}, thus I = L ∪U. Given any index set M and its cardinality
of m, we further denote XM = (xi1,xi2,...,xim) as the sub-matrix of X = (x1,x2,...,xn)⊤, xi
as the i-th row vector, and the index as ij ∈M,j = 1,...,m. Algorithm 2 is based on the above
formulation.
Algorithm 2 provides a new labeling mechanism-free PU learning method for violator detection.
Comparing with existing approaches, this new method incorporates the feature space supported
by the data quality assessment framework, which is constructed by the domain knowledge of
SMEs. Afterwards, we utilize k-means clustering and an iterative scheme to obtain reliable negative
samples. The eﬀectiveness of these techniques has been validated in a number of studies (Chaudhari
and Shevade 2012, Fung et al. 2005, Li and Liu 2003, Liu and Peng 2014, Lu and Bai 2010).
7
PU Learning Models and the Detection of Environmental Violators
7.1
Data Processing
In this section, we describe an application of the proposed techniques to the integrated CEMS
dataset and VPD. The VPD contains 372 records of factories caught through manual inspection

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
24
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Algorithm 2 Labeling Mechanism-Free PU Learning Algorithm for Violator Detection
1: Given
the
maximal
clustering
number K
and
iterative
number J.
Transform
R
into
X =
(x1,x2,...,xn)⊤∈Rn×6
by
the
proposed
data
quality
assessment
framework,
where
xi =
(xi1,...,xi6)⊤,i = 1,...,n is the data quality indicators of the i-th factory.
2: for k = 2 : K do
3:
Apply k-means clustering algorithm on data quality matrix X.
4:
Compute the average distances dk of the samples that are in the cluster which does not involve
positive samples, with all positive samples.
5: end for
6: Select k∗= arg maxk=1:K dk.
7: Run K-means via the clustering number k∗and select the samples that are in the cluster which does
not involve the positive samples as reliable negatives, and denote the selected reliable negative samples
with the index set RN1 = {i : the i-th sample is selected as reliable negative sample}.
8: for j = 1 : J do
9:
Use a supervised learning approach on the dataset {(xj,ljtj) : j ∈L ∪RNj} to obtain a decision
function fj. Apply fj on the sample set with index I −(L ∪RNj) to predict their labels.
10:
Add the predicted negative samples into RNj to obtain a new reliable negative sample set.
11: end for
12: Output: fJ as the ﬁnal classiﬁer.
during 2016-2017. Of these records, 118 were caught for gas violation. The set consisting of the gas
violation factories that have been caught is labeled as the sample index set L. Out of the 7,643
facilities, there are 3,482 relevant facilities that installed a gas emission monitoring system. We
remove the 118 facilities from these 3,482 facilities and select the remaining ones into the unlabeled
set U. Thus, L and U are disjoint.
Before building predictive models, we process the data from CEMS and VPD to ensure appro-
priate integration of the two datasets. First, we examine the date that a particular facility has
been caught, and remove entries in the CEMS dataset post that date (note that although VPD
is published quarterly, it does specify the date when a particular facility has been caught). Since
it is reasonable to expect the violating facility to change its reporting behavior after it has been
caught, we must remove the post-caught data to ensure the consistency of the data used to predict
environmental predictors. Second, we use the remaining dataset to compute data quality indica-
tors. Note that these indicators are ratio data. For example, the ﬁrst indicator, abnormal ratio,
is computed by dividing accumulated abnormal period by accumulated running time. Therefore,
the computation of the indicators is time scale free. Thus, the removal of post-caught records, as
reported in step one, will not impact the computation of the ratio data. Third, certain facilities
may contain several outlets. When we calculate the reporting data quality indicators, the average
value of outlets is utilized as the reporting data quality indicators for the facility.
7.2
Model Description
Table 3 provides a summary of the models we built. We now provide a detailed discussion of
these. We built ﬁve types of model: (i) learning from raw CEMS data of L ∪U, using Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), which is a speciﬁc recurrent neural

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
25
network (RNN) architecture that was designed to model temporal sequences and their long-range
dependencies more accurately than conventional RNNs; (ii) learning from L ∪U with the 6 data
quality features, using logistic regression and AdaBoost; (iii) learning from L ∪U with the 6 data
quality features using the algorithm proposed by Lee and Liu (2003) (denoted as WLR-PU);
(iv) learning from L ∪U with the 6 data quality features using Algorithm 1; and (v) learning from
L ∪U with the 6 data quality features using Algorithm 2. We also test a naive rule-based model
based on insights from the qualitative interviews. We report the results of the rule-based model
in Appendix B. The results are inferior to other prediction models presented here. Tables 4 and 5
provide summaries of model results.
Table 3
Model Comparison
Method
Raw Data or Features
PU Learning
Evaluation Metric
LSTM
Raw Data
No
AUC, precision, recall, F1-score
Logit
Features
No
AUC, precision, recall, F1-score
AdaBoost
Features
No
AUC, precision, recall, F1-score
WLR-PU
Features
Yes
recall, Fpu
PU Logistic
Features
Yes
recall, Fpu
PU AdaBoost
Features
Yes
recall, Fpu
PU-2 Logistic
Features
Yes
AUC, precision, recall, F1-score
PU-2 AdaBoost
Features
Yes
AUC, precision, recall, F1-score
Scenario (i) is the baseline: learning a classiﬁer from raw CEMS data, characterized by irregular-
ity and outliers. To deal with the irregularity, we adopt the state-of-the-art deep learning technique
LSTM. Scenario (ii) employs classical supervised learning approaches for the CEMS data that we
recognized as a fully labeled dataset. This represents a scenario that utilizes feature engineering
but does not utilize PU learning, i.e., we treat liti values as the true labels of CEMS data and
the unlabeled samples as negative samples. Note that liti values lead to an unbalanced training
set because factories that are caught are relatively smaller in number than factories that are not
caught. Then we use the classical sample weighting method (He and Garcia 2009) to train the
logistic regression and AdaBoost with the loss formulation as:
min
f
nn+ + n−
n+
X
liti=1
ℓ(f(xi),liti) + n+ + n−
n−
X
liti=−1
ℓ(f(xi),liti)
o
,
(10)
where ℓ(f(X),L) = exp(−Lf(X)) and ℓ(f(X),L) = log(1 + exp(−Lf(X))) are used for logistic
regression and AdaBoost respectively, and n+,n−are the number of labeled samples and unlabeled
samples. To make comparison with other PU learning algorithms, we also include scenario (iii).
Even though many PU learning classiﬁcation techniques have been proposed over the last decade,
most of them focus on the classiﬁcation of text data, which makes them inapplicable to our research
context. We choose WLR-PU, which is the most suitable technique for our CEMS application. This

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
26
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Table 4
Mean and Standard Deviation of AUC, Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Fpu for Diﬀerent Comparable
Models
Method
AUC
Precision
Recall
F1
FP U
LSTM
0.57(0.08)
0.04(0.01)
0.93(0.03)
0.07(0.01)
-
Logit
0.71(0.07)
0.03(0.006)
0.73(0.14)
0.07(0.012)
-
AdaBoost
0.80(0.08)
0.10(0.03)
0.46(0.15)
0.16(0.05)
-
WLR-PU
0.78(0.06)
0.03(0.006)
0.69(0.15)
0.06(0.01)
1.66(0.64)
PU Logistic
0.75(0.06)
0.03(0.006)
0.73(0.17)
0.06(0.01)
1.47(0.47)
PU AdaBoost
0.80(0.08)
0.04(0.01)
0.76(0.14)
0.07(0.01)
1.83(0.47)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 1)
0.97(0.03)
0.53(0.18)
0.87(0.10)
0.65(0.14)
14.99(4.80)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 1)
0.96(0.05)
0.94(0.10)
0.83(0.14)
0.87(0.10)
29.44(5.86)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 5)
0.96(0.04)
0.44(0.16)
0.86(0.11)
0.57(0.13)
14.28(5.08)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 5)
0.94(0.06)
0.88(0.15)
0.79(0.15)
0.82(0.13)
30.42(7.21)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 9)
0.96(0.03)
0.44(0.16)
0.86(0.11)
0.56(0.13)
14.13(4.92)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 9)
0.94(0.06)
0.83(0.21)
0.79(0.15)
0.80(0.17)
29.51(9.03)
Table 5
Mean and Standard Deviation of Recall@k for Diﬀerent Comparable Models
k
LSTM
B-Logit
B-Ada
WLR-PU
PU Log
PU Ada
PU2Log(1) PU2Ada(1) PU2Log(5) PU2Ada( 5) PU2Log(9) PU2Ada(9)
10 0.03(0.01) 0.09(0.05)
0.34(0.13)
0.14(0.1)
0.19(0.11) 0.34(0.13) 0.21(0.01)
0.2(0.02)
0.21(0.0)
0.19(0.04)
0.21(0.0)
0.19(0.04)
20 0.03(0.01)
0.1(0.07)
0.37(0.13)
0.2(0.11)
0.27(0.12) 0.37(0.13) 0.41(0.03)
0.39(0.04)
0.41(0.02)
0.3(0.07)
0.41(0.01)
0.29(0.06)
30 0.06(0.01)
0.1(0.06)
0.4(0.13)
0.25(0.13) 0.31(0.14) 0.41(0.14) 0.58(0.06)
0.56(0.07)
0.58(0.06)
0.36(0.1)
0.56(0.06)
0.35(0.09)
40 0.09(0.02) 0.11(0.06)
0.43(0.14)
0.28(0.13) 0.31(0.14) 0.44(0.15) 0.69(0.11)
0.7(0.12)
0.69(0.1)
0.42(0.14)
0.65(0.1)
0.42(0.15)
50 0.10(0.03) 0.11(0.07)
0.45(0.14)
0.3(0.14)
0.32(0.14) 0.46(0.15) 0.73(0.1)
0.78(0.14)
0.73(0.09)
0.47(0.18)
0.7(0.09)
0.48(0.2)
60 0.12(0.05) 0.11(0.07)
0.48(0.14)
0.32(0.14) 0.35(0.14) 0.47(0.16) 0.77(0.08)
0.81(0.14)
0.77(0.07)
0.52(0.21)
0.75(0.07)
0.52(0.22
scenario can be viewed as a baseline PU learning algorithm. Finally, scenarios (iv) and (v) represent
our proposed methods, where scenario (iv) represents labeling mechanism-based PU learning and
(v) represents labeling mechanism-free PU learning. We should mention that the unknown labeling
frequency c is treated as a tuning parameter, which is selected by 5-folder cross validation in
Algorithm 1. In Algorithm 2, we set the maximal cluster number K = 30 and iterative number J
from 1 to 9.
In each scenario, we split the whole dataset into a training set with 80% of samples and a testing
set with 20% of samples and repeat the experiment 100 times. The average and standard deviation
of AUC, precision, recall, F1-score, Fpu, and recall@k, which are the commonly used measurements
in supervised learning and PU learning, are reported in Tables 4 and 5. Because diﬀerent scenarios
represent diﬀerent model assumptions, the model ﬁt indicators should be interpreted in the context
of the type of model being evaluated. We provide more detail on this in the next subsection.
7.3
Model Evaluation and Results
First of all, scenarios (i) (i.e., LSTM) and (ii) (i.e., logistic regression and AdaBoost) represent
models without the PU learning framework. In these models, the labeled samples are treated as
positive samples and nonlabeled samples are treated as negative samples. In these three models,
the violator detection problem is treated as a classical binary classiﬁcation problem, and as such
AUC, precision, recall, and F1-score can be utilized to compare their performance. From Table 4,

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
27
the AUC value of LSTM is less than that of logistic regression or AdaBoost. This demonstrates the
advantage of the proposed data quality features over raw data, thereby beneﬁting the detection of
falsiﬁcation issues in reported data. However, the precision and F1-scores across all three models
are very poor due to the unlabeled dataset, i.e., these models treat the unlabeled data as true
negatives, which is incorrect. This justiﬁes the need to employ the proposed PU learning framework
in the subsequent scenarios.
Second, we compare the results of violator detection under the PU learning framework by WLR
(Lee and Liu 2003) and our proposed PU logistic regression and AdaBoost. Note that although
we report AUC, precision, and F1-scores in Table 4, they are not the best indicators of model ﬁt
due to the existence of unlabeled data. Along the same line, we do not report precision@k and f@k
because they require clearly labeled datasets. Under the PU learning framework, recall and Fpu
are two meaningful measurements (Lee and Liu 2003). Recall measures the accuracy of catching
the true oﬀenders, and can be denoted as r = P( ˆY = 1|Y = 1). Under the SCAR assumption, the
recall can be estimated from PU data as r = P( ˆY = 1|L = 1). Based on the deﬁnition of recall, we
know that higher recall value means higher capability to catch violators. Fpu =
r2
P( ˆY =1), which has
been proven to have the same property as the F1-score, could be estimated from PU data, and
the Fpu indicates eﬃciency in catching violators (Bekker and Davis 2020). From Table 4, the PU
AdaBoost shows high accuracy in catching violators (best recall), while at the same time, it uses
less resources (best Fpu compared to other PU learning models).
Third, we present the AUC, precision, recall, and F1-scores for the two labeling mechanism-free
PU learning methods, which are denoted as PU2Ada and PU2Log, for the use of AdaBoost and
logistic regression in Step 9 of Algorithm 2. We tried diﬀerent iterative numbers J from 1 to 9
and found that the optimal number of cluster k∗is always around 18. For diﬀerent Js, the results
show that the algorithms are robust and J = 1 can achieve the best recall value. This means that
the data quality indicators we proposed ﬁt the separability assumption on the CEMS data and
VPD, because using k-means algorithms once suﬃces to separate the labeled (positive) and reliable
negative samples.
Finally, we report the recall@k for diﬀerent k = 10,20,...,60, because recall is the only metric
that can be used to compare the capability of catching violators for all comparable methods. Based
on the results of Table 5, the labeling mechanism-free PU learning (PU2Ada and PU2Log) still has
the best performance in catching violators. In summary, the labeling mechanism-free PU learning
algorithms show signs of robustness and good performance in detecting violators, due to their
simplicity, eﬃciency, and accuracy in detection.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
28
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
7.4
Robustness Test
Our key models are built on waste gas datasets. In order to test the robustness and to enhance the
generalizability of our model, we have also applied our prediction models to wastewater datasets.
Wastewater data collection uses an entirely diﬀerent mechanism, and collects data on an entirely
diﬀerent set of substances at completely diﬀerent intervals. However, there is some preliminary
evidence that our predictive models may work well for the wastewater context. The results of
predictive models based on this context are provided in Appendix C. We note that due to the
drastically diﬀerent context, some parameters may need to be ﬁne-tuned accordingly. We call for
future research to investigate this further.
7.5
Field Test
The previous sections have demonstrated the predictive power of the proposed CEMS data quality
assessment framework and the PU learning methods based on the empirical data we collected.
Next, we take advantage of the ﬁndings from our prediction models and prescribe a new means
of violation detection, which we then use in a ﬁeld test. This ﬁeld test provides evidence of the
usefulness of our newly prescribed process. It also serves as a means to further validate the results
of our prediction model.
We prescribe four steps to systematically generate a list of suspected environmental violators.
These four steps are documented in Figure 2. First, we extract raw CEMS data from July 1, 2017
to December 31, 2017 in one of the provinces in China. Second, we use the data quality assessment
framework to compute a set of data quality indicators for each of the reporting facilities. Third, we
run the labeling mechanism-free PU logistic regression model that is obtained in Algorithm 2 with
this set of indicators, and compute the violation status. Finally, we rank ﬁrms based on predicted
violation probability and obtain a list of the top ﬁve suspicious facilities. We provided the list to
MEEC, which subsequently assembled a team to inspect these ﬁve suspicious factories in 2018. We
report the results based on this targeted inspection mechanism below.
MEEC inspected ﬁve case companies. Case Company A is a large steel-making company. Its
main source of pollution is air pollution. In this company, gas pollutants are discharged through
the chimney after being treated. The inspection staﬀfound a hidden break at the bottom of the
chimney used to discharge gas pollutants (see Figure 3). This break served to introduce more
oxygen to dilute the gas pollutants, thereby distorting the readings on the monitoring devices.
Case Companies B and C changed their monitoring devices immediately before the arrival of
staﬀto perform the facility inspection, indicating that perhaps there was a leak of information to
these facilities, which prompted them to switch the devices. According to our SMEs, it is highly

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
29
Figure 2
Prescribed New Process of Targeted Inspection
Figure 3
Evidence of Tampering with Monitoring Device
likely that these facilities would have been caught circumventing the monitoring devices, had the
devices not been changed right before the inspection. The staﬀwere not able to ﬁnd any evidence
of tampering with the device in Case Company D. However, the company cannot explain the data
quality problems.
Finally, Company E showed evidence of introducing new pollution control equipment for environ-
mental protection. The new equipment had recently reduced the average concentration of pollution
(between the time of our analysis and the inspection). Note that the diﬀerence between Case Com-
panies B and C, and Case Company E is that the latter showed evidence of improving production
and waste control process without changing the monitoring device, while the former two case com-
panies showed no evidence of improving the production or waste control process; at the same time,
they showed evidence of changing the monitoring device immediately before the inspections. Along
the same lines, the diﬀerence between Case Company D and Case Company E is that the former
showed no evidence of improving the production or waste control process and could not explain the

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
30
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
abnormal readings, while the latter showed improvements in the production and waste control pro-
cess, which provided a logical explanation for the improvement of readings at the time of inspection.
8
Conclusions and Managerial Implications
Environmental violations pose severe threats to the triple bottom line (e.g., Lee and Tang 2018,
Mendelssohn et al. 2012) and distort fair competition for non-violating ﬁrms (Delmas and Keller
2005). However, low ﬁdelity in reported environmental monitoring data is not uncommon and
impedes public agencies ability to detect hidden violators. We conduct a study to make predictions
on environmental violators. Along the way, we showcase a holistic approach to solve a practical
problem in sustainability enforcement with descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive data analytics
techniques. Our approach has been tested in a ﬁeld test and the results are satisfactory and
encouraging.
8.1
Contributions
Our study contributes to both sustainability literature and big data analytics. First, we build a
reporting data quality assessment framework, which provides a useful way to measure the level of
ﬁdelity in the reported environmental monitoring data. Its signiﬁcance lies beyond the detection of
inaccuracy in data caused by the noise in big data (Dey and Kumar 2013), in that the framework
can detect low ﬁdelity caused by intentional manipulation of the data. As far as we know, we are
the ﬁrst to derive such a measurement scale, which can serve as an excellent tool for public oﬃces
to deploy in situations where there are conﬂicts between government reporting requirements and
the internal eﬃciency of ﬁrms (Marquis and Qian 2014).
Second, we utilize approaches to build prediction models of environmental violators and prescribe
a new process to catch cheaters. These prediction models and the new process greatly increase
the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness of environmental agencies’ operations. Third, while building pre-
diction models, we develop two new PU learning techniques to overcome the sparsity and missing
label challenges in the empirical dataset. The usability of these two new PU learning techniques
we developed is not restricted to our unique dataset, but can be generalized to other datasets
where sparsity and mislabeled data exist in a binary classiﬁcation problem. Fourth, our research
answers calls from operations and supply chain management scholars to use a holistic approach
(Swaminathan 2018, Wang et al. 2016) to solve operational problems. Our study is one of the ﬁrst
to integrate descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive data analytics elements to solve a pressing
problem in sustainable operations.
Our research has great practical implications. Public agencies can utilize the prediction model
to compute the probability of environmental violation for each reporting facility. This is the most

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
31
direct and eﬀective mechanism to identify violators, and potentially reduces the resource investment
associated with manual inspections. In addition, once the improved detection algorithm has been
fully implemented and communicated to pollutant-producing facilities, we expect more facilities
will report high quality data and proactively work on improving their internal operations to reduce
the severity of pollutants.
Although we studied the detection of hidden environmental violators using datasets from China,
we expect that the research ﬁndings can be easily adaptable to environmental protection in other
countries. For example, the EPA in the United States utilizes the same CEMS devices to monitor
environmental pollutants, and can beneﬁt from pioneering the use of our data quality assessment
framework to measure the quality of reported waste gas data. The resulting data quality indices
can then be used to predict the under-reporting of emissions by manufacturing facilities in the US.
Our predictive model shows superb predictive power and thus can be used in conjunction with
the control chart approach that the EPA is rolling out (EPA 2016). Similarly, we could apply our
model to data collected on oilsands operations in Canada and evaluate whether data falsiﬁcation
is involved in the reporting of pollutant data.
8.2
Future Research Directions
This research can be extended in several directions. First, the VPD is limited in the number of
records compared to the size of the CEMS dataset. However, the sample size is increasing with
the passing of time. With a larger sample size, future research can utilize other complex predictive
techniques in machine learning to reﬁne the predictive model and enhance prediction accuracy.
Second, our research focuses on the detection of violations for gas pollutants. We also validate its
usefulness in the wastewater context. Future research can replicate our research for the detection of
other types of pollutants. Such research will enhance the generalizability of the reporting data qual-
ity assessment framework and potentially shed light on the detection of anomalies in data reported
by other Internet of Things devices. Lastly, our research is data-driven. We made it clear that our
objective is prediction, not ﬁnding causal relationships (Kitchin 2014). Future research can take
advantage of our data-driven ﬁndings and build theoretical models. This type of follow-up research
will help us explain and understand why facilities follow and/or violate environmental regulations.
Appendix
A
Proofs
A.0.1
Proof of Theorem 1
According the deﬁnition of SCAR, we know that P(L = 1|X) =
cP(Y = 1|X) and P(L = −1|Y = −1,X) = 1, so we can compute that
P(L = −1|X) = P(L = −1|Y = −1,X)P(Y = −1|X) + P(L = −1|Y = 1,X)P(Y = 1|X)

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
32
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
= P(Y = −1|X) + (1 −c) ∗P(Y = 1|X)
= P(Y = −1|X) + 1 −c
c
∗P(L = 1|X),
and
P(Y = −1|X) = P(L = −1|X) −1 −c
c
∗P(L = 1|X).
Thus,
P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X) = 1
cP(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X) + 1 −c
c
P(L = 1|X)
= 2 −c
c
P(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X).
This implies the results.
A.0.2
Proof of Theorem 2
Let us compute and denote that
G(f(X)) = EL|X(g(L)exp{−Lf(X)})
= (2 −c)P(L = 1|X)log(1 + exp{−f(X)}) + cP(L = −1|X)log(1 + exp{f(X)}).
.
Therefore, f ∗
1 must satisfy
∂G(f(X))
∂f(X)
= −(2 −c)P(L = 1|X)
1 + exp{f(X)}
+ cP(L = −1|X)exp{f(X)}
1 + exp{f(X)}
= 0,
and we can obtain
f ∗
1 (X) = log (2 −c)P(L = 1|X)
cP(L = −1|X)
.
Thus,
sign(f ∗
1 (X)) = sign

log (2 −c)P(L = 1|X)
cP(L = −1|X)

= sign
2 −c
c
P(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X)

= sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)),
where the last equation is based on Theorem 1.
A.0.3
Proof of Theorem 3
Let us compute and denote that
G(f(X)) = EL|X(g(L)exp{−Lf(X)}) = (2−c)P(L = 1|X)exp{−f(X)}+cP(L = −1|X)exp{f(X)}.
Therefore, f ∗
2 must satisfy
∂G(f(X))
∂f(X)
= −(2 −c)P(L = 1|X)exp{−f(X)} + cP(L = −1|X)exp{f(X)} = 0,
and we can obtain
f ∗
2 (X) = 1
2 log (2 −c)P(L = 1|X)
cP(L = −1|X)
.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
33
Thus,
sign(f ∗
2 (X)) = sign

log (2 −c)P(L = 1|X)
cP(L = −1|X)

= sign
2 −c
c
P(L = 1|X) −P(L = −1|X)

= sign(P(Y = 1|X) −P(Y = −1|X)),
where the last equation is based on Theorem 1.
B
Naive Check
In Section 5, we put forward the CEMS data quality assessment framework based on domain
knowledge from SMEs. We test a naive rule-based model based on the qualitative interviews we
conducted with the SMEs.
We use the same data processing method that is described in Section 7 to construct the training
set from CEMS data and VPD. We split the whole dataset into a training set (80% of samples)
and a testing set (20% of samples) and repeat the experiment 100 times. We use the null ratio as
a prediction rule, and its average ROC curve is shown in Figure 4. Figure 4 shows that the naive
rule-based method cannot achieve the desired prediction power. The average AUC of the null ratio
is 0.64. Compared with the logistic regression and/or AdaBoost in scenario (i) of Section 7, the
prediction power is relatively low. This provides motivation to investigate a more powerful method
to detect violators.
Figure 4
ROC Curve of Rule Derived by Null Ratio.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
34
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Table 6
Mean and Standard Deviation of AUC, Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Fpu for Diﬀerent Comparable
Models for Wastewater Dataset
Method
AUC
Precision
Recall
F1
FP U
LSTM
0.68(0.01)
0.04(0.0)
0.74(0.08)
0.07(0.0)
-
Logit
0.54(0.06)
0.02(0.006)
0.35(0.14)
0.034(0.01)
-
AdaBoost
0.78(0.07)
0.08(0.01)
0.56(0.12)
0.14(0.02)
-
WLR-PU
0.58(0.06)
0.018(0.005)
0.38(0.13)
0.035(0.01)
0.53(0.32)
PU Logistic
0.57(0.06)
0.013(0.0003)
0.98(0.04)
0.027(0.0006)
0.97(0.058)
PU AdaBoost
0.78(0.07)
0.037(0.01)
0.70(0.12)
0.07(0.017)
1.86(0.57)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 1)
1.0(0.0)
0.71(0.37)
0.89(0.08)
0.72(0.31)
8.14(4.48)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 1)
0.99(0.01)
0.71(0.21)
0.86(0.08)
0.76(0.15)
9.56(2.86)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 5)
0.99(0.0003)
0.70(0.36)
0.88(0.08)
0.71(0.30)
7.98(4.19)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 5)
0.90(0.02)
0.51(0.27)
0.80(0.08)
0.57(0.22)
9.62(4.94)
PU-2 Logistic(J = 9)
1.0(0.0)
0.70(0.36)
0.89(0.08)
0.71(0.30)
7.97(4.19)
PU-2 AdaBoost(J = 9)
0.85(0.03)
0.45(0.26)
0.78(0.08)
0.52(0.23)
9.01(5.07)
C
Prediction Results for Wastewater Dataset
Table 7
Mean and Standard Deviation of Recall@k for Diﬀerent Comparable Models for Wastewater Data
k
LSTM
B-Logit
B-Ada
WLR-PU
PU Log
PU Ada
PU2Log(1)
PU2Ada(1)
PU2Log(5)
PU2Ada( 5)
PU2Log(9)
PU2Ada(9)
10
0.08(0.01)
0.01(0.02)
0.39(0.09)
0.01(0.02)
0.02(0.03)
0.4(0.08)
0.1(0.01)
0.11(0.0)
0.1(0.01)
0.11(0.0)
0.09(0.02)
0.11(0.01)
20
0.16(0.05)
0.01(0.02)
0.46(0.11)
0.01(0.02)
0.03(0.04)
0.46(0.09)
0.18(0.02)
0.21(0.01)
0.18(0.03)
0.21(0.01)
0.18(0.03)
0.2(0.02)
30
0.20(0.03)
0.01(0.02)
0.48(0.11)
0.02(0.03)
0.03(0.04)
0.49(0.09)
0.24(0.05)
0.32(0.03)
0.25(0.06)
0.32(0.02)
0.25(0.06)
0.3(0.04)
40
0.22(0.06)
0.01(0.02)
0.49(0.11)
0.02(0.03)
0.04(0.04)
0.5(0.1)
0.3(0.08)
0.42(0.03)
0.32(0.08)
0.42(0.03)
0.31(0.09)
0.4(0.06)
50
0.22(0.07)
0.01(0.02)
0.5(0.11)
0.03(0.04)
0.05(0.04)
0.51(0.1)
0.36(0.1)
0.52(0.04)
0.39(0.1)
0.52(0.05)
0.38(0.1)
0.49(0.06)
60
0.22(0.07)
0.01(0.02)
0.51(0.11)
0.04(0.04)
0.05(0.05)
0.52(0.1)
0.41(0.1)
0.63(0.04)
0.45(0.1)
0.61(0.06)
0.44(0.11)
0.57(0.06)
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge kindly and useful comments and suggestions from the department editor,
associate editor, and two anonymous reviewers. The work of Xiangyu Chang was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 11771012 and 61502342. The
work of Xin Bo was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
2019YFE0194500.
All the URLs are last accessed on Sep 14, 2020.
References
AN (2019) Ford facing U.S. criminal probe into emissions testing. Automotive News. URL https://www.
autonews.com/regulation-safety/ford-facing-us-criminal-probe-emissions-testing.
Arenas D, Rodrigo P (2016) On ﬁrms and the next generations: Diﬃculties and possibilities for business
ethics inquiry. Journal of Business Ethics 133(1):165–178.
Ballou DP, Pazer HL (1985) Modeling data and process quality in multi-input, multi-output information
systems. Management Science 31(2):150–162.
Bartlett P, Jordan M, McAuliﬀe J (2006) Convexity, classiﬁcation, and risk bounds. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 101(473):138–156.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
35
Bekker J, Davis J (2020) Learning from positive and unlabeled data: A survey. Machine Learning 109(4):719–
760.
Bernard Y, Godard L, Zouaoui M (2018) The eﬀect of CEOs turnover on the corporate sustainability
performance of French ﬁrms. Journal of Business Ethics 150(4):1049–1069.
Boone T, Ganeshan R, Hicks RL, Sanders NR (2018) Can Google Trends improve your sales forecast?
Production and Operations Management 27(10):1770–1774.
Bousquet O, Boucheron S, Lugosi G (2004) Introduction to statistical learning theory. Advanced Lectures on
Machine Learning: ML Summer Schools 2003, Canberra, Australia, February 2-14, 2003, T¨ubingen,
Germany, August 4-16, 2003, Revised Lectures 3176:169–207.
Boxenbaum E, Jonsson S (2017) Isomorphism, diﬀusion and decoupling: Concept evolution and theoretical
challenges. The Sage handbook of organizational institutionalism 2:79–104.
Brownlee
J
(2014)
Machine
learning
mastery.
URL
http://machinelearningmastery.com/
discover-feature-engineering-howtoengineer-features-and-how-to-getgood-at-it.
Cachia M, Millward L (2011) The telephone medium and semi-structured interviews: A complementary ﬁt.
Qualitative Research in Organizations and Management: An International Journal 6(3):265–277.
Calvano L (2008) Multinational corporations and local communities: A critical analysis of conﬂict. Journal
of Business Ethics 82(4):793–805.
Chaudhari S, Shevade S (2012) Learning from positive and unlabelled examples using maximum margin
clustering. Proceedings of the 19th international conference on neural information processing-Volume
Part III, 465–473 (Springer-Verlag).
Chen TP (2018) China smites smog with an iron ﬁst. The Wall Street Journal. URL https://www.wsj.
com/articles/china-smites-smog-with-an-iron-fist-1516185003.
Choi TM, Wallace SW, Wang Y (2018) Big data analytics in operations management. Production and
Operations Management 27(10):1868–1883.
Chow GC (1993) Capital formation and economic growth in China. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
108(3):809–842.
Corbett CJ (2018) How sustainable is big data? Production and Operations Management 27(9):1685–1695.
Cormack GV, Hidalgo JMG, S´anz EP (2007) Feature engineering for mobile (SMS) spam ﬁltering. Proceedings
of the 30th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information
retrieval, 871–872.
Cui R, Gallino S, Moreno A, Zhang DJ (2018) The operational value of social media information. Production
and Operations Management 27(10):1749–1769.
Da Silva RFB, Batistella M, Moran EF (2017) Socioeconomic changes and environmental policies as dimen-
sions of regional land transitions in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil. Environmental Science & Policy 74:14–
22.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
36
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Danigelis A (2018) Global emission monitoring systems market to reach $4.44 billion by 2025, report says.
URL https://www.environmentalleader.com/2018/06/emission-monitoring-systems-market.
Deepa R, Chezian RM (2014) A study on data cleansing and classiﬁcation algorithms for large dataset
systems. International Journal of Research in Advent Technology 2(9):12–22.
Deka GC (2016) Big data predictive and prescriptive analytics. Big data: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and
applications, 30–55 (IGI Publishing, Herhely, USA).
Delmas M, Keller A (2005) Free riding in voluntary environmental programs: The case of the US EPA
WasteWise program. Policy Sciences 38(1):91–106.
Dey D, Kumar S (2010) Reassessing data quality for information products. Management Science 56(12):2316–
2322.
Dey D, Kumar S (2013) Data quality of query results with generalized selection conditions. Operations
Research 61(1):17–31.
Dubinsky Z (2019) Oilsands CO2 emissions may be far higher than companies report, scientist says.
CBC News. URL https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/oilsands-carbon-emissions-study-1.
5106809.
Ebenstein A (2012) The consequences of industrialization: Evidence from water pollution and digestive
cancers in China. Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1):186–201.
ECCC (2020) Canada-United States air quality agreement progress report 2012. Environment and
Climate Change Canada. URL https://ec.gc.ca/air/default.asp?lang=En&n=8ABC14B4-1&xml=
8ABC14B4-ED53-4737-AD51-528F8DBA2B4C&offset=2&toc=hide#s2_2_3.
ECR (2019) Legal enforcement-statistics on environmental infringements. European Commission Report.
URL http://ec.europa.eu/environment/legal/law/statistics.htm.
Elkan C, Noto K (2008) Learning classiﬁers from only positive and unlabeled data. Proceedings of the 14th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Kkowledge discovery and data mining, 213–220 (ACM).
Elkington J (1998) Partnerships from cannibals with forks: The triple bottom line of 21st-century business.
Environmental Quality Management 8(1):37–51.
EPA
(2016)
Control
chart
methodology
for
detecting
under-reported
emissions.
Environmental
Protection
Agency.
URL
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-10/documents/
control-chart_method_draft_12-13-16_accessible.pdf.
EPA (2019) 2017 major criminal cases. Environmental Protection Agency. URL https://www.epa.gov/
enforcement/2017-major-criminal-cases.
EPA (2020) EMC: Continuous emission monitoring systems information and guidelines. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency. URL https://www.epa.gov/emc/emc-continuous-emission-monitoring-systems.
Fang M, Chan CK, Yao X (2009) Managing air quality in a rapidly developing nation: China. Atmospheric
Environment 43(1):79–86.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
37
Foster K, Penninti P, Shang J, Kekre S, Hegde GG, Venkat A (2018) Leveraging big data to balance new
key performance indicators in emergency physician management networks. Production and Operations
Management 27(10):1795–1815.
Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R (2001) The elements of statistical learning, volume 1 (Springer series in
statistics New York).
Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R, et al. (2000) Additive logistic regression: A statistical view of boosting
(with discussion and a rejoinder by the authors). The Annals of Statistics 28(2):337–407.
Fung GPC, Yu JX, Lu H, Yu PS (2005) Text classiﬁcation without negative examples revisit. IEEE Trans-
actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 18(1):6–20.
Gaber T, Awad A, Ali A, et al. (2020) Feature selection method based on chaotic maps and butterﬂy optimiza-
tion algorithm. International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computer Vision (AICV2020),
159–169.
Gale A (2018) Nissan admits emissions-test data was falsiﬁed. The Wall Street Journal. URL https://www.
wsj.com/articles/nissan-admits-emission-test-data-was-falsified-1531139749.
Garla VN, Brandt C (2012) Ontology-guided feature engineering for clinical text classiﬁcation. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 45(5):992–998.
Goebel P, Reuter C, Pibernik R, Sichtmann C, Bals L (2018) Purchasing managers’ willingness to pay for
attributes that constitute sustainability. Journal of Operations Management 62:44–58.
Gray WB, Shimshack JP (2011) The eﬀectiveness of environmental monitoring and enforcement: A review
of the empirical evidence. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 5(1):3–24.
Guha S, Kumar S (2018) Emergence of big data research in operations management, information sys-
tems, and healthcare: Past contributions and future roadmap. Production and Operations Management
27(9):1724–1735.
Gupta
R
(2019)
Implementation
of
this
eﬃcient
pollution
monitoring
sys-
tem
caught
in
delays.
URL
https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/air/
implementation-of-this-efficient-pollution-monitoring-system-caught-in-delays-66746.
He H, Garcia EA (2009) Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-
neering 21(9):1263–1284.
Hermanns H, Biewer S, D’Argenio PR, K¨ohl MA (2018) Veriﬁcation, testing, and runtime monitoring of
automotive exhaust emissions. EPiC Series in Computing 57:1–17.
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural Computation 9(8):1735–1780.
Holz CA (2008) Chinas economic growth 1978–2025: What we know today about Chinas economic growth
tomorrow. World Development 36(10):1665–1691.
Huber PJ (2004) Robust statistics, volume 523 (John Wiley & Sons, New York).

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
38
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Hussain N, Rigoni U, Orij RP (2018) Corporate governance and sustainability performance: Analysis of
triple bottom line performance. Journal of Business Ethics 149(2):411–432.
Jagadish H, Gehrke J, Labrinidis A, Papakonstantinou Y, Patel JM, Ramakrishnan R, Shahabi C (2014)
Big data and its technical challenges. Communications of the ACM 57(7):86–94.
Jaskie K, Spanias A (2019) Positive and unlabeled learning algorithms and applications: A survey. 2019 10th
International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems and Applications (IISA), 1–8 (IEEE).
Ji D, Li L, Wang Y, Zhang J, Cheng M, Sun Y, Liu Z, Wang L, Tang G, Hu B, et al. (2014) The heaviest
particulate air-pollution episodes occurred in northern China in January, 2013: Insights gained from
observation. Atmospheric Environment 92:546–556.
Joglekar NR, Davies J, Anderson EG (2016) The role of industry studies and public policies in production
and operations management. Production and Operations Management 25(12):1977–2001.
Karplus VJ, Zhang S, Almond D (2018) Quantifying coal power plant responses to tighter SO2 emissions
standards in China. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(27):7004–7009.
KarpoﬀJM, Lott JR Jr, Wehrly EW (2005) The reputational penalties for environmental violations: Empir-
ical evidence. The Journal of Law and Economics 48(2):653–675.
Keller S, Korkmaz G, Orr M, Schroeder A, Shipp S (2017) The evolution of data quality: Understanding the
transdisciplinary origins of data quality concepts and approaches. Annual Review of Statistics and Its
Application 4:85–108.
Kepner J, Gadepally V, Michaleas P, Schear N, Varia M, Yerukhimovich A, Cunningham RK (2014) Com-
puting on masked data: A high performance method for improving big data veracity. 2014 IEEE High
Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), 1–6 (IEEE).
Kitchin R (2014) Big data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts. Big Data & Society 1(1):1–12.
Kumar N, Venugopal D, Qiu L, Kumar S (2018) Detecting review manipulation on online platforms with
hierarchical supervised learning. Journal of Management Information Systems 35(1):350–380.
Kumar N, Venugopal D, Qiu L, Kumar S (2019) Detecting anomalous online reviewers: An unsupervised
approach using mixture models. Journal of Management Information Systems 36(4):1313–1346.
Kumar R, Chadrasekaran R (2011) Attribute correction-data cleaning using association rule and clustering
methods. Intl. Jrnl. of Data Mining & Knowledge Management Process 1(2):22–32.
Labrinidis A, Jagadish HV (2012) Challenges and opportunities with big data. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 5(12):2032–2033.
Lau RYK, Zhang W, Xu W (2018) Parallel aspect-oriented sentiment analysis for sales forecasting with big
data. Production and Operations Management 27(10):1775–1794.
Lecu´e G, Lerasle M, et al. (2020) Robust machine learning by median-of-means: theory and practice. Annals
of Statistics 48(2):906–931.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
39
Lee G, Xiao X (2020) Voluntary engagement in environmental projects: Evidence from environmental viola-
tors. Journal of Business Ethics 164:325–348.
Lee HL, Tang CS (2018) Socially and environmentally responsible value chain innovations: New operations
management research opportunities. Management Science 64(3):983–996.
Lee WS, Liu B (2003) Learning with positive and unlabeled examples using weighted logistic regression.
Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning, 448–455 (AAAI Press).
Li F, Liu Y, L¨u J, Liang L, Harmer P (2015) Ambient air pollution in China poses a multifaceted health
threat to outdoor physical activity. J Epidemiol Community Health 69(3):201–204.
Li M, Lin Y, Huang S, Crossland C (2016) The use of sparse inverse covariance estimation for relationship
detection and hypothesis generation in strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 37(1):86–
97.
Li M, Wu Y, He Y, Huang S, Nair A (2020) Sparse inverse covariance estimation: a data mining technique
to unravel holistic patterns among business practices in ﬁrms. Decision Sciences 51(4):1046–1073.
Li X, Liu B (2003) Learning to classify texts using positive and unlabeled data. Proceedings of the 18th
international joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, 587–592 (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.).
Lin Y (2004) A note on margin-based loss functions in classiﬁcation. Statistics and Probability Letters
68(1):73–82.
Liu L, Peng T (2014) Clustering-based method for positive and unlabeled text categorization enhanced by
improved TFIDF. Journal of Information Science & Engineering 30(5):1463–1481.
Lu F, Bai Q (2010) Semi-supervised text categorization with only a few positive and unlabeled documents.
2010 3rd International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics, volume 7, 3075–3079
(IEEE).
Marquis C, Qian C (2014) Corporate social responsibility reporting in China: Symbol or substance? Orga-
nization Science 25(1):127–148.
Mendelssohn IA, Andersen GL, Baltz DM, Caﬀey RH, Carman KR, Fleeger JW, Joye SB, Lin Q, Maltby
E, Overton EB, et al. (2012) Oil impacts on coastal wetlands: Implications for the Mississippi River
Delta ecosystem after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. BioScience 62(6):562–574.
Meyer JW, Rowan B (1977) Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and ceremony. Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology 83(2):340–363.
Mishra D, Gunasekaran A, Papadopoulos T, Childe SJ (2018) Big data and supply chain management: A
review and bibliometric analysis. Annals of Operations Research 270(1-2):313–336.
Moro S, Cortez P, Rita P (2014) A data-driven approach to predict the success of bank telemarketing.
Decision Support Systems 62:22–31.
Murray A, Skene K, Haynes K (2017) The circular economy: An interdisciplinary exploration of the concept
and application in a global context. Journal of Business Ethics 140(3):369–380.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
40
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
Nonet G, Kassel K, Meijs L (2016) Understanding responsible management: Emerging themes and variations
from European business school programs. Journal of Business Ethics 139(4):717–736.
Oppel Jr RA (2000) Environmental tests falsiﬁed, US says. New York Times A 14, URL https://www.
nytimes.com/2000/09/22/us/environmental-tests-falsified-us-says.html.
Ozdemir S, Susarla D (2018) Feature engineering made easy: Identify unique features from your dataset in
order to build powerful machine learning systems (Packt Publishing Ltd).
Pan L, Wang Zk, Wang Zx (2005) Present status and countermeasure suggestion for thermal power plants
CEMS in China. Research of Environmental Sciences 18(4):42–45.
Plambeck E, Lee HL, Yatsko P (2012) Improving environmental performance in your Chinese supply chain.
MIT Sloan Management Review 53(2):43.
Porteous AH, Rammohan SV, Lee HL (2015) Carrots or sticks? Improving social and environmental compli-
ance at suppliers through incentives and penalties. Production and Operations Management 24(9):1402–
1413.
Rhodes C (2016) Democratic business ethics: Volkswagens emissions scandal and the disruption of corporate
sovereignty. Organization Studies 37(10):1501–1518.
Roque PG, Severo EA, Dorion ECH, Roque EdS, de Guimar˜aes JCF (2018) The dilemma of environmental
sustainability in a developing country: Environmental crimes in southern Brazil. Business Strategy &
Development 1(1):43–52.
Rozados IV, Tjahjono B (2014) Big data analytics in supply chain management: Trends and related research.
6th International Conference on Operations and Supply Chain Management, Bali, volume 1, 2013–2014.
Rubin V, Lukoianova T (2013) Veracity roadmap: Is big data objective, truthful and credible? Advances in
Classiﬁcation Research Online 24(1):4.
Sanders NR, Ganeshan R (2018) Big data in supply chain management. Production and Operations Man-
agement 27(10):1745–1748.
Shmueli G, Koppius O (2011) Predictive analytics in information systems research. MIS Quarterly 35(3):553–
572.
Shmueli G, Yahav I (2018) The forest or the trees? Tackling Simpson’s Paradox with classiﬁcation trees.
Production and Operations Management 27(4):696–716.
Siano A, Vollero A, Conte F, Amabile S (2017) More than words: Expanding the taxonomy of greenwashing
after the Volkswagen scandal. Journal of Business Research 71:27–37.
Singhal K, Feng Q, Ganeshan R, Sanders NR, Shanthikumar JG (2018) Introduction to the special issue on
perspectives on big data. Production and Operations Management 27(9):1639–1641.
Singhal K, Singhal J (2019) Technology and manufacturing in China before the industrial revolution and
glimpses of the future. Production and Operations Management 28(3):505–515.

Article submitted to: Production and Operations Management
Xiangyu Chang et al.: Violator Detection via CEMS Data
41
Sodhi MS (2015) Conceptualizing social responsibility in operations via stakeholder resource-based view.
Production and Operations Management 24(9):1375–1389.
Strong DM, Lee YW, Wang RY (1997) Data quality in context. Communications of the ACM 40(5):103–110.
Swaminathan JM (2018) Big data analytics for rapid, impactful, sustained, and eﬃcient (RISE) humanitarian
operations. Production and Operations Management 27(9):1696–1700.
Tang CS (2018) Socially responsible supply chains in emerging markets: Some research opportunities. Journal
of Operations Management 57(1):1–10.
Tang L, Qu J, Mi Z, Bo X, Chang X, Anadon LD, Wang S, Xue X, Li S, Wang X, et al. (2019) Substantial
emission reductions from Chinese power plants after the introduction of ultra-low emissions standards.
Nature Energy 4(11):929–938.
Wang G, Gunasekaran A, Ngai EW, Papadopoulos T (2016) Big data analytics in logistics and supply chain
management: Certain investigations for research and applications. International Journal of Production
Economics 176:98–110.
Wang RY, Strong DM (1996) Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consumers. Journal of
Management Information Systems 12(4):5–33.
Xia L, Guo T, Qin J, Yue X, Zhu N (2018) Carbon emission reduction and pricing policies of a supply chain
considering reciprocal preferences in cap-and-trade system. Annals of Operations Research 268(1):149–
175.
Xu X, Zeng S, Tam CM (2012) Stock markets reaction to disclosure of environmental violations: Evidence
from China. Journal of Business Ethics 107(2):227–237.
Xu X, Zeng S, Zou H, Shi JJ (2016) The impact of corporate environmental violation on shareholders’ wealth:
A perspective taken from media coverage. Business Strategy and the Environment 25(2):73–91.
Yin S, Kaynak O (2015) Big data for modern industry: Challenges and trends. Proceedings of the IEEE
103(2):143–146.
Zhang D, Lee WS (2005) A simple probabilistic approach to learning from positive and unlabeled examples.
Proceedings of the 5th annual UK workshop on computational intelligence (UKCI), 83–87.
Zhang X, Schreifels J (2011) Continuous emission monitoring systems at power plants in China: Improving
SO2 emission measurement. Energy Policy 39(11):7432–7438.
Zou H, Zeng R, Zeng S, Shi JJ (2015) How do environmental violation events harm corporate reputation?
Business Strategy and the Environment 24(8):836–854.