TITLE: “Pulling the Plug:” Time Allocation between Drug Discovery and Development Projects
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13255
---

EUR Research Information Portal
"Pulling the plug”: Time allocation between drug discovery and development projects
Published in:
Production and Operations Management
Publication status and date:
Published: 04/08/2020
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1111/poms.13255
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Subramanian, AM., Levesque, M., & van de Vrande, V. (2020). "Pulling the plug”: Time allocation between drug discovery
and development projects. Production and Operations Management, 29(12), 2851-2876. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13255
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

Accepted Manuscript
Title: “Pulling the plug”: Time allocation between drug discovery and 
development projects
 
Authors: Annapoornima M. Subramanian, Moren Lévesque,
Vareska Van De Vrande 
DOI:
https://doi.org/doi:10.1111/poms.13255
Reference:
POMS 13255
To appear in:
Production and Operations Management
Please cite this article as: Subramanian AnnapoornimaM. .,et.al., “Pulling the plug”: 
Time allocation between drug discovery and development projects.
 
Production and Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/doi:10.1111/poms.13255
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may
lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as
doi: 10.1111/poms.13255

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been 
through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to 
differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 
10.1111/POMS.13255
 This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
PROF. MOREN LEVESQUE (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-9815-4192)
Article type : Original Article
“Pulling the plug”:
Time allocation between drug discovery and development projects
Annapoornima M. Subramanian*
Industrial Systems Engineering & Management
National University of Singapore
Faculty of Engineering 
Block E1A, #06-25, 1 Engineering Drive 2
Singapore 117576 
+ 65 6516 1645
isemsa@nus.edu.sg
Moren Lévesque*†
Schulich School of Business
York University
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M3J 1P3
+1 416 736 2100 ext 44591
mlevesque@schulich.yorku.ca
Vareska Van De Vrande* 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Department of Strategic Management & Entrepreneurship
Rotterdam School of Management
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3062PA, Rotterdam
The Netherlands
+31 10 4082847
vvrande@rsm.nl 
*Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Abstract—Biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms invest billions of dollars in R&D, primarily in new 
drug discovery. Nonetheless, the industry is facing declining returns on R&D investments. Failure to 
discontinue less-promising new drug discovery projects is a key driver of this decreased productivity. 
Hence, firms are scrambling to restructure the new drug discovery process to improve decision-making and 
to limit the attrition rate to the early stages of drug discovery. Drawing on insights from the exploration-
exploitation literature, our study addresses this timing problem by using a formal model and empirically 
testing its implications on how the time to discontinuation of new drug discovery projects are impacted by 
project- and firm-specific characteristics, so that a firm’s resources can be promptly redeployed to more 
fruitful endeavors. Our findings, based on an analysis of 1,274 early-stage drug discovery projects 
worldwide, suggest that the time to discontinuation of early-stage drug discovery projects requires careful 
consideration of these project- and firm-specific characteristics. These findings hold important implications 
for the industry, which is undergoing tremendous stress and transformation. The results also contribute to 
the exploration-exploitation literature by modeling and testing the time-allocation decision between 
exploratory and exploitative activities.
Keywords—time to discontinuation, new drug discovery, time allocation decision, biopharma industry, 
mixed-method approach
History—Received: December 2018; accepted: July 2020 by Edward Anderson after three revisions.
1. Introduction
Scholars have underscored the significance of the biotechnology and pharmaceutical (henceforth 
‘biopharma’) industry for many economies (Casper, 2000; Nesta and Savotti, 2006; Sinha and Kohnke, 
2009; Zucker et al., 2002), particularly because it operates at the intersection of scientific interests and 
economic pursuits, especially for economies with aging populations. New drug development is highly 
regulated and proceeds through a series of stages including basic research, pre-clinical trials, clinical trials, 
approval by a regulatory body, and if approved, the drug launch. Biopharma industry firms pursue new 
drug discovery and development hoping to launch a blockbuster drug capable of generating huge ongoing 
revenues. However, discovering and developing a new drug from scratch is extremely costly and highly 
uncertain. 
According to a 2016 study (Tufts CSDD), bringing a drug from invention stage to pharmacy 
shelves costs, on average, an estimated US$2.6 billion. The study also concluded that over 90% of new 
drugs in discovery and development do not reach the market because they are found to be either unsafe or 
ineffective. Another study on investigational compounds of the 50 largest pharmaceutical firms worldwide 
found that the clinical approval success rate in the United States was a mere 16% for self-originated 
compounds (Dimasi et al., 2010). Moreover, in the past several years, most top firms did not launch enough 
New Molecular Entities (NMEs) to achieve the two to three NMEs per year necessary to meet the R&D 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
objectives (Schuhmacher et al., 2016). Adding to the industry’s pressure is the ‘patent cliff’: an abrupt drop 
in a firm’s revenues after a drug patent expires and other firms can develop generic versions. Consequently, 
biopharma R&D efficiency, defined as the successful launch of a drug relative to the rate of R&D 
investment, has seen a sharp decline over the years mainly due to the low success rate of drug discoveries 
and the respective costs of failed drug projects. Thus, in the quest to increase R&D efficiency, biopharma 
firms have had to scramble to adopt various processes, including timely discontinuation of fruitless drug 
discovery projects. 
Due to growth intentions, drug discovery and development firms invest in ambitious, and 
extremely uncertain, early-stage drug discovery projects. Driven by the desire to develop groundbreaking 
drugs, firms often escalate their commitments to floundering early-stage drug discovery projects, and 
frequently waste valuable resources. Therefore, firms must learn to halt unproductive drug discovery 
projects in a timely fashion and divert resources to competing projects. Despite its importance, firms have 
difficulty discontinuing early-stage discovery projects. A recent McKinsey & Co. (2019) report highlights 
firms’ reluctance to kill ongoing discovery projects because of their ingrained belief that they can produce a 
blockbuster drug if they just work hard enough. Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019) emphasize that 
valuable resources can become a liability by trapping firms in a failing, ever-extending course, resulting in 
escalating commitments to the floundering drug discovery project. 
To overcome the tendency to escalate their commitment to a fruitless drug discovery project, many 
firms have designated professionals tasked with reviewing all discovery projects on a continual rolling 
basis to decide which projects should be discontinued. Firms need to strategically decide on a time that 
their scientific team should allocate to early-stage drug discovery activities after which they must be 
discontinued, termed “time to discontinuation”, by weighing the pros and cons of investing their limited 
resources across two competing objectives: early-stage drug discoveries for innovative outcomes versus 
late-stage drug development that exploits the knowledge certainties generated by the firm to enhance R&D 
efficiency and productivity. The industry thus faces a dilemma central to the operations and management 
literatures: How do project- and firm-specific factors influence the time to be allocated to early-stage drug 
discovery projects beyond which they should be discontinued to free up time for late-stage drug 
development projects? The operations and management literatures have documented the benefits of 
balancing early-stage exploration and late-stage exploitation activities (e.g., Cao et al., 2009; 
Chandrasekaran et al., 2012, 2015; He and Wong, 2004; Kortmann et al., 2014; Menor et al., 2002; 
Rothaermel and Deeds, 2004). One approach to achieving this balance is captured in the concept of 
contextual ambidexterity (Gibson and Birkinshaw, 2004), which highlights the importance of letting 
individuals decide how to divide their time between exploration and exploitation activities. However, little 
guidance exists on the time allocation decisions between the two competing activities. This research gap is 
striking, given that the structural approach to ambidexterity (where exploration and exploitation take place 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
in separate organizational units) is not viable in contexts such as new drug discovery and development, in 
which a team of scientists need to juggle their time between early-stage discoveries and late-stage 
development activities within a specific therapeutic area. 
We address this gap by formally modeling and then empirically testing how, respectively, firms 
should and actually do allocate the time to scientific teams for early-stage drug discovery projects, beyond 
which the projects are to be discontinued to free up time for late-stage drug development projects. Our 
model considers three important factors reflected in the following questions that are essential to 
determining the time to discontinuation for early-stage discovery activities, thereby enabling firms to 
benefit from engaging their R&D teams in both early-stage discovery and late-stage development: (a) What 
is the nature of the early-stage project to be discovered?, (b) What late-stage projects could be developed 
instead?, and (c) What is the firm’s risk-aversion level? This formal model enables us to hypothesize how 
the time to discontinuation for early-stage discovery projects may be influenced by the emergent nature of 
the discovery activity, the number of late-stage projects available for development, and the firm’s risk-
aversion level. We test our hypotheses on a sample of 1,274 early-stage drug discovery projects in 
biopharma firms worldwide. 
Our research offers several practical and theoretical contributions. Our main contribution is in 
characterizing the time to allocate for early-stage drug discovery projects beyond which the project should 
be killed and efforts should be diverted to late-stage development activities to create an innovative and 
productive project portfolio. The time-to-discontinuation decision is essentially aimed at strategizing 
discovery and development so as to maintain an effective and efficient drug portfolio. Developing a more 
objective approach to allocating time for early-stage discovery activities that considers a firm’s risk-
aversion level can help refine the drug development process, which is currently undergoing tremendous 
stress and transformation, especially due to automation. 
We also add to the growing stream of literature on exploration and exploitation by modeling and 
testing the time allocation decision for exploratory early-stage and exploitative late-stage projects. The 
findings enhance our understanding that the time to allocate to early-stage discovery is contingent on 
project- and firm-level characteristics (Luger et al., 2018). 
2. New Product Development in the Biopharma Industry
The biopharma industry tops all other industries in R&D spending, a trend expected to continue into the 
immediate future. Thus, when a firm engages in drug development, it must strategically decide on a 
portfolio of projects in which to invest its R&D budget. Portfolio-level analyses pertaining to new product 
development (NPD) are explored by a few streams of literature including operations, economics, decision 
analysis, real options, and using simulations (Chapman and Ward, 1996; Ding and Eliashberg, 2002; Loch 
and Bode-Greuel, 2001; Sharpe and Keelin, 1998). In NPD portfolio analysis, the firm (a) compiles a list of 
projects that compete for the same scarce resources, (b) estimates the value of competing projects, and (c) 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
allocates resources to a project portfolio that maximizes the overall value to the firm. This approach is 
useful for project selection decisions, wherein the firm selects project portfolios in which it invests billions 
of R&D dollars. Companies like Novartis, Roche, Merck, Pfizer, J&J, and Sanofi are expected to allocate 
over US$5 billion in R&D in 2020 (Schuhmacher et al., 2016).
The challenge with increased R&D spending is the rising expectation for returns on investment 
(ROI). While increased R&D spending seems logical for profitability growth, ROI statistics suggest 
otherwise. Declining productivity is one of the most discussed topics in the biopharma industry (Deloitte 
Report, 2018). The return on R&D investment for small-molecule compounds and for biologics was 
estimated at 7.5% in 2010, in contrast to 12% in both 1997 and 2001. The Centre for Medicines Research 
International (CMRI) attributes decreased productivity to numerous causes, most significantly, the high 
failure rate of drug discovery initiatives. CMRI estimates that firms face a 4.9% success rate beginning 
from the first toxicity-test dose to market approval. While the attrition rate has been high, the failure to 
discontinue less promising projects is considered to be the primary cause of productivity decline (Peck et 
al., 2015). 
Hence, decisions pertaining to NPD projects are not just one-time events that happen only during 
the project selection phase. Every NPD project undergoes careful evaluation at regular intervals so that 
managers can decide whether to continue the project or discontinue it to redirect resources to more fruitful 
R&D endeavors. Many companies such as Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer attempt to restructure 
their new drug development processes for better decision-making and to limit the attrition rate to early-
stage discovery (David et al., 2010). A ‘quick kill’ strategy to discontinue less promising projects at the 
earliest possible time is warranted to reduce wasted resources and to enhance productivity (Peck et al., 
2015). 
To accomplish this, companies like Bristol-Myers Squibb have adopted approaches such as ‘fit-for-
purpose’, which involves purposeful tradeoffs in investing resources and continuing discovery and 
development projects. Through prudent investments across the firm’s entire NPD portfolio, constant 
evaluation of ongoing projects, acknowledging the need for a tradeoff, and recognizing that not all projects 
can continue receiving extended support, the company was able to achieve success. As summarized by Van 
Arnum (2010) in discussing Bristol-Myers Squibb: 
It is all about how to best apply money, people, and technology to reach the key development 
decision points for every compound as fast and as efficiently as possible. We think this is an overall 
model that best addresses those issues. (p. 2)
Discontinuing risky, new drug discovery projects is thus critical for the firm to redirect resources to other 
more promising research endeavors. Our research focuses on this key decision variable as its dependent 
variable. Specifically, our dependent variable is the time from start to discontinuation of an early-stage drug 
discovery project, or time to discontinuation. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
A firm that attempts to discontinue seemingly fruitless projects at an early stage is required to 
continuously evaluate its projects across all portfolios. Regarding funding and continuing discovery and 
development of projects, some biopharma companies attempt to discontinue highly uncertain early-stage 
projects for more sure-shot bets in the later stages of development. A few companies invest only in late-
stage projects, transferring the early-stage discoveries to universities and nonprofit research entities, 
eventually getting exclusive licenses when discovery reaches later stages. For instance, Pfizer established a 
science hub in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 2011, to leverage the expertise of the “big brains” at Harvard 
and MIT (Schuhmacher et al., 2016). Other companies make tradeoffs when competing for either 
unprecedented first-in-kind emergent drugs or best-in-kind follower drugs (Schulze and Ringel, 2013). For 
instance, Merck developed its blockbuster cholesterol-lowering drug, MEVACOR, a first-in-kind emergent 
drug, and Pfizer later developed its “follower” drug LIPITOR, aimed to grab a market share. 
3. Drug Discovery and Development: Contingencies and Tradeoffs
As noted in the introduction, new drug discoveries are capital intensive and face high failure rates. Hence, 
while new drug discovery endeavors are key success drivers, discontinuing discovery endeavors in a timely 
manner is equally important to prevent firms and scientific teams from following a dead-end course for 
longer than necessary. Discontinuing new drug initiatives is an arduous task due to many factors, including 
management advocacy for their ‘favorites’, and organizational politics and factors rooted in intellectual 
capital (Brockner, 2011; Green et al., 2003; Staw, 1981; Subramanian and Van de Vrande, 2019). 
Decisions concerning timely discontinuation can benefit from March’s (1991) exploration-exploitation 
framework, wherein exploration, often characterized as experimentation, generally involves risk-taking 
innovations, while exploitation, often described as ‘refinement’, aims to improve efficiency. 
In the NPD context, exploration and exploitation can be linked to different stages of development 
(Rothaermel and Deeds, 2004). Firms and scientific teams engage in early-stage discoveries aimed to 
uncover new things, thereby building new knowledge, capabilities and learning (Rothaermel and Deeds, 
2004). Consequently, early-stage projects are often associated with uncertain, distant and negative returns 
(March, 1991). The small likelihood of success for early-stage drug discovery in the biopharma industry is 
proof of the risky nature of discovery endeavors (Bains, 2004; Gogos, 2018). While the precursor of the 
discovery process is the desire to unearth something new, the precursor of late-stage development is the 
availability of exploitable knowledge obtained through early-stage discovery activities. Therefore, when 
valuable learning is acquired through early-stage discoveries, a scientific team turns its attention to 
exploiting the newly acquired knowledge and translating it into more certain outcomes (Cohen and 
Levinthal, 1990). Late-stage development endeavors are thus considered comparatively risk-free, which is 
also substantiated by the high success rate of late-stage drug development projects (Bains, 2004; Gogos, 
2018). 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Although both activities are important, they compete for the biopharma firm’s scarce resources. 
Consequently, research teams continuously face tradeoff decisions between engaging in early-stage 
explorative and late-stage exploitative activities (Cao et al., 2009). Excessive focus on either one negatively 
relates to sales growth (e.g., He and Wong, 2004) and thus a balance between the two activities is 
warranted for better performance outcomes (Benner and Tushman, 2003; He and Wong, 2004; Jansen et al., 
2006; Katila and Ahuja, 2002; Raisch and Birkinshaw, 2008; Raisch et al., 2009; Tushman and O’Reilly, 
1996; Uotila et al., 2009). 
For new drug development teams, the context of our study, deciding on the time to discontinuation 
of early-stage drug discovery projects can be achieved by determining the best allocation of scarce 
resources, such as the scientific team’s time spent for drug discovery and drug development activities, to 
achieve the maximum utility. To characterize the time to allocate for early-stage drug discovery projects, 
we construct a formal model and then theoretically and empirically investigate the time to discontinuation 
of early-stage drug discovery projects. 
Exploratory projects in our context are defined as early-stage drug discoveries (Discovery phase to 
Phase III1), whereas exploitative projects are late-stage drug development projects (Pre-registration and 
Registration; e.g., FDA approval) that use technologies similar to those of the focal early-stage exploratory 
drug discovery project. The rationale for restricting the late-stage exploitative drug projects to technologies 
similar to those of a firm’s exploratory, early-stage drug discovery is that if the scientific team is not 
exploring the focal early-stage drug, then the team can exploit late-stage drugs of similar technologies (i.e., 
a scientific team of experts engages in projects that require similar expertise). During the later stages of 
drug development, scientific expertise is not only crucial during the Pre-registration and Registration 
stages2, but also when a drug undergoes Phase IV clinical trials (known as post-marketing surveillance or 
confirmatory trials) after FDA approval, wherein the drug’s effectiveness and safety must be monitored in a 
large and diverse population.3 Moreover, scientific expertise is vital for post-clinical trials, when scientists 
work toward publishing their findings in peer-reviewed scientific journals.4 All these late stage activities 
can be classified as risk-free relative to the high-risk nature of the early stages of drug discovery. The 
payoffs from allocating time between early-stage drug discovery projects and late-stage drug development 
projects are used to help determine the right time at which early-stage projects should be discontinued. 
Contingency Factors on the Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff
As He and Wong (2004) note, “the effective balance between exploratory discovery and exploitative 
development activities may vary significantly with market and technological dynamism” (p. 493). 
1 Please see Section 5 for more details and Section 6 for robustness checks pertaining to the definition of exploration 
and exploitation stages.
2 https://www.getscience.com/innovators/how-preparing-drug-fda-approval-requires-mind-scientist-and-strategist 
3 https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/what-are-clinical-trials-and-studies 
4 https://www.nih.gov/health-information/nih-clinical-research-trials-you/basics 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Therefore, our formal model considers three contingency factors reflected in the following questions: (a) 
What is the nature of the early-stage project to be discovered? (b) What late-stage projects could be 
developed instead? and (c) What is the firm’s risk-aversion level? As for the first question, the nature of the 
early-stage project, we examine the emergence level of early-stage drug discovery projects to characterize 
whether the project is aligned with the business model of the biopharma industry, which is to work on high-
risk, high-return exploratory endeavors. Hence, drugs with a high emergence level are akin to first-in-kind 
drugs (Arora et al., 2009) and thus correspond to drugs on the cutting-edge of science. In other words, the 
early-stage new drug discovery project is unprecedented scientifically and the first of its kind. Examples of 
such drugs launched in 2017 include NERLYNX by Puma Biotechnology, ZINPLAVA by Merck, and 
FEDOSINE by BioCryst Pharmaceuticals. Though the goal of bringing a brand new drug to market is 
appealing, committing the concerted time and effort necessary to do so entails great risk and does not 
ensure success (Schulze and Ringel, 2013). Moreover, a new approach to treating a disease with a high-
level emergent drug involves huge uncertainty and costs, and no guarantee of success (LaMattina, 2013). 
However, while drugs with high emergence levels entail various risks, they could potentially become 
blockbuster drugs like HUMIRA, ENBREL and ADVAIR, which have annual sales of more than US$5 
billion (Schuhmacher et al., 2016). 
To explore the second question, “What late-stage projects could be developed instead?”, we look at 
the number of other late-stage drug development projects in the firm’s pipeline that use technologies 
similar to those of the firm’s early-stage discovery projects. These projects thus compete for the same 
resources and are comparatively less risky because they are relatively more developed. Firms with large 
portfolios of exploitable late-stage development projects face more pressure in determining the ideal 
amount of time to allocate to early-stage projects for which the payoffs are more distant and more uncertain 
(March, 1991). 
Finally, many firms struggle when deciding when to discontinue projects because they consider 
this as a failure. As drug development discontinuations can also affect a firm’s market value (Statman and 
Sepe, 2007; Terry, 2019) (i.e., investors and potential investors generally view drug exploration 
discontinuations as a sign of weakness), firms with high risk-aversion levels might push forward the 
fruitless projects rather than discontinue them. Firms with too few projects poised to enter late-stage 
development tend to desperately pour resources into poor performers rather than discontinue them (Terry, 
2019). Therefore, we factor in the risk-aversion level using three proxies: the firm’s (i) number of 
collaborative deals engaged in its early-stage drug discovery project, (ii) variance of return on assets 
(ROA), and (iii) total number of drugs under discovery and development in the focal year. 
Table 1 summarizes the variables used in our model and describes how they relate to the context of 
new drug development. Table 1 also summarizes how the variables are measured, which we further discuss 
in Section 5. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
-------------------- Insert Table 1 Here --------------------
4. Decision Model and Hypotheses Development
Time Allocation in Drug Development
Consider a scientific team at a biopharma firm that can invest time on new early-stage drug discovery and 
is committed to spending a minimum amount of (successive) months, (> 0), on this explorative endeavor. 
𝜀
As noted in the earlier section, early-stage discoveries are fraught with risk, while the later stages of 
development are comparatively risk-free as they build upon earlier discoveries (Rothaermel and Deeds, 
2004). Therefore, instead of continuing with early-stage drug discovery, the team can decide to exploit the 
firm’s late-stage drug development projects, which have a higher chance of success. Thus, the scientific 
team can afford to allocate a maximum of months to the early-stage drug discovery project, or engage in 
𝜏
late-stage drug development projects and exploit their certainties. 
With the tremendous financial benefits associated with developing a blockbuster drug, it is easy for 
biopharma firms to prolong early-stage drug discovery projects in hopes of achieving a fundamental 
breakthrough (Ravasi and Turati, 2005; Simonds, 2018). However, given the uncertain outcomes and the 
fact that less than 5% of drugs in development succeed, the timely discontinuation of fruitless projects is 
essential to free up limited resources for late-stage projects with more promising outcomes (Vasaikar et al., 
2016). Therefore, the scientific team must make a key decision of allocating 
 successive months (a 
𝑚
maximum of months) to a risky, early-stage drug discovery project before discontinuing it, and then 
𝜏
devoting the remaining 
 months to less risky, late-stage projects. 
[𝜏― 𝑚]
Late-stage Drug Numbers and Early-stage Drug Emergence Levels
The decision to discontinue an early-stage drug discovery project to free up time for less risky, late-stage 
projects is even more crucial when a firm has multiple late-stage drugs in the research pipeline. In such 
situations, excess exploration at the expense of exploitation leads to higher costs and loss of potential 
benefits associated with exploiting extant opportunities (Lavie et al., 2010; March, 1991). Therefore, when 
a firm has more late-stage drug development projects available, it might be more prudent to redirect the 
effort from early-stage discovery to late-stage development projects, where the outcomes hold much less 
uncertainty and may require less time to achieve. In allocating time to a new early-stage drug discovery 
project, the scientific team thus faces an opportunity cost based on the number 
 of late-stage drug 
𝑛
development projects it can work on instead. 
Also, we must consider the level of emergence of the early-stage drug discovery project. This 

emergence level indicates how new the product or technology being developed is in chronological terms. A 
high emergence level represents the leading edge of technology (Ahuja and Lampert, 2001). Following the 
logic of technology recombination (Fleming, 2001), the likelihood of new combinations of existing but 
unexplored products or technologies increases with their underlying emergence levels. Consequently, the 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
higher the emergence levels, the greater the chances of developing a breakthrough drug (Ahuja and 
Lampert, 2001), which can incentivize firms to continue with their early-stage projects in hopes of 
developing a new blockbuster drug. 
Risky Gains and Selecting a Time to Discontinuation
Because rational decision-makers generally prefer greater potential gains, the scientific team should target a 
time to discontinuation 
 for the early-stage drug discovery project that maximizes the team’s utility. 
𝑚∗
This utility is an increasing function of the total gain to the scientific team from both early- and late-stage 
projects. In essence, the gain corresponds to potential learning benefits that result from either the time 
allocated to developing an early-stage drug, even if this initiative is later discontinued, or from the time it 
allocates to late-stage drug development projects. 
As emerging technologies are being developed, they are not as well understood and tested 
compared to more mature technologies. With emergent technologies, the focal firm might also lack the 
necessary capabilities and absorptive capacity needed to further develop the technology and reap its 
benefits (Ahuja and Lampert, 2001). Hence, the more emergent an early-stage drug discovery project is, the 
greater the expected gains and risks, whereas the less emergent that project is, the lower the expected gains 
and risks. Moreover, the marginal gain from the early-stage drug discovery project’s emergence level 
depends on the number of months that the scientific team allocates to investigating the project, since 
spending time on an initiative produces learning benefits. However, as described above, the learning 
benefits from early-stage drug discovery projects are not risk-free. The marginal gain thus also depends on 
a risky outcome that the scientific team cannot control. We use a random variable to represent this risky 
𝑋
outcome, where 
 and 
 (with 
 as the expectation operator and 
 as the 
𝐸[𝑋] = 0
Var[𝑋] = 𝜎2
𝐸[ ∙]
Var[ ∙]
variance operator). Hence, the marginal gain, denoted as 
 is a function of both the early-stage drug 
𝑅(𝑚,𝑋)
discovery project’s time to discontinuation 
 and the risky outcome , where the realization of that 
𝑚
𝑋
𝑥
outcome could be negative and thus could negatively impact the gain. 
When the scientific team terminates work on an early-stage drug discovery project to work on a 
late-stage drug development project, the gain from this move is 
 per month. This monthly gain is now 
𝜔(𝑛)
a function of , the firm’s number of late-stage drug development projects (of similar technologies to the 
𝑛
focal early-stage drug) that the team could be working on. Firms with a large portfolio of late-stage projects 
have a larger ‘basket’ of successful cases to exploit, which not only renders many learning benefits, but 
also creates learning traps because exploiting existing paradigms reduces the team’s ability to learn new 
paradigms (Ahuja and Lampert, 2001). Thus, a large portfolio of late-stage drug development projects (a 
large ) can result in greater or smaller monthly gains 
 in relation to those of a smaller project 
𝑛
𝜔(𝑛)
portfolio (small ). In other words, 
 can be either an increasing or decreasing function of . 
𝑛
𝜔(𝑛)
𝑛
In our stylized model, the team should thus select a time to discontinuation for the early-stage drug 
discovery project based on the potential reward—the total gain (i.e., learning benefits) from its drug 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
discovery and development activities. Based on the above discussion, this total gain can be represented as 𝐺
, where is the early-stage drug discovery project’s emergence level, the 
(𝑚) = 𝑅(𝑚,𝑋) +𝜔(𝑛)[𝜏― 𝑚]

term 
is the uncertain gain from allocating 
 successive months to the project, and the term 
𝑅(𝑚,𝑋) 
𝑚
𝜔(𝑛)
 is the (comparatively) risk-free gain associated with discontinuing the early-stage project and 
[𝜏― 𝑚]
allocating the remaining months to late-stage drug development projects. The total gain is thus uncertain. 
A desirable functional form for 
 is one where, expectedly, (1) the time allocated to the 
𝑅(𝑚,𝑋)
early-stage drug discovery project (
) impacts the expected total gain as well as that gain’s standard 
𝑚
deviation (risk), and (2) the impact of the risky outcome can be interpreted as a percentage of change in 
𝑋
the total gain from allocating time to the early-stage project. We thus choose 
, 
𝑅(𝑚,𝑋) = 𝑟1(𝑚) + 𝑟2(𝑚)𝑋
where 
 is an increasing function of 
, since each additional month allocated to the early-stage drug 
𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑚
discovery project is expected to generate additional gains; note that 
 implies that the expected gain 
𝐸[𝑋] = 0
from allocating 
 months to the early-stage drug discovery project is 
. Also note that 
 can be 
𝑚
𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑟2(𝑚)
an increasing or decreasing function of 
 since it characterizes the standard deviation of the gain by 
𝑚
allocating 
 months to the early-stage project, which is 
. Allocating additional months to that 
𝑚
𝑟2(𝑚)𝜎
project could reduce the uncertainty of that gain. This can occur when additional months give the scientific 
team time to reflect on and learn from their early-stage project experience, even if the project fails.
Firm Risk Aversion and the Utility Function
The target at which a firm or its scientific team decides to abandon an exploration effort and redirect its 
resources to higher-success-probability exploitative projects is firm specific and based on the firm’s risk-
aversion level; we use an exponential utility function 
, where represents this risk-aversion 
𝑈(𝐺) = ― 𝑒―𝛼𝐺

level (see, e.g., Burmeister-Lamp et al., 2012, in the context of entrepreneurs’ time allocation).5 Based on 
evidence from the entrepreneurial decision-making context (e.g., Burmeister-Lamp et al., 2012; Caliendo et 
al., 2009; Elston and Audretsch, 2011) and from the biopharma industry (Farrell, 2008), we assume in this 
innovation-based context that the firm is risk averse (i.e., 
). The risk-aversion level refers to the 
𝛼> 0
degree to which a firm is averse to risk (Weber et al., 2002). The exponential utility function, along with a 
normally distributed outcome , leads to a key property of our model: for any alternative , the scientific 
𝑋
𝐺
team will be indifferent about selecting the maximum of 
 (which is mathematically 
𝐸[𝐺] ―
1
2αVar[𝐺]
tractable) and maximizing its expected utility (which is not as tractable due to the need to integrate a 
probability distribution function) (see Freund, 1956). We capitalize on this property (also used in, e.g., 
Burmeister-Lamp et al., 2012; Lévesque et al., 2019; Lévesque and Minniti, 2006; Lévesque and Schade, 
2005) to characterize a target time to discontinuation for the early-stage drug discovery project.
5 Underlying this utility function is the assumption that the firm possesses a constant, absolute risk aversion (CARA), 
which is common in the financial decision-making literature (e.g., the CAPM model; Sharpe, 1991), among others.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Given that 
 and 
, as described above, 
𝐺(𝑚) = 𝑅(𝑚,𝑋) +𝜔(𝑛)[𝜏― 𝑚]
𝑅(𝑚,𝑋) = 𝑟1(𝑚) + 𝑟2(𝑚)𝑋
to maximize expected utility, the scientific team should target a number of months 
 after which the 
𝑚∗
early-stage drug discovery project will be discontinued so as to maximize 𝐸[𝐺] ―
1
2αVar[𝐺] = 𝑟1(𝑚) ―
1
2α
.6 The first- and second-order conditions for optimality thus correspond to, 
[𝑟2(𝑚)𝜎]2 +𝜔(𝑛)[𝜏― 𝑚]
respectively, 
 and 
∆≡
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚
― α
2𝜎2𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚
―𝜔(𝑛) = 0

𝑑2𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚2
―α
2𝜎2{[
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚]
2
+ 𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑2𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚2 }
; note that the second-order condition holds as long as 
 is concave and 
 is convex 
< 0
𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑟2(𝑚)
(including when both functional forms are linear). To analyze the model and develop a series of 
hypotheses, we characterize the early-stage drug discovery project’s time to discontinuation 
 , which 
𝑚∗
satisfies the first-order condition for optimality. 
Model Analysis and Testable Hypotheses
We now derive utility theory-based hypotheses that assume full rationality and thus provide a benchmark 
for assessing the relative efficiency of a scientific team’s de facto time to discontinuation for the early-stage 
drug discovery project. These testable hypotheses are based on the sensitivity of 
 with respect to (1) the 
𝑚∗
number of the firm’s late-stage drug development projects available for exploiting, (2) the early-stage 
𝑛
drug discovery project’s emergence level
, and (3) the firm’s risk-aversion level . From a comparative 
 
𝛼
statics analysis, for any model parameter , the sign of 
 equals the sign of 
 (see, e.g., Gravelle and 
𝜃
∂𝑚∗
∂𝜃
∂∆
∂𝜃
Rees, 1992). 
We begin with , the number of late-stage drug development projects in the firm’s pipeline that the 
𝑛
scientific team could be working on. Since 
, it follows that 
 is positive if 
 and 
∂∆
∂𝑛= ―
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛
∂𝑚∗
∂𝑛
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛< 0
negative if 
. The relationship between and an early-stage drug discovery project’s time to 
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛> 0
𝑛
discontinuation 
 is thus expected to be contingent on the sign of 
. When is this sign positive? 
𝑚∗
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛
When an increase in the number of late-stage drug development projects the scientific team could be 
working on (instead of the early-stage drug discovery) corresponds to an increase in the monthly gain the 
team will reap by working on these late-stage projects. However, the sign of this derivative is negative if an 
increase in the number of late-stage drug development projects the scientific team could be working on 
corresponds to a decrease in this monthly gain.
6 This model also considers a form of interaction between a focal NPD and other NPDs in the firm’s project portfolio, 
as Girotra et al. (2007) account for in a firm’s portfolio strategy. However, in our context, that interaction focuses on 
other drug projects in later stages of development (drugs at the Pre-registration or Registration stage). We do this to 
provide a benchmark that focuses on risky versus comparatively risk-free activities (i.e., of negligible risk relative to 
the focal early-stage drug project) to unearth potential explanations as to why a firm should expedite or delay the 
project’s discontinuation.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
The sign of the monthly gain 
 can be determined by the size of the scientific team. A small 
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛
team is expected to have a narrower range of know-how than a large team. Hence, when a small team 
works on a relatively large number of late-stage drug development projects, it is likely to face learning 
traps, because the team’s ability to learn new paradigms from exploiting existing paradigms is reduced 
(Ahuja and Lampert, 2001). Thus, a small team is expected to reap less monthly gain when the number of 
late-stage drug development projects increases. Conversely, a large team, owing to its broader range of 
know-how, can bypass learning traps when the team faces large number of late-stage drug development 
projects. In other words, a large team is expected to generate more monthly gain when the number of late-
stage drug development projects increases.
Therefore, when 
 is an interior solution (i.e., 
), Hypothesis 1 (H1), presented next, 
𝑚∗
𝜀< 𝑚∗< 𝜏
formalizes the expected relationship between the time to discontinuation of an early-stage drug discovery 
project and , which is contingent on the size of the scientific team working on this project.
𝑛
H1a: When the scientific team is large, the more late-stage drug development projects that the team 
could be working on instead of the early-stage drug discovery project, the shorter the early-stage drug 
discovery project’s time to discontinuation will be. 
H1b: When the scientific team is small, the more late-stage drug development projects the team could 
be working on instead of the early-stage drug discovery project, the longer the early-stage drug 
discovery project’s time to discontinuation will be. 
We next consider the early-stage drug discovery project’s emergence level . Since 

∂∆
∂=
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚
 and from the first-order condition for optimality, 
|𝑚= 𝑚∗―2𝛼𝜎2𝑟2(𝑚∗)
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
― α𝜎2𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚
, it follows that 
 and thus 
 is positive if 
 and 
=
𝜔(𝑛)
―
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚
∂∆
∂= 2
𝜔(𝑛)
―
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
∂𝑚∗
∂
<
2𝜔(𝑛)
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
negative if 
; that is, it will have an inverted U-shaped relationship. Based on these 
>
2𝜔(𝑛)
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
developments, whenever 
 is an interior solution (i.e., 
), Hypothesis 2 (H2) formalizes the 
𝑚∗
𝜀< 𝑚∗< 𝜏
relationship between the early-stage drug discovery project’s time to discontinuation and its emergence 
level .

H2: The early-stage drug discovery project’s time to discontinuation will have an inverted U-shaped 
relationship with that project’s emergence level. 
Therefore, early-stage drug discovery projects with low or high emergence levels will be discontinued 
earlier than those with moderate emergence levels. The rationale for this unanticipated relationship is that 
when the emergence level is high, the expected gain from efforts to develop the new drug at an early stage 
is high, but so is the variability in this gain. Consequently, the firm will experience a utility tradeoff from 
simultaneously facing more return and more risk. Similarly, when the level of emergence is low, the 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
expected gain from developing the new drug is low, but so is the variability in this gain, which again 
creates a utility tradeoff because the firm simultaneously faces both a low return and low risk. A balance 
between risk and return thus favors the project with a moderate emergence level. 
We finally consider the firm’s risk-aversion level . Since 
 and 
𝛼
∂∆
∂𝛼= ― 
2𝜎2𝑟2(𝑚∗)
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
from the first-order condition for optimality, 
, it 
― 
2𝜎2𝑟2(𝑚∗)
𝑑𝑟2(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗=
1
𝛼[𝜔(𝑛) ― 
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗]
follows that 
 is positive if 
 and negative if 
. Specifically, we now argue 
∂𝑚∗
∂𝛼
<
𝜔(𝑛)
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
>
𝜔(𝑛)
𝑑𝑟1(𝑚)
𝑑𝑚|𝑚= 𝑚∗
that the contingency on derives from the observation that efforts to develop early-stage drug projects of 

high emergence levels are expected to yield high gains accompanied by high variabilities in these gains. 
The firm will thus experience a utility tradeoff from simultaneously facing more return and more risk, but 
the lost utility (or disutility) from the risk becomes more significant if the firm’s risk-aversion level is high, 
which should encourage the firm to discontinue the drug discovery project earlier. In contrast, low 
emergence levels are expected to yield more modest gains as well as more modest variabilities in these 
gains. The firm will again experience a utility tradeoff from simultaneously facing less return and less risk, 
but the lost utility from the risk becomes less significant if the firm’s risk-aversion level is low, which 
should afford the firm some delay in the time to discontinuation. 
Therefore, when 
 is an interior solution (i.e., 
), Hypothesis 3 (H3) formalizes the 
𝑚∗
𝜀< 𝑚∗< 𝜏
relationship between the early-stage drug project’s time to discontinuation and , which is contingent on 
𝛼
the project’s emergence level . 

H3a: For an early-stage drug discovery project with a high emergence level, the higher the firm’s risk-
aversion level, the shorter the early-stage drug discovery project’s time to discontinuation will be. 
H3b: For an early-stage drug discovery project with a low emergence level, the higher the firm’s risk-
aversion level, the longer the early-stage drug discovery project’s time to discontinuation will be. 
For firms with high risk-aversion levels, early-stage drug discovery projects with high emergence levels 
will therefore be discontinued earlier than for those with low risk-aversion levels. This enables the 
scientific team to discontinue the risky early-stage drug discovery activity earlier rather than expend time 
that could be better allocated to more promising late-stage drug development projects. However, firms with 
early-stage drug discovery projects with low emergence levels and high risk-aversion levels will 
discontinue these projects later than firms with low risk-aversion levels. Specifically, although it might 
appear counterintuitive, a delay in the time to discontinuation is warranted because the uncertainty 
pertaining to projects with low emergence levels is significantly lower than that of projects with high 
emergence levels. Therefore, the relative risk in persevering on a low-emergence level, early-stage project 
is lower than that of persevering on a high-emergence level, early-stage project. If highly risk-averse firms 
wish to discontinue these early-stage projects, they must first factor in their low-emergence levels, or they 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
will lose the (relatively less-risky) learning benefits. Extending the time to discontinuation also reduces the 
uncertainty associated with the potential gain from these low-emergence, early-stage projects. In other 
words, the lower risk associated with lower emergence levels enables firms with high risk-aversion levels 
to extend the time to discontinuation of their early-stage drug discovery projects. Figure 1 summarizes the 
behavior of the time to discontinuation as proposed by our formal model and described in H1, H2 and H3.
---------------------- Insert Figure 1 about here ----------------------
5. Research Methodology
Data
We test our three hypotheses using data from the global biopharma industry. Drug discovery, development 
and approval is a highly regulated process involving well-defined steps: Discovery (basic research), Pre-
clinical (the drug’s safety and dosage are tested on animals), Phase I (the drug’s safety and dosage are 
tested on humans), Phase II (the drug’s efficacy and potential side-effects are tested on humans), Phase III 
(the drug’s efficacy is tested on humans and its adverse effects are monitored and assessed), Pre-
registration (with a governmental oversight agency such as the US FDA); Registration, and Launch. As 
highlighted earlier, because the biopharma industry is one of the most R&D-intensive industries, timely 
discontinuation of early-stage drug discovery projects is critical due to the high costs of the lengthy R&D 
process, high R&D expenditures, high failure rates and decreasing approvals by regulatory bodies (Peck et 
al., 2015; Skrepnek and Sarnowski, 2007). 
Moreover, attrition rates are high during the various stages of drug discovery and development. 
The success rate of Phase II is 30%, by far the lowest of all phases. The success rate of Phase III is 58%, 
the next lowest, and in contrast, the success rates following Phase III—Pre-registration and Registration—
are above 85% each (Thomas et al., 2015). Thus, owing to the risky and uncertain nature of R&D, the early 
stages of drug discovery—Discovery to Phase III7—is often classified as exploratory. However, the Pre-
registration and Registration phases are more exploitative in nature, and thus comparatively risk-free in 
terms of their learning benefits (gains) as the scientific team documents the process for approval (by the 
FDA or other regulatory agency), which requires both scientific and strategic planning, publishing the 
results of earlier phases in peer-reviewed scientific journals, and, for selected drugs, engaging in Phase IV 
clinical trials (i.e., post-marketing surveillance or confirmatory trials conducted for regulatory compliance 
or competitive reasons).
We obtained data on drug projects from the Cortellis database of Clarivate Analytics 
(https://www.cortellis.com/intelligence/login.do), which contains R&D drug pipeline information including 
summaries of over 55,000 products and therapeutic research programs worldwide, from pre-clinical 
development through launch (or discontinuation). The data obtained also includes drug profiles, details 
7 As a robustness check, we classified the Discovery phase to Phase II as early stages and Phase III to Registration as 
late stages. The results of this robustness check are reported in Section 6.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
about the biopharma firms developing the drugs, drug development history, regulatory and patent positions, 
partnerships and deals underlying the drugs, among others. The Cortellis database has been used in 
numerous studies to extract information on drug names (Chang et al., 2016), clinical trials (Bespalov et al., 
2016), and drug development projects (Harrison, 2016; Subramanian and Van de Vrande, 2019). Since our 
dependent variable is a drug’s time to discontinuation, we restrict our sample data points to drugs that were 
discontinued between January 1990 and December 2017, which resulted in a total of 7,646 drug discovery 
and development projects from 1,951 firms worldwide. 
For hypothesis testing, we obtained information from the Cortellis database on the firms’ drug 
discovery and development projects, how long each drug had been under development, the stage of each 
drug’s development, the drug’s emergence level, how many patents the firm had filed during the course of 
the drug’s development, collaborative agreements with other firms involving the drug’s development cycle, 
and how many other drugs the focal firm had been simultaneously developing. Complete information on 
patents 
underlying 
the 
discontinued 
drugs 
were 
obtained 
from 
the 
Patsnap 
database 
(http://www.patsnap.com/), which includes more than 120 million patents issued globally and used in a 
number of studies (e.g., Benson and Magee, 2013; Magee et al., 2016; Shi and Guan, 2016; Subramanian 
and Van de Vrande, 2019). Financial data on the firms that initiated the drug projects were obtained from 
the Osiris database (https://osiris.bvdinfo.com), which has also been used in scholarly work (e.g., Neely et 
al., 2011; Subramanian and Van de Vrande, 2019). 
Since our research focuses on the time allocation decision that drug development teams face for 
discovery and development activities, our sample included discontinued drug discovery projects in their 
early stages—the Discovery phase to Phase III. The number of late-stage drug development projects was 
used as an independent variable. After excluding firms that did not have complete information on their 
drugs and financial statistics, our final sample included 1,274 drug projects discontinued at the early stages. 
We next provide a detailed description of the measures we employed. 
Measures
Dependent variable
The dependent variable is time to discontinuation (
), which is the number of months that the early-stage 
𝑚
drug discovery was carried out before the development was discontinued. Clarivate Analytics tracks 
various data such as when a drug discovery project is initiated, and the project’s progress until the drug has 
been launched or terminated. We used the difference in the number of months between the start date and 
discontinuation date of the early-stage drug discovery project to calculate the time to discontinuation. This 
measure aligns with the measures used in other studies to capture drug discovery start-to-discontinuation 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
duration (Subramanian and Van de Vrande, 2019)8, the go/no-go decisions in NPD processes (Schmidt and 
Calantone, 2002) and discontinuation events recorded in qualitative studies on NPD (Shepherd et al., 
2014). 
Independent variables
The first independent variable is the number of late-stage drug development projects ( ) that the scientific 
𝑛
team can exploit, which is measured using the total number of drug development projects in the Pre-
registration and Registration phases of the focal firm’s pipeline. We calculate this measure as the total 
number of the firm’s unique drugs in the Pre-registration and Registration phases in the year the early-stage 
drug is discontinued. Only late-stage drug development projects that use technologies similar to those of 
the focal early-stage drugs were used to calculate because if the scientific team is not exploring a focal 
𝑛
drug in its early stage, then the team can exploit late-stage drugs of similar technologies. As argued earlier, 
our reason for focusing on similar technologies is that the scientific team with specific expertise engages in 
projects that require similar expertise. As a robustness check, we also used two variations of this measure. 
The results, presented in Section 6, remain consistent across these different definitions of early- and late-
stage drug discovery and development projects. The various measures of the early and late stages of the 
projects that we use are akin to measures adopted by Hoang and Rothaermel (2010) and Rothaermel and 
Deeds (2004). 
The second independent variable is the size of the scientific team used to determine the sign of the 
monthly gain 
, which is measured using the number of inventors who were part of the focal early-stage 
∂𝜔(𝑛)
∂𝑛
drug discovery team. This information was captured using the number of inventors listed in the patents 
underlying the early-stage drug discovery projects. This measure is similar to the human capital variable 
adopted by Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019).
The third independent variable is the emergence level of the early-stage drug discovery project (), 
which is based on whether the drug represents leading-edge or nascent technology. To identify nascent 
8 Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019) examine how intellectual capital influences the likelihood of 
discontinuation of new drug development projects due to escalation of commitment. The authors show how 
intellectual capital can become a liability due to factors rooted in the escalation of commitment, and how prior 
experience mitigates this issue. We further the work of Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019) by arguing that if 
firms are liable to escalation of commitment, we must examine what might influence (and how) the time at which new 
drug discovery projects should be discontinued so that firms do not fall prey to escalation of commitment. 
Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019) also look at all drug discovery projects (including launched and 
discontinued) on which Cox proportional hazard models are applied to study the likelihood of discontinuation. In 
contrast, we focus on projects in the early stages of discovery that are eventually discontinued. We run negative 
binomial models because our aim is to identify how the time at which these projects are discontinued are affected by 
project and firm characteristics. While Subramanian and Van de Vrande (2019) take the perspective of the firm’s 
intellectual capital (i.e., human, structural and social), our work incorporates aspects such as the firm’s risk aversion 
level, and early versus late stages of R&D. Note that the ‘discontinuation duration’ measure adopted by Subramanian 
and Van de Vrande (2019) is relabeled ‘time to discontinuation’ in this article to better reflect its meaning and align 
with the focus of this research. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
drugs, we needed to capture the degree to which other firms were engaged in drug discovery projects 
similar to that of the firm’s focal, discontinued drug. We reasoned that the fewer firms working on similar 
drugs, the greater the emergence level of the discontinued drug. We capture the emergence level similar to 
how first-in-kind drugs are adopted by Arora et al. (2009) to differentiate them from follower drugs. For 
instance, Merck’s MEVACOR is the first-in-kind drug to help lower cholesterol. Hence, this drug was an 
emergent drug because there were no equivalent drugs on the market during its discovery. Subsequent to 
MEVACOR, many follower drugs were introduced, including the prominent LIPITOR from Pfizer9. 
The Cortellis database provides information on all biopharma firms worldwide working on drug 
development projects similar to those of our 1,274 targeted discontinued drugs. Cortellis uses both the 
therapeutic indications treated by the drug and the biological mechanism of action underlying the drug to 
map the focal drug along with drugs currently under development by other organizations. We used this 
information to calculate the emergence level of the focal early-stage drug discovery project. Specifically, 
we calculated the emergence level using 
. The greater this measure, 
1
Number of other firms developing similar drugs
the higher the drug’s emergence level. This measure relating to competition intensity surrounding drug 
discovery projects has also been used in other studies (e.g., Subramanian and Van de Vrande, 2019) and 
parallels patent studies (e.g., Ahuja, 2000; Ahuja and Katila, 2004) that measure early-stage discoveries 
based on the date of patent citations, the degree to which a firm cites a patent not used previously, and if a 
patent cites no other patents. 
The last independent variable in our study is firm risk-aversion level ( ). We adopt three measures 
𝛼
to proxy this variable: (a) number of collaborative deals the firm engaged in for its early-stage drug 
discovery project (count deals), (b) variance of the firm’s return on assets (ROA variance), and (c) total 
number of drugs under discovery and development by the focal firm in the year that the early-stage drug is 
discontinued (total number of drugs under discovery & development). As firms with high risk-aversion 
levels engage in more R&D collaborations in order to share the risk of new drug discovery, we adopted the 
count deals as the first proxy to measure a firm’s risk-aversion level (Hoffman, 2007). The assumption is 
that a firm with a high risk-aversion level will engage in more collaborative deals, whereas a firm with a 
low risk-aversion level will have fewer collaborative deals. Scholars commonly use uncertainty pertaining 
to a firm’s income stream to measure risk-aversion (Bromiley, 1991; Miller and Chen, 2004; Singh, 1986; 
Wiseman and Bromiley, 1996), hence we use ROA variance as the second proxy. We thus assume that a 
firm with a high risk-aversion level will have a lower variance of ROA, whereas a firm with a low risk-
aversion level will have a high variance of ROA. Since a firm’s engagement in innovation activities and 
9 measured as the inverse of the number of other firms developing similar drugs could also indicate the market 

potential of the opportunity, and overall attractiveness of the indication. But competitive equilibrium considerations 
are not included in this work and are left for future research. This point is further elaborated in the limitations and 
future research direction section. We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
associated investments entail huge risk, we use the total number of drugs under discovery & development 
in a year as the third proxy for a firm’s risk-aversion level (Gaba and Joseph, 2013; Greve, 2003; 2007). It 
is assumed that firms with high risk-aversion levels engage in fewer new drug discovery and development 
projects. In contrast, firms with low risk-aversion levels engage in more new drug discovery and 
development projects. 
Control Variables
We include several control variables that may affect a drug’s time to discontinuation. First, a firm’s 
decision to continue or discontinue a drug project is likely affected by its internal resources and 
capabilities. More resources and capabilities generally enable the firm to prolong the life of less promising 
projects, whereas limited resources and capabilities should compel the firm to streamline its projects and 
target its limited resources to more promising projects. We control for firm resources and firm capabilities 
using R&D intensity and patent stock variables. R&D intensity represents the year a drug is discontinued 
and is calculated as the firm’s total R&D expenditures divided by its total sales. Patent stock is the number 
of firm-owned patents underlying a specific early-stage drug discovery project. 
Second, firms tend to avoid the discontinuation of drug discovery projects that could possibly 
generate higher revenue (Girotra et al., 2007). We measure a drug’s revenue potential using the 
geographical coverage of the patents underlying the drug: the greater the geographical coverage, the greater 
its potential market size and thus the higher the potential revenue. As a patent family represents a set of 
patent applications filed in multiple countries to protect a single invention (i.e., drug), a patent’s 
geographical coverage is measured using the patent family size of the patents underlying a discontinued 
drug discovery project.
Third, a firm’s decision to discontinue or prolong the development of an early-stage drug discovery 
project is contingent on drug-specific characteristics. We control for this by considering the (a) number of 
indications targeted by the drug (count indications), (b) number of technologies or biological mechanisms 
of action underlying the drug (count technologies), and (c) number of countries in which the firm has 
executed the specific drug’s discovery (count countries). 
Fourth, a drug discontinued during Phase III development is likely to have a higher time to 
discontinuation than a drug discontinued during the Pre-clinical stage. We thus control for the stage at 
which a drug has been discontinued using dummy variables. To account for unobserved industry effects, 
we also control for the year in which the drug is discontinued. 
6. Results
As illustrated in Table 2, the correlations between the variables show that the number of late-stage drug 
development projects is negatively correlated with time to discontinuation, suggesting that the greater the 
number of exploitative opportunities a firm has, the shorter is the time to discontinuation of early-stage 
discovery projects. In contrast, size of the scientific team is positively correlated with time to 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
discontinuation, suggesting that this time is prolonged when an early-stage project has a larger scientific 
team. The correlations among count deals, ROA variance and time to discontinuation are positive, whereas 
the correlation between total number of drugs under discovery & development and time to discontinuation 
is negative. This suggests that different proxies of firm risk-aversion might have different associations with 
time to discontinuation. The significant correlation between patent-level variables, drug-specific 
characteristics and time to discontinuation underscores the significance of controlling for these variables in 
our regression models. 
-------------------- Insert Table 2 Here --------------------
Since our dependent variable, time to discontinuation, is a count variable, we use negative binomial 
regressions to estimate our models. Although the unit of analysis is the individual drug, the independent 
variables—including the number of late-stage drug development projects, ROA variance, total number of 
the firm’s drugs under discovery & development, and control variables such as R&D intensity, are 
measured at the firm level. Therefore, to attain robust estimations, we include robust standard errors 
clustered by firm in the regression analysis. Table 3 presents the results of our negative binomial regression 
analyses when early stages of drug discovery are confined to the Discovery phase to Phase III, and late 
stages are confined to the Pre-registration and Registration stages. Model 1 (Table 3) shows only the 
control variables. The independent variables are individually added to subsequent models. Model 5 (Table 
3) is the full model, which we use to examine the impact of the control variables and to test H2. 
-------------------- Insert Table 3 Here --------------------
Patent stock (Table 3) has a significant and positive impact on time to discontinuation (p < 0.01). 
This suggests that firms tend to prolong the discontinuation of early-stage drug discovery projects in which 
they have invested significantly in attaining intellectual property protection. Patent family size has a 
significant positive association with time to discontinuation (p < 0.10), which suggests firms’ reluctance to 
discontinue early-stage projects that could potentially generate high revenues. Count indications also has a 
significant positive association with time to discontinuation (p < 0.001) suggesting firms’ reluctance to 
discontinue drug investigations that could treat a larger number of diseases or conditions. We observe that 
firms’ number of late-stage drug development projects has a significant negative association with time to 
discontinuation (p < 0.001). This suggests that firms with a relatively large portfolio of late-stage drug 
development projects have greater inclination to pursue them. We also find that the size of the scientific 
team has a significant negative influence on time to discontinuation (p < 0.01) suggesting that when a 
relatively large scientific team engages in early-stage drug discovery projects, the shorter these projects are, 
presumably because firms want to redirect their valuable resources to more promising late-stage 
development activities. This result contrasts with Subramanian and Van de Vrande’s (2019) finding that the 
intellectual capital of an organization results in an escalation of its commitment to the drug discovery and 
development projects. A plausible reason for these contrasting results is that Subramanian and Van de 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Vrande (2019) examined the escalation of commitment pertaining to drug discovery and development 
across all stages, while we focus only on early-stage drug discovery. Perhaps, for early-stage discovery, 
the expertise of the research scientists (human capital) helps firms discontinue less-promising projects 
sooner than more promising ones.
H1a and H1b posit that the effect of the number of late-stage drug development projects on time to 
discontinuation is contingent on the size of the scientific team. We posited a negative relationship between 
the number of late-stage drug development projects and time to discontinuation for projects with a large 
scientific team, and a positive relationship for projects with a small scientific team. Because the 
relationship between the number of late-stage drug development projects and time to discontinuation is 
expected to switch directions based on the size of the scientific teams of the early-stage drug discovery 
projects, we conduct a split sample analysis to test H1. We use the median value of the size of the scientific 
team to split the sample into two groups (those above and below that median value) and we then examine 
whether the influence of the number of late-stage drug development projects on the time to discontinuation 
differs across the two groups. Model 6 (Table 4) presents the results for the group with a larger scientific 
team (> median value), while Model 7 (Table 4) focuses on the group with a smaller scientific team (≤ 
median value). The significant negative association between the number of late-stage drug development 
projects and time to discontinuation in Model 6 (p < 0.001) supports H1a. However, the significant 
negative association between these two variables in Model 7 (p < 0.10) rejects H1b. Thus, scientific teams 
belonging to firms with larger portfolios of late-stage drug development projects seem to spend less time on 
early-stage discovery projects, irrespective of the size of the team. Perhaps the scientific teams assume that 
the gain from working on the larger portfolio of late-stage projects has greater potential payoffs, and 
thereby decide not to persevere on the early-stage drug discovery projects. 
-------------------- Insert Table 4 Here --------------------
Based on Models 4 and 5 (Table 3), we observe that the linear and squared terms of the drug’s 
emergence level have a significant positive and negative association, respectively, with time to 
discontinuation (both p < 0.001). This supports H2; the drug emergence level has an inverted U-shaped 
relationship with respect to time to discontinuation. 
H3a and H3b posit that the effect of a firm’s risk-aversion level on a drug discovery project’s time 
to discontinuation is contingent on the drug’s emergence level. We posited a positive relationship between 
firm risk-aversion level and time to discontinuation for early-stage drug discovery projects of low 
emergence level and a negative relationship for late-stage drug development projects of high emergence 
level. As the relationship between this risk-aversion variable and drug time to discontinuation is expected 
to reverse directions based on the emergent nature of the early-stage drug discovery projects, we again 
conduct a split sample analysis to test our hypotheses. We use the median value of the emergence levels to 
split the sample into two groups (those above and below that median value) and we then examine whether 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
the influence of firms’ risk-aversion levels on time to discontinuation differs across the two groups. Model 
8 (Table 5) presents the results for the group with high drug-emergence levels (> median value), while 
Model 9 (Table 5) focuses on the group with low drug-emergence levels (≤ median value). 
The significant positive association between count deals and time to discontinuation (p < 0.001), 
and the significant negative association between total number of drugs under discovery & development and 
time to discontinuation (p < 0.01) in Model 9 support H3b. Recall that a large total number of drugs under 
discovery & development or a large ROA variance corresponds to a firm with a low risk-aversion level. In 
other words, for early-stage drug discovery projects of low emergence level, our results suggest that a firm 
with a high risk-aversion level should have a longer time to discontinuation than a firm with a low risk-
aversion level. However, the significant positive association between count deals and time to 
discontinuation (p < 0.001), and the significant negative association between total number of drugs under 
discovery & development and time to discontinuation (p < 0.001) in Model 8 lead us to reject H3a, 
suggesting that firms with high risk-aversion levels prolong the discontinuation of even the drugs with high 
emergence levels. ROA variance has a significant positive association with the time to discontinuation in 
Model 9 (p < 0.01), but no association in Model 8; thereby we reject both H3a and H3b. We do find 
support for H3b for two proxies of firm risk-aversion level—count deals and total number of drugs under 
discovery & development—although H3a is rejected for all three proxies of the risk variable. In essence, we 
find that the firms with high risk-aversion levels extend the time to discontinue their more-emergent, early-
stage, drug discovery projects.
-------------------- Insert Table 5 Here --------------------
Robustness Checks
We evaluate the robustness of our findings by first assessing the inverted U-shaped relationship between 
the early-stage drugs’ emergence level and time to discontinuation using the steps recommended by Lind 
and Mehum (2010); we examine whether the relationship increases for less-emergent drug discovery 
projects and decreases for more-emergent drug discovery projects. We then estimate the extreme point of 
the drugs’ emergence level, calculate the confidence interval using Fieller’s standard error and ensure that 
the emergence levels are within the data limits. Table 6 provides the results, which again show strong 
evidence to support the inverted U-shaped relationship between the drug emergence level and time to 
discontinuation and thus support H2.
-------------------- Insert Table 6 Here --------------------
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Second, we replicate the analysis by redefining the projects from the Discovery phase to Phase II as 
early-stage projects and categorizing the projects in Phase III to Registration phase as late-stage.10 The 
corresponding results, presented in Tables 7 to 10, coincide with those illustrated in Tables 3 to 6, which 
confirm the negative association between the number of late-stage drug development projects and the 
early-stage drugs’ time to discontinuation for all scientific teams (both large and small sized), and confirm 
the inverted U-shaped relationship between the drug emergence level and time to discontinuation. These 
results therefore remain consistent across the different definitions of early- and late-stage drug discovery 
and development. The tests for the influence of firm risk-aversion levels on time to discontinuation are also 
consistent across two proxies (count deals and total number of drugs under discovery & development). The 
only difference is in the association between ROA variance and time to discontinuation. While the 
association is insignificant for Model 8 (Table 5), it is positive and significant for Model 8 (Table 9). This 
suggests that firms with low risk-aversion levels (as proxied by a high ROA variance) tend to prolong the 
discontinuation of early-stage projects irrespective of their emergence levels. 
-------------------- Insert Tables 7, 8, 9 and 10 Here --------------------
Third, we use the number of late-stage drug development projects with similar indications (rather 
than similar technologies) as those of early-stage drug development projects for the independent variable, 
number of late-stage drug development projects ( ), and we then replicate the analysis. Tables 11 to 14 
𝑛
present the results of this analysis, which suggest that the key results remain consistent with those 
presented in Tables 3 to 6, thereby confirming the robustness of our findings. 
-------------------- Insert Tables 11, 12, 13 and 14 Here --------------------
7. Discussion and Conclusion
We modeled and empirically tested the time allocation decision between early-stage drug discovery 
projects and late-stage drug development projects. In accounting for both the learning benefits and success 
trap associated with exploiting late-stage drug development projects (Lavie et al., 2010; Levinthal and 
March, 1993), our formal model deduced the association between a firm’s number of late-stage drug 
development projects and the time to discontinuation of early-stage discovery projects to be contingent on 
the size of the scientific team engaged in the discovery process. Nevertheless, our empirical results suggest 
that, in reality, the time to discontinuation of early-stage drug discovery projects consistently declines when 
the firm has a relatively large portfolio of late-stage drug development projects, irrespective of the size of 
the scientific discovery team. Thus, our empirical findings illustrate the level of difficulty firms face in 
prudently allocating valuable resources such as a scientific team’s time across early-stage discovery and 
late-stage development activities aimed to maximize gains. Further, although studies on exploration and 
exploitation have assumed that the ideal allocation of time between the two types of projects is 50-50, 
10 The mathematical derivations are not altered by how we define a late stage: starting from Pre-registration or Phase 
III.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
wherein both activities receive equal attention (e.g., Gupta et al., 2006; He and Wong, 2004), our formal 
model (and empirical findings that support H1a) suggests that the literature has overstated the influence of 
the success trap and the need to strike a 50-50 balance between early- and late-stage projects. If a firm has a 
large portfolio of exploitable drugs at later stages of development and a relatively larger scientific team 
involved in discovery activities (early-stage development), the firm can achieve maximum gain by 
prudently targeting more resources for late-stage development over early-stage discovery. This supports the 
recent findings by Luger et al. (2018) that demonstrate the firm’s ability to dynamically maintain an 
exploration-exploitation balance based on internal and external contingencies (e.g., firm strategy and 
whether incremental or discontinuous changes characterize the industry). 
Second, we show that the emergence level of the early-stage drug plays an important role in the 
time allocation decision for drug discovery projects. When early-stage drug discovery projects have either 
low- or high-emergence levels, they will be discontinued earlier than projects with moderate emergence 
levels. Based on our analytical results, scientific teams should persist in early-stage, new drug discoveries 
simultaneously with a moderate number of competing firms; in fact, our data suggest that they often do this 
already (thus they support H2). In contrast, early-stage drug discovery projects in a disease/condition 
category that is highly congested or has not yet attracted much attention from other firms tend to be 
discontinued sooner. Our findings recommend that scientific teams should persist longer in technological 
“white spaces” that provide learning spillover benefits attained by observing other firms as they try to crack 
into that space (Thornton and Thompson, 2001). Furthermore, these findings suggest that firms should not 
only strive to allocate the right amount of their scientific team’s time between early- and late-stage projects, 
but also choose the right kind of innovative projects (e.g., those with a moderate level of emergence) to 
achieve the best risk-return tradeoffs (Criscuolo et al., 2017). 
Finally, our empirical results show mixed findings for the impact of the firm’s risk-aversion level 
on the time to discontinuation of early-stage drug discovery projects. Subramanian and Van de Vrande 
(2019) found that firms with greater number of interorganizational collaborations are more likely to 
escalate their commitment to new drug discovery and development projects, and therefore extend the time 
to discontinuation of such projects. Similarly, we found that firms that work on a larger portfolio of 
alternative drug discovery and development projects are able to overcome escalation of commitment, as 
these firms have multiple projects competing for limited resources. Our research, which has found a 
significant positive association between count deals and time to discontinuation, and a significant negative 
association between the total number of drugs under discovery & development and time to discontinuation 
(Model 5, Table 3), provides further empirical evidence that supports Subramanian and Van de Vrande’s 
(2019) findings. 
The abovementioned inferences provide a fitting explanation for the mixed findings for H3. These 
findings provide justification for why firms with high risk-aversion levels—assessed as those that engage in 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
a higher number of collaborative deals and have a smaller portfolio of drug discovery and development 
projects—tend to have longer times to discontinuation. In fact, our results go one step further in showing 
that Subramanian and Van de Vrande’s (2019) findings hold true for various types of drug development 
projects, irrespective of their emergence levels. Taken together, our findings suggest that firms with high 
risk-aversion levels persevere longer on drug discovery projects, even if these projects are highly uncertain. 
Since firms’ stock prices are shown to plummet significantly following the discontinuation of drug 
discovery projects (Ahmed et al., 2002), perhaps firms with high risk-aversion levels assume that the 
potential costs of discontinuing an exploratory project outweigh even the uncertain nature of highly 
emergent exploratory projects, so they delay discontinuing the project. Our finding that firms with high 
risk-aversion levels tend to prolong the discontinuation of both less- and more-emergent drug discovery 
projects also illustrates the challenges faced by biopharma scientific teams in achieving an exploration-
exploitation balance. Because prolonging the discontinuation of drug development projects with high 
emergence levels can result in wasted resources, firms entering into collaborative deals with other firms in 
pursuit of new drug discoveries would benefit from revising their stage-gate models for timely project 
termination. 
The positive association between ROA variance and time to discontinuation for low emergence 
level drugs could mean that when a firm’s income stream is unpredictable, the firm tends to persist longer 
in new drug discovery initiatives in hopes of succeeding and securing a steady income. The explanation is 
also supported by the significant positive association between ROA variance and time to discontinuation in 
Model 5 (Table 3). This line of reasoning is consistent with studies related to the behavioral theory of 
firms, which demonstrates that firms undertake calculated risks to counter performance shortfalls 
(Bromiley, 1991; Singh, 1986). When firms work on highly emergent drugs, the high uncertainty 
associated with the project provides no assurance of achieving a steady income; therefore, these firms lack 
incentive to persist on such projects. Consequently, we do not find time to discontinuation to be influenced 
by ROA variance for firms investigating highly emergent drugs. 
Taken together, the results of our study provide important contributions to the literature regarding 
the balancing act between early stage, exploratory innovation activities and later-stage, exploitative 
activities (e.g., Cao et al., 2009; Chandrasekaran et al., 2012, 2015; He and Wong, 2004; Kortmann et al., 
2014; Menor et al., 2002; Rothaermel and Deeds, 2004). Our contributions to this body of research are 
threefold. First, the literature on exploration and exploitation has discussed the temporal aspects only from 
the perspective of short-term versus long-term gains (Kim et al., 2019). We advance this stream of research 
by explicitly addressing time allocation decision across early-stage versus late-stage projects that generate 
maximum gain for an organization. Second, most existing studies have dealt with balancing exploration 
and exploitation across structurally distinct units (e.g., innovation versus marketing), wherein balance 
warrants considering the allocation of resources spanning different functional units (Gibson and 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Birkinshaw, 2004). To the best of our knowledge, our research is among the first to dissect the different 
pre-commercialization stages of new product discovery and development, and discuss the tradeoffs in the 
time spent by the same resource (scientific team) across two competing activities. Third, in modeling and 
testing the time allocation decision for exploratory early-stage and exploitative late-stage projects, our 
findings suggest that time to allocate to early-stage discovery is contingent on project- and firm-level 
characteristics. Thus, we provide empirical evidence in support of the contingency approach to balancing 
exploration and exploitation (Luger et al., 2018). 
The time-to-discontinuation decision is essentially aimed at strategizing discovery and 
development so as to maintain an effective and efficient drug portfolio. In demonstrating how micro level 
decisions such as time allocation across early- and late-stage projects can impact firms in maintaining 
exploration-exploitation balance, we also add to the growing body of discourse on innovation portfolios 
(Klingebiel and Rammer, 2014; Nagji and Bansi, 2012). Developing a more objective approach to 
allocating time for early-stage discovery activities that considers a firm’s risk-aversion level can help refine 
the drug development process, which is currently undergoing tremendous stress and transformation, 
especially due to automation. 
Limitations and Future Research
We adopted a time allocation model because our story is about how scientific teams in biopharma firms 
allocate their time to early-stage drug discovery projects, beyond which the projects should be discontinued 
to free up time for late-stage drug development projects. A time allocation model also nicely fits the 
exploration-exploitation balance story to which this work contributes. Furthermore, our model includes 
both project- and firm-specific factors, while factoring in the tradeoff between modeling sophistication and 
data availability in selecting our modeling approach. Thus, we opted for an elegantly simple model that 
could capture key elements and tradeoffs as suggested by relevant literatures without going beyond the data 
available to us. Based on this, future work could consider an optimal-stopping approach to further refine 
our analytical findings, albeit most likely with the help of numerical analysis. For instance, an optimal-
stopping model could more explicitly capture the longitudinal and dynamic nature of the decision to 
discontinue an early-stage drug discovery project based on the project’s failure chances, and thus balance 
the risk to continue the project against the risk to discontinue it, which could be impacted by the emergent 
nature of the discovery activity and the number of late-stage projects that the firm has in development. 
Moreover, decisions concerning early- and late-stage projects in a biopharma firm’s pipeline may 
be influenced by firm-specific strategies. For instance, some firms may prefer to continue with risky, 
underperforming early-stage drug discoveries, not for R&D productivity, but to mislead the competitors. 
Firms might also engage in certain kinds of drug discovery projects to project themselves to be at the 
forefront of innovation. Such alternative explanations can rationalize our empirical finding that risk-averse 
firms extend the time to discontinuation of even highly emergent drug discovery projects. While this 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
alternative explanation does not challenge the analytical findings of our study, it could suggest that the lack 
of empirical support for H3a may not necessarily mean that firms face practical challenges in striking a 
balance across early- and late-stage drug discovery and development projects. Inclusion of variables that 
account for firms’ strategic choices is required to fully decipher the mechanism. Also, the economic, social, 
political, and legal conditions in which a firm operates could impact the munificence of the environment, 
thereby influencing the number of early- and late-stage projects in the firm’s pipeline. We include a host of 
variables in our estimation models that potentially capture some facets of these factors. We include a 
discontinuation year dummy variable that might capture some aspects of the social economic factors that 
favors certain indications in a specific time period, and we not only include indication specific control 
variables, but also narrowly focus on late-stage drug development projects that address the same indication 
as that of the discontinued project. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that not all of the confounding aspects 
are accounted for in our research and hence potential endogeneity issues remain. 
Firms in biopharma industry undergo several mergers and acquisitions (M&As). Some M&As are 
targeted at complementing the drug development process, whereas others are aimed at buying innovative 
competitors to deliberately shut them down. Thus, unobserved factors such as market attractiveness and 
threat of rivalry could have impacted our research sample and results. While the drug emergence level 
variable used in our research includes some aspects of anticipated competition,11 it does not fully capture 
the competitive dynamics prevailing in the industry, thus bringing another potential concern regarding 
endogeneity. 
Drug discovery and development can result in several kinds of organizational returns. Since our 
research deals with scientific teams in the biopharma industry, it primarily focuses on the learning benefits 
that these teams bring to an organization, rather than more tangible assets such as intellectual property, that 
add to the firm’s structural capital. However, a scientific team can engage in and benefit from various types 
of learning such as explorative, experimental, experiential and reflective learning (Kolb, 1984), all well 
documented in the literature. Our model incorporates explorative, experimental, experiential and reflective 
learning attained by the scientific team when engaging in early-stage discovery or late-stage development 
projects. Explorative, experimental and experiential learning typically occur during new drug discovery and 
development processes, while reflective learning can take place both during and after these processes have 
concluded, which would suggest some potential positive residual value from the drug project. Nevertheless, 
we chose not to include aspects of reflective learning attained by the scientific team at a later point in time 
(e.g., after the completion of the focal project and when the team reflects on previously completed 
projects), because reflective learning cannot be assumed as a given since many firms fail to allot time and 
space for their scientific teams to engage in such reflective learning (Shepherd et al., 2014). Future research 
11 We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
that considers an optimal-stopping approach could possibly incorporate reflective learning benefits since 
this approach can more readily capture the longitudinal and dynamic nature of the decision-making process. 
With R&D efficiency declining in the biopharma industry (Scannell et al., 2012; Schuhmacher et 
al., 2016), the question of how to allocate scarce resources is more compelling. Exploiting late-stage drugs 
is sure to improve firms’ R&D productivity. However, equally important is embarking on new drug 
discoveries that could potentially deliver huge financial (and societal) benefits. While our research findings 
encourage firms to strike a well-considered balance between discovery and development endeavors, further 
research could consider policies (e.g., government subsidies or tax benefits) that encourage firms to invest 
in early-stage new drug development and investigate their effects on the biopharma drug discovery process, 
especially discovery and development time allocation decisions. 
The biopharma industry experiences tremendous change, particularly related to the entry of 
advanced automation and robotics into drug discovery and development, and the increasing role of artificial 
intelligence. These developments rapidly change the industry’s competitive landscape. For instance, new 
firms have emerged that focus only on exploitation of previously approved drugs (e.g., drug repositioning). 
Such industry transformations bring interesting possibilities for future research. By collaborating with these 
drug repositioning firms, biopharma firms can further exploit their existing portfolios of approved drugs. 
This not only leads to new revenue-generating opportunities, it also warrants focused attention on the 
associated challenges in finding the right balance between exploration and exploitation. Given the benefits 
of extending discovery and development initiatives beyond firm boundaries (Hoang and Rothaermel, 2010; 
Lavie and Rosenkopf, 2006), along with a trend towards more open innovation (Schuhmacher et al., 2016; 
Macher and Boerner, 2012), such collaborations, expected to increase in the near future, will intensify the 
influence of key firm and drug characteristics on the time allocation decision for discovery and 
development activities. 
Practical Implications
The findings of our study also bear important implications for managers and policymakers. For managers, 
our findings underscore the importance of having a solid portfolio management system in place that 
facilitates timely discontinuation of projects. For instance, a thorough analysis of AstraZeneca’s R&D 
strategy in search of improving R&D productivity in 2011, revealed that although AstraZeneca’s success 
rates in Phase I were at par with industry benchmarks, the success rates for Phases II and III were 
significantly lower (Cook et al., 2014). According to Cook et al. (2014), “AstraZeneca was allowing more 
projects to enter later-stage development, only to have them subsequently fail” (p. 421). Following this 
analysis, AstraZeneca undertook a major revision of their R&D strategy, incorporating a framework that 
facilitates a more inclusive understanding of the risks associated with the drug under development. Our 
findings highlight the importance of including portfolio level as well as drug level characteristics into such 
frameworks.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Although most drugs are discontinued for safety or efficacy reasons, strategic reasons for 
discontinuation should not be overlooked. Strategic reasons could be the result of a global marketing 
strategy, such as the decision to discontinue the development of Lescol at Novartis in 2000 (Lièvre et al., 
2001). However, strategic reasons may also refer to the competitive environment, as captured by the 
concept of emergence in our study. As indicated by our results, early-stage discovery projects are 
discontinued sooner when the drug has a low level of emergence—that is, when many other firms are 
already working on the same disease/category. For managers, it means a continuous assessment of the 
competitive environment is warranted. 
Our results show that biopharma firms tend to discontinue emergent drug discovery initiatives 
sooner rather than later. If firms only pursue “me too” drugs as Agarwal et al. (2013) note, attention will be 
diverted from rare-disease drug development. Therefore, governments should develop mechanisms to 
incentivize firms to persist in the development of high-risk emergent drugs, especially those that target rare 
diseases and conditions. An example is the National Institutes of Health (NIH) program launched in 2010 
aimed to accelerate the discovery of rare-disease drugs, known as orphan drugs (Boat, 2010). Because rare 
diseases increasingly require emerging technologies to help find cures (Ornskov, 2018), more policy 
initiatives are required to address the slow pace of progress on certain rare diseases. 
For maximum gains, firms with larger scientific discovery teams and substantially large drug 
portfolios at advanced development stages could benefit by focusing more resources on exploiting these 
late-stage drugs. While this approach might benefit the firm, for strategic reasons, firms with large 
portfolios of late-stage drug projects could direct their scientific teams to pursue only early-stage new-drug 
discovery. This strategic move could also benefit firms with teams of top-notch scientists, because their 
expertise can be better leveraged to develop breakthrough drugs when they focus more on discovery than 
late-stage development. Therefore, policymakers should provide incentives and appropriability mechanisms 
for such firms to continue leveraging their strengths by engaging simultaneously in many discovery 
projects, while openly sharing selected drug discovery data, thereby providing opportunities for other firms 
interested in exploiting the data and advancing the drug development (Pushpakom et al., 2018). The 
initiative by the NIH to further develop its clinical trials’ design and set new data-sharing rules (Kaiser, 
2016) exemplifies such collaborative incentives. NIH also developed a program together with Pfizer, 
AstraZeneca and Eli Lilly that matches university researchers with a selection of biopharma industry 
compounds to help scientists develop new treatments (Allison, 2012). Such initiatives will not only help 
biopharma firms allocate their resources more effectively across discovery and development activities by 
extending these initiatives beyond firm boundaries, but also help firms to combine the expertise and efforts 
across the entire industry to help find drugs to cure diseases and vaccines to stop pandemics such as 
COVID-19, which has plagued the global community in 2020. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Acknowledgment—We are grateful to the Department Editor, Dr. Edward Anderson for his continued 
guidance and support throughout the review process, and to the Senior Editor and three Reviewers for 
pushing us in the right direction with their constructive and highly valuable comments. We are also grateful 
to the National University of Singapore for support from a research grant (R-535-000-008-112). Moreover, 
we are thankful to research seminar participants at Queensland University of Technology, University of 
Queensland, Wilfrid Laurier University, University of Nottingham China, and Ulsan National Institute of 
Science and Technology for their constructive comments.
References 
Agarwal, P., P. Sanseau, L.R. Cardon. 2013. Novelty in the target landscape of the pharmaceutical 
industry. Nature Reviews 12 575–576. 
Ahmed, P., J. Gardella, S. Nanda. 2002. Wealth effect of drug withdrawals on firms and their competitors. 
Financial Management 31(3) 21–41. 
Ahuja, G. 2000. The duality of collaboration: Inducements and opportunities in the formation of interfirm 
linkages. Strategic Management Journal 21(3) 317–343.
Ahuja, G., R. Katila. 2004. Where do resources come from? The role of idiosyncratic situations. Strategic 
Management Journal 25(89) 887–907.
Ahuja, G., C.M. Lampert. 2001. Entrepreneurship in the large corporation: A longitudinal study of how 
established firms create breakthrough inventions. Strategic Management Journal 22(6–7) 521–543.
Allison, M. 2012. NCATS launches drug repurposing program. Nature Biotechnology 30 571–572. 
Arora, A., A. Gambardella, L. Magazzini, F. Pammolli. 2009. A breath of fresh air? Firm type, scale, 
scope, and selection effects in drug development. Management Science 55(10) 1638–1653. 
Bains, W. 2004. Failure rates in drug discovery and development: Will we ever get any better? Drug 
Discovery World 5(4) 9-18.
Benner, M.J., M.L. Tushman. 2003. Exploitation, exploration, and process management: The productivity 
dilemma revisited. Academy of Management Review 28(2) 238–256.
Benson, C.L., C.L. Magee. 2013. A hybrid keyword and patent class methodology for selecting relevant 
sets of patents for a technological field. Scientometrics 96(1) 69–82.
Bespalov, A., T. Steckler, B. Altevogt, E. Koustova, P. Skolnick, et al. 2016. Failed trials for central 
nervous system disorders do not necessarily invalidate preclinical models and drug targets. Nature 
Reviews Drug Discovery 15(7) 516–516.
Boat, T. 2010. Rare diseases and orphan products: Accelerating research and development. The National 
Academies of Sciences Engineering Medicine. http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2010/Rare-
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Diseases-and-Orphan-Products-Accelerating-Research-and-Development/ReportBrief.aspx 
Retrieved 
November 27, 2018.
Brockner, J. 2011. The escalation of commitment to a failing course of action: Toward theoretical progress. 
Academy of Management Review 17(1) 39–61.
Bromiley, P. 1991. Testing a causal model of corporate risk taking and performance. Academy of 
Management Journal 34(1) 37-59.
Burmeister-Lamp, K., M. Lévesque, C. Schade. 2012. Are entrepreneurs influenced by risk attitude, 
regulatory focus or both? An experiment on entrepreneurs’ time allocation. Journal of Business 
Venturing 27(4) 456–476.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen, A.S. Kritikos. 2009. Risk attitudes of nascent entrepreneurs-new evidence from 
an experimentally validated survey. Small Business Economics 32(2) 153–167.
Cao, Q., E. Gedajlovic, H. Zhang. 2009. Unpacking organizational ambidexterity: Dimensions, 
contingencies, and synergistic effects. Organization Science 20(4) 781–796.
Casper, S. 2000. Institutional adaptiveness, technology policy, and the diffusion of new business models: 
The case of German biotechnology. Organization Studies 21(5) 887–914.
Chandrasekaran, A., K. Linderman, R. Schroeder. 2012. Antecedents to ambidexterity competency in high 
technology organizations. Journal of Operations Management 30(1–2) 134–151.
Chandrasekaran, A., K. Linderman, R. Schroeder. 2015. The role of project and organizational context in 
managing high‐tech R&D projects. Production and Operations Management 24(4) 560–586.
Chang, M., M. Chang, J.Z. Reed, D. Milward, J.J. Xu, et al. 2016. Developing timely insights into 
comparative effectiveness research with a text-mining pipeline. Drug Discovery Today 20(3), 473–480.
Chapman, C., S. Ward. 1996. Project risk management: Processes, techniques, and insights. John Wiley.
Cohen, W.M., D.A. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 35 128-152.
Cook, D., D. Brown, R. Alexander, R. March, P. Morgan, et al. 2014. Lessons learned from the fate of 
AstraZeneca’s drug pipeline: A five-dimensional framework. Nature Review Drug Discovery 13(6) 
419-431.
Criscuolo, P., L. Dehlander, T. Grohsjean, A. Salter. 2017. Evaluating novelty: The role of panels in the 
selection of R&D projects. Academy of Management Journal 60(2) 433–460.
David, E., T. Tramontin, R. Zemmel. 2010. Pharma R&D compendium. McKinsey Report. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/pharma 
and 
medical 
products/pmp new/pdfs/773771 invention reinvented.ashx Retrieved July 15, 2019.
Deloitte Report, 2018. Unlocking R&D productivity. Measuring the return from pharmaceutical 
innovation. 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/life-sciences-health-
care/deloitte-uk-measuring-return-on-pharma-innovation-report-2018.pdf Retrieved August 16 2019.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Dimasi, J.A., L. Feldman, A. Seckler, A. Wilson. 2010. Trends in risks associated with new drug 
development: Success rates for investigational drugs. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 87(3) 
272–277.
Ding, M., J. Eliashberg. 2002. Structuring the new product development pipeline. Management Science 
48(3) 343–363. 
Elston, J.A., D.B. Audretsch. 2011. Financing the entrepreneurial decision: An empirical approach using 
experimental data on risk attitudes. Small Business Economics 36(2) 209–222.
Farrell, 
S. 
2008. 
Risk-averse 
investors 
threaten 
drug 
development. 
Independent. 
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/risk-averse-investors-threaten-drug-development-
847921.html Retrieved November 27, 2018.
Fleming, L. 2001. Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management Science 47(1) 117–132.
Freund, R. 1956. The introduction of risk into a programming model. Econometrica 21 253–263. 
Gaba, V., J. Joseph. 2013. Corporate structure and performance feedback: Aspirations and adaptation in M-
form firms. Organization Science 24 1102-1119.
Gibson, C.B., J. Birkinshaw. 2004. The antecedents, consequences, and mediating role of organizational 
ambidexterity. Academy of Management Journal 47(2) 209-226.
Girotra, K., C. Terwiesch, K.T. Ulrich. 2007. Valuing R&D projects in a portfolio: Evidence from the 
pharmaceutical industry. Management Science 53(9) 1452–1466.
Gogos, J. 2018. New uses for old medication. Scientific American. https://blogs.scientificamerican. 
com/observations/new-uses-for-old-medications/ Retrieved November 27 2018.
Gravelle, H., R. Rees. 1992. Microeconomics, 2nd ed. Longman, New York, NY.
Green, S.G., M.A. Welsh, G.E. Dehler. 2003. Advocacy, performance, and threshold influences on 
decisions to terminate new product development. Academy of Management Journal 46 419–434.
Greve, H.R. 2007. Exploration and exploitation in product innovation. Industrial and Corporate Change 
16(5) 945-975.
Greve, H.R. 2003. A behavioral theory of R&D expenditures and innovations: Evidence from shipbuilding. 
Academy of Management Journal 46(6) 685-702.
Gupta, A.K., K.G. Smith, C.E. Shalley. 2006. The interplay between exploration and exploitation. Academy 
of Management Journal 49(4) 693–706.
Harrison, R.K. 2016. Phase II and phase III failures: 2013-2015. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 15(12) 
817–818.
He, Z.-L., P.-K. Wong. 2004. Exploration vs. Exploitation: An empirical test of the ambidexterity 
hypothesis. Organization Science 15(4) 481–494.
Hoang, H., F.T. Rothaermel. 2010. Leveraging internal and external experience: Exploration, exploitation, 
and R&D Project performance. Strategic Management Journal 31(7) 734–758.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Hoffman, W.H. 2007. Strategies for managing a portfolio of alliances. Strategic Management Journal 
28(8) 827-856.
Jansen, J.J.P., F.A.J. Van Den Bosch, H.W. Volberda. 2006. Exploratory innovation, exploitative 
innovation, and performance: Effects of organizational antecedents and environmental moderators. 
Management Science 52(11) 1661–1674.
Kaiser, J. 2016. NIH aims to beef up clinical trial design as part of new data sharing rules. Science. 
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/09/nih-aims-beef-clinical-trial-design-part-new-data-sharing-
rules Retrieved November 27 2018.
Katila, R., G. Ahuja. 2002. Something old, something new: A longitudinal study of search behavior and 
new product introduction. Academy of Management Journal 45(6) 1183–1194.
Kim. A, P. Bansal, H. Haugh. 2019. No time like the present: How a present time perspective can foster 
sustainable development. Academy of Management Journal 62(2) 607-634.
Klingebiel, R., C. Rammer. 2014. Resource allocation strategy for innovation portfolio management. 
Strategic Management Journal 35(2) 246-268. 
Kolb, D.A. 1984. Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development, Vol. 1. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Kortmann, S., C. Gelhard, C. Zimmermann, F.T. Piller. 2014. Linking strategic flexibility and operational 
efficiency: The mediating role of ambidextrous operational capabilities. Journal of Operations 
Management 32(7–8) 475–490.
LaMattina, J. 2013. BCG weighs in on first-in-class vs. best-in-class drugs. How valuable is their advice? 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnlamattina/2013/06/17/bcg-weighs-in-on-first-in-class-vs-best-in-
class-drugs-how-valuable-is-their-advice/#259de8542a18 Retrieved July 7, 2019.
Lavie, D., L. Rosenkopf. 2006. Balancing exploration and exploitation in alliance formation. Academy of 
Management Journal 49(4) 797–818.
Lavie, D., U. Stettner, M.L. Tushman. 2010. Exploration and exploitation within and across organizations. 
Academy of Management Annals 4 109–155.
Lévesque, M., Y.R. Choi, J. Hsuan. 2019. Growth through Franchises in Knowledge-Intensive Industries: 
Interplay of Routine Program and Expansion Mode. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 
66(4) 496–513.
Lévesque, M., M. Minniti. 2006. The Effect of Aging on Entrepreneurial Behavior. Journal of Business 
Venturing 21(2) 177–194.
Lévesque, M., C. Schade. 2005. Intuitive optimizing: Experimental findings on time allocation decisions 
with newly formed ventures. Journal of Business Venturing 20(3) 313–342.
Levinthal, D.A., J.G. March. 1993. The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal 14 95-112.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Lièvre, M., J. Ménard, E. Bruckert, J. Cogneau, F. Delahaye, et al. 2001. Premature discontinuation of 
clinical trial for reasons not related to efficacy, safety, or feasibility. British Medical Journal 322(7286) 
603-605. 
Lind, J.T., H. Mehlum. 2010. With or without u? The appropriate test for a U-shaped relationship. Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 72(1) 109–118.
Loch, C.H., K. Bode‐Greuel. 2001. Evaluating growth options as sources of value for pharmaceutical 
research projects. R&D Management 31(2) 231–248.
Luger, J., S. Raisch, M. Schimmer. 2018. Dynamic balancing of exploration and exploitation: The 
contingent benefits of ambidexterity. Organization Science 29(3) 449–470.
Macher, J.T., C. Boerner. 2012. Technological development at the boundaries of the firm: A knowledge-
based examination in drug development. Strategic Management Journal 33(9) 1016–1036.
Magee, C.L., S. Basnet, J.L. Funk, C.L. Benson. 2016. Quantitative empirical trends in technical 
performance. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 104 237–246.
March, J.G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science 2(1) 71–
87.
McKinsey & Co. 2019. Bias busters: Knowing when to kill a project. https://www.mckinsey.com/ 
business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/bias-busters-knowing-when-to-kill-a-
project?cid=other-eml-alt-mcq-mck&hlkid=b28b074b9d664ef79fbc09b4ed09285c&hctky=263 
7242&hdpid=57c63c6e-c066-4f3a-a8c9-3c929ab4cf5d Retrieved August 2, 2019.
Menor, L.J., M.V. Tatikonda, S.E. Sampson. 2002. New service development: Areas for exploitation and 
exploration. Journal of Operations Management 20(2) 135–157.
Miller, K.D., W.R. Chen. 2004. Variable organizational risk preferences: Tests of the March-Shapira 
model. Academy of Management Journal 47(1) 105-115. 
Nagji, B., G. Tuff. 2012. Managing your innovation portfolio. Harvard Business Review, 90(5). 
https://hbr.org/2012/05/managing-your-innovation-portfolio Retrieved June 20, 2020.
Neely, A., O. Benedettini, I. Visnjic. 2011. The servitization of manufacturing: Further evidence. 
Proceedings of the European Operations Management Association Conference. Cambridge, UK.
Nesta, L., P.P. Saviotti. 2006. Firm knowledge and market value in biotechnology. Industrial and 
Corporate Change 15(4) 625–652.
Ornskov, F., 2018. 350 million people suffer from rare diseases. Here is how tech can help. World 
Economic 
Forum. 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/350-million-people-suffer-from-rare-
diseases-heres-how-tech-can-help/ Retrieved November 27, 2018.
Peck, R.W., D.W. Lendrem, I. Grant, B.C. Lendrem, J.D. Isaacs. 2015. Why is it hard to terminate failing 
projects in pharmaceutical R&D? Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 14 663–664. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Pushpakom, S., F. Iorio, P.A. Eyers, K.J. Escott, S. Hopper, et al. 2018. Drug repurposing: Progress, 
challenges and recommendations. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 18 41–58. 
Ravasi, D., C. Turati. 2005. Exploring entrepreneurial learning: A comparative study of technology 
development projects. Journal of Business Venturing 20(1) 137–164. 
Raisch, S., J. Birkinshaw. 2008. Organizational ambidexterity: Antecedents, outcomes, and moderators. 
Journal of Management 34(3) 375–409.
Raisch, S., J. Birkinshaw, G. Probst, M.L. Tushman. 2009. Organizational ambidexterity: Balancing 
exploitation and exploration for sustained performance. Organization Science 20(4) 685–695.
Rothaermel, F.T., D.L. Deeds. 2004. Exploration and exploitation alliances in biotechnology: A system of 
new product development. Strategic Management Journal 25(3) 201-221.
Scannell, J.W., A. Blanckley, H. Boldon, B. Warrington. 2012. Diagnosing the decline in pharmaceutical 
R&D efficiency. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 11(3) 191–200.
Schmidt, J.B., R.J. Calantone. 2002. Escalation of commitment during new product development. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science 30 30–103.
Schuhmacher, A., O. Gassmann, M. Hinder. 2016. Changing R&D models in research-based 
pharmaceutical companies. Journal of Translational Medicine 14(1) 105.
Schulze, U., M. Ringel. 2013. What matters most in commercial success: first-in-class or best-in-class? 
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 12(6) 419–420.
Sharpe, W.F. 1991. Capital asset prices with and without negative holdings. The Journal of Finance 46(2) 
489–509.
Sharpe, P., T. Keelin. 1998. How SmithKline Beecham makes better resource-allocation decisions. 
Harvard Business Review 76(2) 45-57.
Shepherd, D.A., H. Patzelt, T.A. Williams, D. Warnecke. 2014. How does project termination impact 
project team members? Rapid termination, “Creeping Death”, and learning from failure. Journal of 
Management Studies 51(4) 513–546.
Shi, Y., J.C. Guan. 2016. Small-world network effects on innovation: evidences from nanotechnology 
patenting. Journal of Nanoparticle Research 18(11). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-016-3637-1 
Retrieved November 20, 2019.
Simonds. D. 2018. A Pharmaceutical firm bets big on a cancer drug. The Economist. https://www. 
economist.com/business/2018/02/22/a-pharmaceutical-firm-bets-big-on-a-cancer-drug 
Retrieved 
November 27, 2018.
Singh, J. 1986. Performance, slack, and risk taking in organizational decision making. Academy of 
Management Journal 29(3) 562-585.
Sinha, K.K., E.J. Kohnke. 2009. Health care supply chain design: Toward linking the development and 
delivery of care globally. Decision Sciences 40(2) 197–212.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Skrepnek, G.H., J.J. Sarnowski. 2007. Decision-making associated with drug candidates in the 
biotechnology research and development (R&D) pipeline. Journal of Commercial Biotechnology 13(2) 
99–110.
Statman, M., J.F. Sepe. 2007. Project termination announcements and the market value of the firm. 
Financial Management 18(4) 74–81. 
Staw, B.M. 1981. The escalation of commitment to a course of action. Academy of Management Review 6 
577–587.
Subramanian, A.M., V. Van de Vrande. 2019. The role of intellectual capital in new product development: 
Can it become a liability? Journal of Operations Management 65(6) 517-535. 
Terry, M. 2019. Biogen loses $18B in value as it kills Aducanumab Alzheimer's program. 
https://www.biospace.com/article/biogen-and-eisai-abandon-alzheimer-s-trials-of-aducanumab/ 
Retrieved July 13, 2019.
Thomas, D.W., J. Burns, J. Audette, A. Carroll, C. Dow-Hygelund, M. Hay. 2015. Clinical Development 
success 
rates 
pharma 
intelligence 
2006 
- 
2015. 
BioMedTracker 
https://www.bio.org/ 
sites/default/files/Clinical%20Development%20Success%20Rates%202006-2015%20%20BIO,% 
20Biomedtracker,%20Amplion%202016.pdf Retrieved July 17, 2019.
Thornton, R.A., P. Thompson. 2001. Learning from experience and learning from others: an exploration of 
learning and spillovers in wartime shipbuilding. American Economic Review 91(5) 1350–1368.
Tufts University, Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development (CSDD), https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/5a9eb0c8e2ccd1158288d8dc/t/5aa6d6289140b7ba5768d034/1520883240185/october2016-
pr.pdf Retrieved September 11, 2019.
Tushman, M.L., C.A. O’Reilly. 1996. Ambidextrous organizations: Managing evolutionary and 
revolutionary change. California Management Review 38(4) 8–29.
Uotila, J., M. Maula, T. Keil, S.A. Zahra. 2009. Exploration, exploitation, and financial performance: 
Analysis of S&P 500 corporations. Strategic Management Journal 30(2) 221–231.
Van Arnum, P. 2010. Strategies for early-stage drug development. PharmTech. http://www.pharmtech. 
com/strategies-early-stage-drug-development Retrieved July 15, 2019.
Vasaikar, S., P. Bhatia, P.G. Bhatia, C.Y. Koon. 2016. Complementary approaches to existing target based 
discovery for identifying novel drug targets. Biomedicines 4 4–27. 
Weber, E.U., A.R. Blais, N.E. Betz. 2002. A domain-specific risk-attitude scale: Measuring risk 
perceptions and risk behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 15(4) 263–290.
Wiseman, R.M., P. Bromiley. 1996. Toward a model of risk in declining organizations: An empirical 
examination of risk, performance and decline. Organization Science 7(5) 524-543.
Zucker, L.G., M.R. Darby, J.S. Armstrong. 2002. Commercializing knowledge: University science, 
knowledge capture, and firm performance in biotechnology. Management Science 48(1) 138–153.
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 1. Key variables summary
Non-measured variables
Justification and interpretation
 = minimum time to 
𝜀
discontinuation (in number of 
successive months) of an 
early-stage drug discovery 
project
Since all focal projects have been selected to undergo discovery and development 
in the first place, the minimum time to discontinuation must exceed zero. 
Although this variable does not need to be measured for our purpose herein, its 
value can be estimated from our data by taking the smallest time to 
discontinuation among all drugs that have been discontinued.
 = time horizon (in number 
𝜏
of months) for a firm’s 
scientific team to build utility 
from learning from an early-
stage drug discovery project; 
this also corresponds to the 
project’s maximum time to 
discontinuation
Since all focal projects must reach an end, the scientific team’s time horizon for a 
given project must be finite.
Although this variable does not need to be measured for our purpose herein, its 
value can be estimated by considering the funding support a firm allocated to 
each project in its portfolio, which in turn determines the maximum duration for a 
given project.
Measured variables
Justification and interpretation
 = time to discontinuation 
𝑚
(in number of successive 
months) of an early-stage 
drug discovery project
This variable corresponds to the decision variable, for which we characterize its 
utility-maximizing value 
 to use as a benchmark for a drug’s time to 
𝑚∗
discontinuation to assess how this time should be steered (i.e., longer or shorter) 
under varying circumstances. 
Actual time to discontinuation of an early-stage drug discovery project.
 = emergence level of an 

early-stage drug discovery 
project
This variable qualifies whether a new drug discovery project corresponds to a 
drug that is first-in-kind drug (e.g., Merck’s Mevacor) or a follower drug (e.g., 
Pfizer’s Lipitor). 
A drug’s emergence level is captured using data on the number of other firms that 
engage in discovery of drugs of similar nature, because a drug is first-in-kind 
when only a few firms, if any, work on discovering and developing drugs of 
similar nature.
 = number of late-stage drug 
𝑛
development projects a firm 
has that use technologies 
similar to those of the early-
stage drug discovery project 
This variable captures the time allocation tradeoff faced by the scientific team, 
since once the team discontinues its early-stage drug discovery project, the team 
moves on to other comparatively risk-free exploitative activities. 
A scientific team possesses scientific expertise that is crucial for later stages of 
drug development, including Pre-registration, Registration, Phase IV clinical 
trials after FDA approval (or post-marketing surveillance trials or confirmatory 
trials), post clinical trials (where scientists publish the findings in peer-reviewed 
scientific journals), all of which correspond to comparatively risk-free 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
exploitative activities.
 = a firm’s risk-aversion 

level
Any firm’s decision pertaining to NPD initiatives entails risk.
Proxies for a firm’s risk-aversion level include the number of collaborative deals 
engaged by the firm for its early-stage drug discovery project, the variance of 
return on assets, and the total number of drugs under discovery and development 
by the firm in the year the focal early-stage drug discover project is discontinued; 
the first two proxies capture potential risks while the third one measures the 
actual risk encountered by the firm. 
Random variable
Justification and interpretation
 = risky learning outcome 
𝑋
from the scientific team 
working on an early-stage 
drug discovery project
Any outcome from NPD initiatives entails randomness and given that many 
natural phenomena follow a normal distribution, we use this distribution (mean 
equals without loss of generality, and variance equals 
).
0
𝜎2
As the scientific team spends more time on an early-stage drug discovery project, 
it may not increase its learning at a constant (i.e., non-random) rate because in 
explorative endeavors, learning might not always be embedded in organizational 
routines owing to, for instance, low team motivation. 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 2. Descriptive statistics and correlation
Variables
Mean
Std.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
Time to discontinuation
64.47
43.37
1
2
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects
9.36
20.30
-0.02
1
3
Size of the scientific team
4.38
3.92
0.03
0.11*
1
4
Emergence level
0.22
0.39
0.00
0.03
-0.01
1
5
Count deals
0.87
1.24
0.37*
-0.16*
-0.13*
-0.03
1
6
ROA variance
19.75
85.91
0.06*
-0.08*
-0.02
-0.02
0.09*
1
7
Total number of drugs under 
discovery & development
76.07
111.03
-0.06*
0.44*
 0.11*
0.02
-0.24*
-0.12*
1
8
R&D intensity
2.27
14.47
0.04
-0.06*
-0.06*
-0.00
0.09*
0.12*
-0.08*
1
9
Patent stock
1.09
0.41
0.13*
-0.01
0.02
0.02
0.09*
0.01
-0.03
0.11*
1
10
Patent family size
25.88
21.14
0.17*
0.11*
0.15*
-0.04
0.03
-0.02
0.13*
-0.06*
0.07*
1
11
Count indications
2.37
2.03
0.33*
0.05
0.02
0.03
0.23*
0.01
0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.14*
1
12
Count technologies
2.29
1.19
0.24*
0.15*
0.00
-0.01
0.24*
0.08*
-0.00
0.08*
0.10*
0.07*
0.09*
1
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
13
Count countries
2.10
1.91
0.30*
0.21*
0.08*
-0.01
0.20*
0.00
 0.10*
-0.01
0.03
0.23*
0.33*
0.24*
* p < 0.05
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6 report the results when explorative early stages were confined to Discovery — Phase 
III and exploitative late stages were confined to Pre-registration — Registration
Table 3. Negative binomial regression to test H2 (inverted U-shaped relationship between emergence level of 
the drug and time to discontinuation)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
 Variables 
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 1 
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects
-0.0056***
[0.0006]
-0.0054***
[0.0006]
-0.0052***
[0.0006]
-0.0026***
[0.0007]
Size of the scientific team
-0.0130***
[0.0038]
-0.0131***
[0.0038]
-0.0091**
[0.0036]
Emergence level (H2, +)
1.6417***
[0.3580] 
1.4377***
[0.3497]
[Emergence level]2 (H2, 
)
―
-1.5802***
[0.3576]
-1.3669***
[0.3482]
Count deals
0.0923***
[0.0165]
ROA variance
0.0004**
[0.0001]
Total number of drugs under discovery 
& development
-0.0005***
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
0.0019
[0.0016]
 0.0013
[0.0015]
-0.0011
[0.0015]
-0.0010
[0.0014]
 0.0002
[0.0013]
Patent stock
0.1147***
[0.0337]
0.1061***
[0.0330]
0.1096***
[0.0333]
0.1043***
[0.0322]
0.0834**
[0.0297]
Patent family size
0.0003
[0.0009]
0.0007
[0.0008]
0.0009
[0.0008]
0.0010
[0.0009]
0.0013†
[0.0008]
Count indication
0.0646***
[0.0069]
0.0653***
[0.0075]
0.0653***
[0.0074]
0.0652***
[0.0075]
0.0564***
[0.0071]
Count technologies
-0.0240
[0.0191]
-0.0216
[0.0191]
-0.0267
[0.0195]
-0.0323†
[0.0196]
-0.0595***
[0.0182]
Count countries
0.0084
0.0177†
0.0194†
0.0198†
0.0099
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
[0.0109]
[0.0106]
[0.0109]
[0.0107]
[0.0095]
Constant
-125.2206***
[12.4832]
-131.5880***
[11.9688]
-136.4411***
[11.9632]
-139.5808***
[11.9778]
-140.6327***
[11.0847]
No. of observations
1274
1274
1274
1274
1274
Log likelihood
-6352.41
-6339.27
-6336.47
-6330.80
-6311.16
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 4. Negative binomial regression to test H1 (relationship between number of late-stage drug development 
projects and time to discontinuation is contingent on the team size)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 6 
Size of the scientific team > 
Median
Model 7
Size of the scientific team ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects (H1)
-0.0032***
[0.0008] (H1a, 
)
―
-0.0024†
[0.0014] (H1b, +)
Emergence level
1.2155*
[0.5503]
1.5352**
[0.5045]
[Emergence level]2
-1.0519*
[0.5496]
-1.5457**
[0.4888]
Count deals
0.1411***
[0.0235]
0.0709***
[0.0213]
ROA variance
0.0001
[0.0002]
 0.0004**
[0.0001]
Total number of drugs under discovery & 
development
-0.0005**
[0.0001]
-0.0005***
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
 0.0033***
[0.0009]
-0.0005
[0.0014]
Patent stock
0.0896†
[0.0478]
0.0973**
[0.0386]
Patent family size
0.0002
[0.0010]
0.0029**
[0.0012]
Count indication
0.0540***
[0.0098]
0.0559***
[0.0089]
Count technologies
-0.0509*
[0.0249]
-0.0596**
[0.0240]
Count countries
0.0122
[0.0131]
0.0055
[0.0121]
Constant
-134.9216***
[15.7470]
-144.9142***
[14.3011]
No. of observations
611
665
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Log likelihood
-3013.2428
-3286.8362
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 5. Negative binomial regression to test H3 (relationship between risk-aversion level and time to 
discontinuation is contingent on the emergence level of the drug)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 8 
Level of Emergence > Median
Model 9
Level of Emergence ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug development 
projects
-0.0043***
[0.0009]
-0.0005
[0.0015]
Size of the scientific team
-0.0031
[0.0056]
-0.0129**
[0.0047]
Count deals (H3)
0.0913***
[0.0208] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0867***
[0.0244] (H3b, +)
ROA variance (H3)
0.0004
[0.0003] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0003**
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
Total number of drugs under 
discovery & development (H3)
-0.0008***
[0.0001] (H3a, 
)
―
-0.0004**
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
R&D intensity
-0.0015†
[0.0008]
-0.0026***
[0.0007]
Patent stock
0.0669†
[0.0377]
0.1011†
[0.0554]
Patent family size
0.0011
[0.0011]
0.0018
[0.0011]
Count indication
0.0500***
[0.0117]
0.0598***
[0.0093]
Count technologies
-0.0476**
[0.0235]
-0.0789***
[0.0236]
Count countries
0.0109
[0.0152]
0.0139
[0.0119]
Constant
-144.1159***
[16.5562]
-136.113***
[14.7137]
No. of observations
650
624
Log likelihood
-3251.62
-3055.53
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 6. Robust test for the inverted U-shaped (H2)
Lower bound
Upper bound
Slope
1.4648 
-1.3094 
t-value
4.1943 
-3.7109
p value
< 0.001
< 0.001
Overall significance
t-value = 3.71
p-value < 0.001
Extreme point
0.5280
Confidence interval
[0.4936 0.5624]
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Tables 7, 8, 9 and 10 report the results when explorative early stages were confined to Discovery — 
Phase II and exploitative late stages were confined to Phase III — Registration
Table 7. Negative binomial regression to test H2 (inverted U-shaped relationship between emergence level of 
the drug and time to discontinuation)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 1 
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects
-0.0041***
[0.0006]
-0.0040***
[0.0006]
-0.0039***
[0.0006]
-0.0022***
[0.0006]
Size of the scientific team
-0.0129**
[0.0041]
-0.0130***
[0.0041]
-0.0103**
[0.0039]
Emergence level (H2, +)
1.3994***
[0.3930]
1.2189**
[0.3909]
[Emergence level]2 (H2, 
)
―
-1.3783***
[0.3969]
-1.1879**
[0.3909]
Count deals
0.0981***
[0.0175]
ROA variance
0.0004**
[0.0001]
Total number of drugs under discovery 
& development
-0.0005***
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
0.0015
[0.0018]
0.0007
[0.0016]
-0.0005
[0.0015]
-0.0003 
[0.0015]
 0.0005
[0.0013]
Patent stock
0.1316***
[0.0408]
0.1120**
[0.0403]
0.1143**
[0.0405]
0.1086**
[0.0391]
0.0921**
[0.0358]
Patent family size
0.0002
[0.0009]
0.0006
[0.0009]
0.0009
[0.0009]
0.0009
[0.0009]
0.0010
[0.0009]
Count indications
0.0733***
[0.0087]
0.0766***
[0.0100]
0.0764***
[0.0100]
0.0771***
[0.0101]
0.0669***
[0.0097]
Count technologies
-0.0186
[0.0207]
-0.0153
[0.0200]
-0.0204
[0.0204]
-0.0244
[0.0207]
-0.0547**
[0.0196]
Count countries
0.0222†
0.0340**
0.0375**
0.0389***
0.0237**
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
[0.0132]
[0.0116]
[0.0120]
[0.0119]
[0.0119]
Constant
-122.2139***
[14.0391]
-134.2014***
[13.1837]
-139.2755***
[13.1586]
-141.2869***
[13.3381]
-141.4748***
[12.5094]
No. of observations
1106
1106
1106
1106
1106
Log likelihood
-5458.60
-5444.03
-5441.68
-5438.43
-5422.59
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 8. Negative binomial regression to test H1 (relationship between number of late-stage drug development 
and time to discontinuation is contingent on the team size)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 6 
Size of the scientific team > 
Median
Model 7
Size of the scientific team ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects (H1)
-0.0024***
[0.0069] (H1a, 
)
―
-0.0023***
[0.0006] (H1b, +)
Emergence level
1.0267†
[0.5724]
1.3160*
[0.6504]
[Emergence level]2
-0.8684
[0.5714]
-1.4036*
[0.6385]
Count deals
0.1324***
[0.0254]
0.0805***
[0.0229]
ROA variance
0.0001
[0.0002]
 0.0005**
[0.0002]
Total number of drugs under discovery & 
development
-0.0005**
[0.0001]
-0.0003*
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
 0.0030***
[0.0087]
-0.0014
[0.0012]
Patent stock
0.1069*
[0.0561]
0.1012*
[0.0506]
Patent family size
0.0003
[0.0012]
0.0018
[0.0013]
Count indications
0.0644***
[0.0132]
0.0677***
[0.0130]
Count technologies
-0.0471†
[0.0261]
-0.0543*
[0.0272]
Count countries
0.0193
[0.0161]
0.0236
[0.0176]
Constant
-133.1221***
[16.9803]
-148.5696***
[15.9586]
No. of observations
550
556
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Log likelihood
-2697.1459
-2715.7628
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 9. Negative binomial regression to test H3 (relationship between risk-aversion level and time to 
discontinuation is contingent on the emergence level of the drug)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 8
Level of Emergence > Median
Model 9
Level of Emergence ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug development 
projects
-0.0031***
[0.0008]
-0.0012
[0.0008]
Size of the scientific team
-0.0024
[0.0061]
-0.0171***
[0.0051]
Count deals (H3)
0.0991*** 
[0.0262] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0913***
[0.0250] (H3b, +)
ROA variance (H3)
0.0007**
[0.0003] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0004* 
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
Total number of drugs under 
discovery & development (H3)
-0.0007***
[0.0001] (H3a, 
)
―
-0.0003*
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
R&D intensity
-0.0009
[0.0011]
-0.0028***
[0.0006]
Patent stock
0.0672
[0.0442]
0.1166
[0.0752]
Patent family size
0.0006
[0.0013]
0.0018
[0.0012]
Count indications
0.0610***
[0.0159]
0.0681***
[0.0114]
Count technologies
-0.0370
[0.0272]
-0.0765***
[0.0231]
Count countries
0.0278
[0.0175]
0.0257
[0.0160]
Constant
-147.2389***
[17.2529]
-133.2202***
[16.1081]
No. of observations
556
550
Log likelihood
-2746.56
-2671.50
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 10. Robust test for the inverted U-shaped (H2)
Lower bound
Upper bound
Slope
1.2187
-1.1569
t-value
3.1538 
-2.8837
p value
< 0.001
< 0.001
Overall significance
t-value = 2.88
p-value < 0.001
Extreme point
0.5130
Confidence interval
[0.4713 0.5548]
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Tables 11, 12, 13 and 14 report the results when explorative early stages were confined to Discovery — 
Phase III and exploitative late stages were confined to Pre-registration — Registration (later stage 
exploitative projects that are of similar indication as that of focal drugs are chosen)
Table 11. Negative binomial regression to test H2 (inverted U-shaped relationship between emergence level of 
the drug and time to discontinuation)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
 Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 1 
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Number of late-stage drug development 
projects
-0.0077***
[0.0009]
-0.0075*** 
[0.0009]
-0.0073***
[0.0009]
-0.0055***
[0.0007]
Size of the scientific team
 
-0.0122**
[0.0036]
-0.0124***
[0.0037]
-0.0083**
[0.0035]
Emergence level (H2, +)
1.6334***
[0.3611]
1.4132***
[0.3514]
[Emergence level]2 (H2, 
)
―
-1.5682***
[0.3619]
-1.3373***
[0.3521]
Count deals
0.0945***
[0.0160]
ROA variance
0.0004**
[0.0001]
Total number of drugs under discovery & 
development
-0.0005***
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
 0.0019
[0.0016]
0.0013
[0.0015]
-0.0011
[0.0015]
-0.0010 
[0.0014]
 0.0001
[0.0013]
Patent stock
0.1147***
[0.0337]
0.1114***
[0.0327]
0.1148***
[0.0331]
0.1090***
[0.0320]
0.0855**
[0.0296]
Patent family size
0.0003
[0.0009]
0.0002
[0.0008]
0.0005
[0.0008]
0.0006
[0.0008]
0.0011
[0.0008]
Count indications
0.0646***
[0.0069]
0.0492***
[0.0067]
0.0497***
[0.0067]
0.0498***
[0.0066]
0.0440***
[0.0065]
Count technologies
-0.0240
[0.0191]
-0.0297
[0.0188]
-0.0343†
[0.0192]
-0.0398*
[0.0193]
-0.0635**
[0.0179]
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Count countries
0.0084
[0.0109]
0.0131
[0.0098]
0.0147
[0.0102]
0.0153
[0.0099]
0.0080
[0.0090]
Constant
-125.2206***
[12.4832]
-126.3596***
[11.4986]
-131.2420***
[11.6626]
-134.6460***
[11.5603]
-137.0563***
[10.7404]
No. of observations
1274
1274
1274
1274
1274
Log likelihood
-6352.41
-6332.48
-6329.94
-6324.25
-6303.82
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were included 
but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 12. Negative binomial regression to test H1 (relationship between number of late-stage drug 
development and time to discontinuation is contingent on the team size)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 6 
Size of the scientific team > 
Median
Model 7
Size of the scientific team ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug 
development projects (H1)
-0.0058***
[0.0011] (H1a, 
)
―
-0.0055***
[0.0015] (H1b, +)
Emergence level
1.1964*
[0.5762]
1.4824**
[0.5060]
[Emergence level]2
-1.0181† 
[0.5753]
-1.4965**
[0.4923]
Count deals
0.1467***
[0.0236]
0.0713***
[0.0195]
ROA variance
0.0001
[0.0002]
 0.0004**
[0.0001]
Total number of drugs under discovery & 
development
-0.0004**
[0.0001]
-0.0004**
[0.0001]
R&D intensity
 0.0032***
[0.0009]
-0.0006
[0.0014]
Patent stock
0.0937*
[0.0475]
0.0975**
[0.0385]
Patent family size
-0.0001
[0.0010]
0.0023*
[0.0012]
Count indications
0.0413***
[0.0094]
0.0443***
[0.0091]
Count technologies
-0.0546*
[0.0250]
-0.0636**
[0.0231]
Count countries
0.0062
[0.0120]
0.0064
[0.0118]
Constant
-133.8113***
[15.3628]
-139.6618***
[15.9586]
No. of observations
611
665
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Log likelihood
-3009.2123
-3283.5421
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 13. Negative binomial regression to test H3 (relationship between risk-aversion level and time to 
discontinuation is contingent on the emergence level of the drug)
Hypothesized relationships are presented in the brackets
Variables
(DV: Time to discontinuation)
Model 8
Level of Emergence > Median
Model 9
Level of Emergence ≤ Median
Number of late-stage drug development 
projects
-0.0077***
[0.0010]
-0.0031*
[0.0014]
Size of the scientific team
-0.0014
[0.0053]
-0.0125**
[0.0049]
Count deals (H3)
0.0974***
[0.0206] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0855***
[0.0234] (H3b, +)
ROA variance (H3)
0.0003
[0.0003] (H3a, 
)
―
0.0003**
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
Total number of drugs under 
discovery & development (H3)
-0.0006***
[0.0001] (H3a, 
)
―
-0.0003*
[0.0001] (H3b, +)
R&D intensity
-0.0013
[0.0008]
-0.0026***
[0.0006]
Patent stock
0.0790*
[0.0394]
0.0973†
[0.0541]
Patent family size
0.0005
[0.0010]
0.0017
[0.0011]
Count indication
0.0348***
[0.0106]
0.0519***
[0.0092]
Count technologies
-0.0512*
[0.0228]
-0.0797***
[0.0238]
Count countries
0.0057
[0.0142]
0.0141
[0.0112]
Constant
-141.5625***
[17.0524]
-132.8354***
[14.6532]
No. of observations
650
624
Log likelihood
-3245.13
-3054.09
Standard errors appear in parentheses. Dummy variables (status before discontinuation) and discontinuation year were 
included but not reported. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Table 14. Robust test for the inverted U-shaped (H2)
Lower bound
Upper bound
Slope
1.6331
-1.5029
t-value
4.5232 
-4.0888
p value
< 0.001
< 0.001
Overall significance
t-value = 4.09
p-value < 0.001
Extreme point
0.5208
Confidence interval
[0.4925 0.5490]
Accepted Article

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
Figure 1. Summary of drug projects’ time-to-discontinuation behaviors in H1, H2 and H3
 
 (a) H1† (b) H2 (c) H3†
† Concave curves are drawn for illustrative purposes. Only the monotonicity of the functional form affects the formulation of the corresponding hypothesis. 
Number of late-stage drugs 
the scientific team could be 
instead working on ( )
𝑛
Early-stage 
drug emergence 
level ( )

Early-stage drug with low 
emergence level (H3b)
Early-stage drug with 
high emergence level 
(H3a)
Risk-aversion 
level ( )
𝛼
Time to 
discontinuation
Large scientific 
team (H1a)
Small scientific 
team (H1b)
Time to 
discontinuation
Time to 
discontinuation
Accepted Article