TITLE: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179
---

EUR Research Information Portal
Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing
Published in:
Production and Operations Management
Publication status and date:
Published: 01/01/2020
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1111/poms.13179
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Valogianni, K., Ketter, W., Collins, J., & Zhdanov, D. (2020). Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing.
Production and Operations Management, 29(6), 1550-1572. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive
Pricing
Konstantina Valogianni*
IE Business School, IE University, Madrid, Spain, konstantina.valogianni@ie.edu
Wolfgang Ketter
Faculty of Management, Economics, and Social Sciences, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, the Netherland, ketter@wiso.uni-koeln.de
John Collins
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, colli075@umn.edu
Dmitry Zhdanov
J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, dzhdanov@gsu.edu
A
transition to electric vehicles (EVs) is widely assumed to be an important step along the road to environmental
sustainability. However, large-scale adoption of EVs may put electricity grids under critical strain, since peaks in
electricity demand are likely to increase radically. Efforts to manage demand peaks through pricing schemes may create
new peaks at low-price periods, if large numbers of EV owners use smart charging to beneﬁt from low prices. This effect
is expected to be ampliﬁed when EV owners adopt smart decision support to assist them with optimal charging decisions.
Therefore, energy policymakers are interested in advanced pricing schemes that can smooth demand or induce demand
that comes as close as possible to a desired proﬁle. We show, through simulations calibrated with real-world data, that
current approaches to electricity pricing are limited in their ability to induce desired demand proﬁles. To address this
challenge, we present adaptive pricing, a method to learn from EV owner reactions to prices and adjust announced prices
accordingly. Our method draws on the Green Information Systems principles and can assist grid operators in ensuring
the reliable operation of the grid. We evaluate our results in simulations, where we ﬁnd that adaptive pricing outperforms
current electricity pricing schemes, yielding results close to the theoretically optimal ones. We test our method in inducing
both ﬂat and extremely volatile demand proﬁles, and we see that in both cases it manages to induce EV charging close to
the ideal scenario under perfect information.
Key words: adaptive pricing; electric vehicles; electricity markets; smart grid; sustainability
History: Received: August 2018; Accepted: January 2020 by Subodha Kumar, after 2 revisions.
1. Introduction
Electric vehicles (EVs) are expected to play a signiﬁcant
role in creating a sustainable future. EV adoption is
heavily incentivized by many governments and policy-
makers, since EVs lower carbon footprint, reduce noise
pollution, and have much higher engine efﬁciency than
internal-combustion (ICE) vehicles.1 At an individual
level, many commuters tend to adopt EVs as part of
their effort to become more environmentally aware and
sustainable (Sovacool and Hirsh 2009). At a business
level, green mobility is expected to bring positive
returns in related investments, while stock markets
react
very
positively
to
green-vehicle
innovation
announcements (Ba et al. 2013).
Unfortunately, widespread EV adoption threatens
the stable operation of the existing power grid due to
the energy needed to charge EV batteries (Knezovic
et al. 2017, Qi and Shen 2019). For example, a US
household might consume on average 28.4 kWh a
day,2 while an EV owner needs on average 10 kWh a
day to cover her driving needs,3 assuming an average
EV has an efﬁciency of 6 km/kWh.4 This means that a
battery charge to cover daily driving needs increases
daily demand by more than 35% in a US household.
Therefore, EV demand accounts for a signiﬁcant por-
tion of the daily demand of a household and needs to
be considered carefully by grid operators when plan-
ning grid capacity and operations. In the absence of
some scheme for managing this additional load,
widespread EV adoption can destabilize segments of
distribution grids as well as the higher-voltage trans-
mission grids. This could occur if, for example, many
residents of a neighborhood own EVs, and they
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179
Vol. 0, No. 0, xxxx–xxxx 2020, pp. 1–23
DOI 10.1111/poms.13179
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|20|00|0001
© 2020 Production and Operations Management Society

decide to start charging them around the same time in
the evening, which is already a time of peak con-
sumption in many areas of the world. Because the
grid needs to support peak demand, it is the primary
determinant of grid capacity planning (Dong et al.
2017, Kirschen 2003), despite the fact that it occurs
infrequently and the average demand is typically
much lower. Consequently, anticipated changes in
peak demand will be an important issue as increasing
numbers of EVs are introduced in the grid.
The traditional solution to this challenge is to
expand the electricity grid infrastructure to support
the higher (Pecas Lopes et al. 2010, Schroeder and
Traber 2012). However, this solution would be costly
as well as highly unsustainable (Kleindorfer et al.
2005, Strbac 2008, Watson et al. 2010), since additional
generating capacity must be installed. The EU projec-
tions of €150 bn investments for grid infrastructure
expansion in 10 years (European Network of Trans-
mission System Operators for Electricity 2018) to
cover the extra demand created in the grid show how
costly and unsustainable these solutions can be.
Grid managers are designing price-based demand
response (DR) schemes (Palensky and Dietrich 2011)
to encourage EV owners to shift consumption to low-
demand periods of the day. However, since all own-
ers are receiving the same signals, they tend to react
in the same way, potentially creating new peaks dur-
ing periods with lower prices (Sioshansi 2012). This
tendency may increase when smart charging tech-
nologies are in place, since they generally attempt to
satisfy individual preferences and minimize cost. This
phenomenon is known in the literature as herding
(Gottwalt et al. 2011, Kim and Shcherbakova 2011,
Valogianni and Ketter 2016). Consequently, a poorly
designed DR scheme might not induce the desired EV
charging, but may instead create higher demand
peaks. Hence, grid managers are interested in price-
based DR schemes that incentivize consumers to shift
consumption toward a desired proﬁle, without creat-
ing new peaks. These desired proﬁles are decided by
grid managing entities, such as grid operators, so that
they serve a certain objective in the grid. For example,
if the supply curve is ﬂat, a grid operator would
desire an equally ﬂat demand proﬁle, so that supply
and demand are matched in real-time, without dis-
ruptions in the grid. Other examples of desired EV
charging proﬁles can be more volatile, matching the
generation pattern of renewable sources, such as
wind turbines. Adoption of renewable energy sources
(RES) is expected to reach up to 75% of supply by
2040 (European Network of Transmission System
Operators for Electricity 2018). This will challenge
grid operators to induce electricity demand that
matches RES generation proﬁles (Golari et al. 2017)
and to maintain grid stability (Goodarzi et al. 2019).
EVs differ from many other loads in the grid, ﬁrst,
because of their signiﬁcant consumption: more than
35% in a US household, as mentioned earlier. In 2017
alone, the global EV demand was 54 TWh, “an
amount which is equivalent to slightly more than the
electricity demand of Greece” (International Energy
Agency 2018), while IEA’s projections for 2030 envi-
sion EV charging demand surpassing 400 TWh in the
most conservative scenario and 900 TWh in the most
optimistic one (International Energy Agency 2018).
Furthermore, EVs are movable and ﬂexible (Interna-
tional Energy Agency 2017), giving grid operators the
opportunity to use EV charging to shape demand to
outweigh pre-existing peaks in the grid, for example,
the peaks resulting from the household consumption
(Huang et al. 2015, Luo et al. 2018). Their ﬂexibility
provides grid operators with the opportunity to
charge EVs directly from RES (Golari et al. 2017),
maximizing renewable utilization and increasing soci-
etal sustainability (Mwasilu et al. 2014). All these rea-
sons
have
given
rise
to a
stream
of
literature
identifying major grid beneﬁts from pricing EV charg-
ing differently than the rest of the household demand
(Biviji et al. 2014, Fridgen et al. 2014, Hu et al. 2014,
2016b, Huang et al. 2015, Luo et al. 2018, Soltani et al.
2015, Wang et al. 2015). Furthermore, the Interna-
tional Energy Agency in its 2018 report (International
Energy Agency 2018) emphasizes the beneﬁts of pric-
ing EV charging differently from other loads to maxi-
mize capacity utilization, redistribute demand, and
couple
EV
charging
with
renewable
generation.
Examples of such pricing are tariffs offered by Paciﬁc
Gas and Electric Company speciﬁcally implemented
for EVs5 and different tariffs for EV charging offered
in the UK.6
We build on recent literature (Biviji et al. 2014, Frid-
gen et al. 2014, Hu et al. 2014, 2016b, Huang et al.
2015, Luo et al. 2018, Soltani et al. 2015, Wang et al.
2015), using principles from the Green IS framework
(Loock et al. 2013, Watson et al. 2010) which suggests
that appropriate use of available information can lead
to more efﬁcient energy utilization and reduced need
for grid capacity investment. In this context, we
address the following research question:
How can price schemes be designed so that they induce a
desired demand proﬁle without creating herding in an EV
population with smart charging decision support in place
and without having prior knowledge about the way EV
owners make charging decisions?
To address this question, we show how to design
price-based DR schemes that target EV owners with
smart charging equipment. Our work contributes to
the Green IS (Loock et al. 2013, Melville 2010, Watson
et al. 2010) and sustainability (Malhotra et al. 2013)
discussion. We describe and demonstrate our design
for
adaptive
pricing
that
adapts
to
idiosyncratic
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
2
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

preferences of EV owners over prices and charging
parameters. We use mathematical modeling cali-
brated with real-world data to derive our pricing
scheme. We validate its performance in simulation
experiments, and we show that adaptive pricing:
a) mitigates peak demand, reducing the need for
grid capacity expansion;
b) induces EV charging demand that follows vola-
tile generation patterns coming from RES, maxi-
mizing renewable consumption and reducing the
need for conventional carbon-intensive electricity
production;
c) yields robust results in populations where EV
owners have individual preferences over prices
which are unknown to grid operators, outper-
forming currently used benchmarks.
Furthermore, this study provides insights related to
sustainable operations (Aﬂaki et al. 2013, Besiou and
Van Wassenhove 2015, Kleindorfer et al. 2005, Qi and
Shen 2019) of energy stakeholders, such as grid opera-
tors and energy providers, who can use adaptive pric-
ing to inﬂuence the EV charging demand in their
portfolios toward a desired outcome. Grid operators
aim to deliver a sustainable and reliable grid to elec-
tricity customers, hence, reduced peak demand and
an effective way of embedding RES in the grid are of
high interest to them (European Network of Trans-
mission
System
Operators
for
Electricity
2018).
Energy providers are striving to have renewable gen-
eration as part of their energy portfolio so that they
comply with the emissions regulations (Drake et al.
2016). Therefore, both of these stakeholder groups can
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from using adaptive pricing to
induce desired demand proﬁles.
The rest of the study is structured as follows. First,
we present the literature which sets the foundation of
our analysis. Second, we explain the model we used
for our simulations. Furthermore, we present the data
sets used to calibrate our simulations and demon-
strate results benchmarked with current and future
electricity pricing schemes. Finally, we summarize
our results and outline paths for future work.
2. Literature Review
Our work builds on research related to smart grid
and electric mobility, which are integral parts of
smart-city management and operations (Atasu et al.
2020, Guha and Kumar 2018, Kumar et al. 2018, Qi
and Shen 2019), as well as energy informatics and
Green IS literature (vom Brocke et al. 2013, Ketter
et al. 2016a, Khuntia et al. 2018, Melville 2010, Wat-
son et al. 2010). Energy informatics and Green IS, in
particular, is a nascent area of information systems,
having as its main goal to increase efﬁciency of energy
usage and reduce societal carbon footprint by using
the information available in a society. Therefore, we
build on these principles to assist grid operators man-
age EV charging load and minimize unsustainable
grid capacity investments. In Table 1, we show how
our work contributes to Green IS and sustainability
discussion (Dao et al. 2011, Malhotra et al. 2013)
using the Integrated Sustainability Framework proposed
by (Dao et al. 2011). This framework captures the
value of sustainable strategies of ﬁrms using the triple
bottom line “natural environment, society, and eco-
nomic performance” (Dao et al. 2011), but there are
direct analogies with our approach to facilitate a
smooth EV transition in a sustainable grid. In the row
labeled “Today”, we show what our approach can
currently contribute to a sustainable grid, whereas in
the row labeled “Tomorrow”, we show that our
approach can support a sustainable EV transition cou-
pled with high RES penetration. In the Evaluation sec-
tion, we present relevant scenarios to reﬂect the
contribution of our method to “Today” and “Tomor-
row”.
2.1. Smart Grid and the Transition to Electric
Mobility
The smart electricity grid is the evolution of the tradi-
tional electricity delivery infrastructure, with techno-
logical advancements playing increasingly crucial
roles in generation, transmission, distribution, and
consumption (Parker et al. 2019). It is becoming a
smart market (Bichler et al. 2010) for electricity; deci-
sions can be facilitated by intelligent decision support
systems (DSS) that can act on behalf of people or orga-
nizations. Blumsack and Fernandez (2012) identify
three aspects that make the smart grid powerful in
Table 1
Integrated Sustainability Framework adapted from Dao et al.
(2011)
Internal (EV owner)
External (grid)
Today
– Strategy
– Strategy
– Maximize individual utility
of EV charging
– Induce desirable EV
charging proﬁle
– Pay-off
– Pay-off
– Lower charging costs
– Stable and reliable grid
operation
– Preference satisfaction
– Peak and volatility
reduction
Tomorrow
– Strategy
– Strategy
– Optimized (smart) EV
charging becomes
– Induce EV charging
matching RES
broadly available
generation proﬁles
– Pay-off
– Pay-off
– Public becomes more open
to EV adoption
– Stable and reliable grid
operation
– Sustainable e-mobility
– Sustainable EV charging
– Charging cost savings
– Smooth EV transition
coupled with high RES
penetration
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
3
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

serving customer electricity needs: real-time monitor-
ing at the transmission level, automation of various
aspects of distribution systems, and smart-metering
for electricity customers. The transmission level con-
sists of high capacity lines bringing electric power
from large-scale generation facilities to local distribu-
tion networks. Power in the transmission grid is cur-
rently produced by a few large generation companies
that own single generation plants or a portfolio of
power generation sources (Kirschen and Strbac 2005).
Local distribution networks are at the second level of
the smart grid, through which electricity is delivered
(at lower voltage than the transmission level) to end
customers located around a power substation. These
two levels comprise the physical infrastructure that
reliably delivers electricity to end customers. Large-
scale EV integration on the electricity grid is expected
to bring demand increase that can threaten the grid’s
stability (Knezovic et al. 2017, Qi and Shen 2019, Su
et al. 2012). This demand was in the conventional cars
covered by oil, but in the era of electric mobility it
must be accommodated by the smart grid’s installed
capacity (Pecas Lopes et al. 2010). Therefore, grid
stakeholders are interested in examining how this
demand will change once large numbers of EVs are
introduced and smart charging DSS become broadly
adopted.
Above the physical infrastructure, lie the economic
mechanisms
that
allow
for
ﬁnancial
exchanges
between energy customers and energy providers,
known in the literature as aggregators or energy util-
ity companies. Energy utility companies offer energy
tariffs (contracts) to consumers and aim to make prof-
its through transactions with them. In many electric-
ity markets (regulated monopolies mostly), the grid
operator and energy utility are one uniﬁed entity,
whereas in other market structures they might be sep-
arate entities.
EV owners rely on electricity to cover their mobility
needs, charging their EVs so that their batteries contain
sufﬁcient energy for their driving needs. EV owners
pay for their mobility services based on energy volume
charged and on electricity prices rather than oil prices.
Therefore, pricing mechanisms can be powerful tools
toward shaping EV charging demand to follow a
desired proﬁle. Designing successful electricity pricing
structures that have a positive demand response
impact is one of the open questions that OM literature
is seeking to address (Choi et al. 2019, Derinkuyu et al.
2019, Parker et al. 2019). Our proposed mechanism
addresses this question by demonstrating how grid
stakeholders can learn from reactions to prices they
broadcast to EV owners and design a pricing scheme
able to induce a desired proﬁle.
Common methods proposed in the energy and OM
literature
to
shape
charging
demand
include
aggregation of EV owner proﬁles (Broneske and Woz-
abal 2017, He et al. 2017, Hu et al. 2016a, Kahlen et al.
2018, Tang et al. 2016, Vandael et al. 2013). EV aggre-
gators, such as car-sharing or EV ﬂeet operators, tend
to make collective decisions about strategically posi-
tioning EV charging in time and place so that they
maximize beneﬁts for their ﬂeet. Furthermore, mecha-
nisms that reject charging requests depending on grid
capacity installed (distribution transformer’s side)
have been proven effective in reducing peak demand
(Mu~noz et al. 2016). These mechanisms might involve
direct control by the grid operator, potentially over-
riding the customer’s preference. Therefore, both cate-
gories tend to not guarantee customer preference
satisfaction, since they have to reject individual
requests to meet a global objective.
In addition, auction mechanisms have been pro-
posed as ways to coordinate EV charging (Valogianni
et al. 2019). Gerding et al. (2013) propose a two-sided
market
approach
to
allocate
charging
timeslots
among EV owners and to avoid charging congestion.
Robu et al. (2013) present an online auction mecha-
nism where EV owners state their availability for
charging in the form of slots, and bid for power in the
available slots. At an EV ﬂeet level, Almuhtady et al.
(2014) introduce
a new battery-swapping policy
model so that ﬂeet owners can optimize their deci-
sions about maintenance costs and make signiﬁcant
savings, while at the same time maintaining the green
character of their ﬂeet. From an infrastructure stand-
point, Avci et al. (2015) and Mak et al. (2013),
describe optimal placement plans for battery charging
stations so that the EV charging is facilitated properly
to serve EV owners. However, pricing mechanisms
are easier to be implemented, as they do not require
any speciﬁc implementation on the EV charging sta-
tion and have higher customer acceptance, since cus-
tomers are used to receiving price signals in exchange
for a service. Current pricing schemes tend to create
herding, especially when smart charging DSS become
broadly available. Our proposed solution mitigates
herding without requiring speciﬁc knowledge about
the customer portfolio, being easily adjustable to
evolving customer needs. Furthermore, our work
responds to the OM research call for addressing
smart-city management challenges (Atasu et al. 2020,
Guha and Kumar 2018, Kumar et al. 2018, Qi and
Shen 2019), such as the sustainable integration of EVs,
using data-driven methods.
2.2. Demand Response and Electricity Pricing
Using price signals as a means of shaping electricity
demand is known as price-based demand response
(DR) (Chrysopoulos et al. 2014, Palensky and Dietrich
2011). DR can be very beneﬁcial for the electricity
grid, since it is capable of shifting parts of the peak
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
4
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

demand to low demand periods, achieving higher sta-
bility on the grid without extra capacity expansions
(Parker et al. 2019). Price-based DR has been studied
both for residential (Albadi and Elsaadany 2008, Choi
et al. 2019, Chrysopoulos et al. 2014, Gottwalt et al.
2011, Palensky and Dietrich 2011, Valogianni and Ket-
ter 2016) and commercial and industrial (C&I) cus-
tomers
(Jessoe
and
Rapson
2015,
Papier
2016).
However, designing successful DR schemes can be
challenging, if the way that customers respond to it
(price responsiveness) is not examined thoroughly
(Borenstein 2005, International Energy Agency 2008,
Spees and Lave 2008).
Price responsiveness can be measured as price elas-
ticity (Bernstein and Grifﬁn 2006) of residential con-
sumers (without accounting for EV consumption) at a
macroscopic
level
across
different
countries,
for
instance: Norway (Aasness and Holtsmark 1993, Nes-
bakken 1999), USA (Bohi and Zimmerman 1984, Branch
1993, Parti and Parti 1980, Reiss and White 2005), UK
(Baker et al. 1989, King and Shatrawka 1994), Germany
(Dennerlein 1987), Canada (Bernard et al. 1996), Israel
(Beenstock et al. 1999), Australia (Fan and Hyndman
2011). These elasticities refer to electricity consumption
and not to EV charging, therefore, it is not straightfor-
ward that electricity consumption elasticities will hold
for EV charging as well. Literature has found that EV
charging price elasticities are different from the electric-
ity consumption ones (Biviji et al. 2014, Soltani et al.
2015), however, there is limited data about their values
(California and Portland (Biviji et al. 2014), 13 EV
owner data and synthetic California data (Soltani et al.
2015)). Given the limited evidence about EV charging
price elasticity, simulation modeling can ﬁll this void
by learning consumer responsiveness from their reac-
tions to broadcast prices, without requiring macro-
scopic
assumptions.
We
build
on
the
literature
supporting the need for pricing EV charging differ-
ently than the rest of the household (Biviji et al. 2014,
Fridgen et al. 2014, Hu et al. 2014, 2016b, Huang et al.
2015, Luo et al. 2018, Soltani et al. 2015, Wang et al.
2015), as explained in section 1. Unlike previous work,
our proposed method learns dynamically from EV
owner charging decisions, so that it can induce a
desired charging demand and can adapt to any EV
population it is facing. Extending our previous work
(Valogianni et al. 2018), we go beyond previously pro-
posed pricing approaches by examining individual
consumption behavior and eliciting the valuation func-
tion of any EV population. This valuation function can
help tailor pricing schemes toward desired proﬁles
and can be learned from EV owners’ reaction to broad-
cast prices. Thus, we add an adaptive layer that
accounts for EV owners’ responsiveness, without
requiring speciﬁc elasticity values. Consequently, adap-
tive pricing can be applied to any EV population,
without
requiring
speciﬁc
knowledge
about
its
response to prices.
Our contributions go beyond traditional capacity
allocation and dynamic pricing problems. In other
capacity allocation problems, such as telecommunica-
tions, aggregating capacity across different locations is
easier, compared to electricity grids (Singh and Dutta
2015). Therefore, in smart grids, any congestion prob-
lems need to be solved locally (e.g., locational marginal
pricing (Li et al. 2014)), requiring for more real-time
adaptability. Furthermore, in telecommunications, brief
“outages” are acceptable, for example when streaming
pauses, without having the severe effects of a grid
black-out. In addition, producing electricity with RES
creates considerable volatility of generation compared
to traditional production units in other supply chains,
such as gasoline production. In the gasoline supply
chain, gasoline can be stored in large quantities
(Thompson et al. 2009), therefore, there is no need for
real-time demand shaping. Furthermore, if the demand
for gas is not managed properly, there will be no black-
or brown-out in the grid. The major effect of such a
mismanagement will be unease on the customer side.
In contrast, if EV charging is not managed properly,
the operation of the whole smart grid or segments of it
will be put at high risk. Adding to that point, the recov-
ery costs of such a black-out are tremendous (Mili and
Dooley 2010), suggesting that their prevention should
be of high priority. Moreover, EVs because of their sub-
stantial load in the grid (54TWh to 400–900 TWh in
2030 (International Energy Agency 2018)) offer a great
opportunity to grid operators to use EV charging for
outweighing pre-existing peaks in the grid, for exam-
ple, the peaks resulting from the household consump-
tion (Huang et al. 2015, Luo et al. 2018). Finally, EV
charging entails a lot of stochasticity and behavioral
characteristics, such as arrival and departure prefer-
ences or the need to have electricity for unexpected
driving, that cannot be neglected during grid planning.
2.3. Parallels to Revenue Management
Our work shows a lot of parallels to the growing rev-
enue management literature stream about learning an
unknown demand function through interactions with
buyers (Araman and Caldentey 2009, Ban and Keskin
2017, den Boer 2015, Chen and Chen 2015, Farias and
Van Roy 2010). Araman and Caldentey (2009) present
an algorithm for a retailer of nonperishable goods to
adjust demand dynamically so that the longterm
proﬁt is maximized, without having any prior belief
of how the market will react. Farias and Van Roy
(2010) assume a similar set-up, but they make some
assumptions about the distributions of customer arri-
vals, which serve as priors in the dynamic price
adjustment. More recently, Ban and Keskin (2017)
introduce personalized pricing based on learning
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
5
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

different customer features. This personalized learn-
ing is done at an individual level, leading to individu-
ally
personalized
prices,
also
known
as
price
discrimination. For a comprehensive historical sum-
mary of the revenue management dynamic pricing lit-
erature we point to the work of den Boer (2015).
This study draws from this growing dynamic pricing
literature (Chen and Chen 2015), mostly in aspects
related to observing EV owner features and adjusting
the
prices
accordingly.
Speciﬁcally,
our
solution
approach shows a lot of parallels, as we ﬁrst examine
the perfect information scenario, where we assume all
EV owner features to be known, and then we relax this
prior knowledge assumption and get to effective
approximate solutions that can perform well without
this prior belief. More importantly, our work is differ-
ent from this literature stream in the following aspects.
First, we do not aim at estimating a demand function,
which is the main objective in revenue management
dynamic pricing (Araman and Caldentey 2009, Ban
and Keskin 2017, den Boer 2015, Chen and Chen 2015,
Farias and Van Roy 2010). Instead, we are learning a
valuation function of EV charging demand. Our prob-
lem set-up resides in the smart grid, therefore, our
objective is not to maximize long-term proﬁts or mini-
mize revenue regret, but, instead, it is to achieve a
desired EV charging demand proﬁle stemming from
the grid operator’s desire to match demand and supply
at all times. Another important difference is that in the
smart grid, it is not allowed to discriminate customers
in terms of pricing—as electricity is considered a public
good in most of the countries. Speciﬁcally, the term
locational marginal pricing (also used for congestion
reduction) refers to the price to be paid at any distribu-
tion network, and customers under the same distribu-
tion network need to be facing this price (Li et al.
2014). The only price discrimination that one can
impose in the smart grids is if the quality of service
offered is different (Oren et al. 1982), for example
renewable electricity, tiered consumption, residential
vs. commercial consumers who are connected to differ-
ent levels of voltage in the grid (Jardini et al. 2000),
because they receive a different quality of service.
Therefore, our work contributes to this growing rev-
enue management literature by presenting how these
pricing methods can be adjusted to be applicable in the
smart grid domain, where stakeholder objectives and
regulations are different.
3. Model Description
Our model takes the standpoint of a grid operator or
an energy provider. Grid operators are responsible
for the reliable operation of the grid so that demand
and supply are matched. Therefore, grid operators
must incentivize a desired demand pattern so that the
supply pattern is always matched and black-outs are
prevented.7 Energy providers, also known as utility
companies, are responsible for providing the cus-
tomers with the required electricity. In regulated mar-
kets, energy providers are also responsible for the
generation of electricity, besides its distribution.
Therefore, they must incentivize their customers to
consume matching the generation patterns they have
in their portfolios to avoid high imbalance charges.
We use the grid operator as an example for the rest of
this analysis. The presented results can be applied to
energy providers, as well.
The grid operator is facing the problem of shaping
electricity demand toward a desired proﬁle, such as a
less volatile demand proﬁle. It is important for the
grid operator to be in control of shaping the electricity
demand, since this allows for a more stable and reli-
able operation of the grid (Goodarzi et al. 2019). For
instance, achieving a demand proﬁle with low volatil-
ity reduces the unpredictability of electricity demand
as well as demand peaks. In order to achieve a
desired demand proﬁle, the grid operator must “com-
municate” with EV owners to induce a certain charg-
ing behavior. One effective way of establishing
communication between grid operators and EV own-
ers is price-based DR. Grid operators, typically, lack a
priori information about how EV owners evaluate
prices and make charging decisions. They are only
able to observe aggregate EV charging demand in
response to prices they broadcast.
EV owners receive the broadcast prices, and evalu-
ate them based on their preferences, which we model
as valuation functions. For example, an EV owner
who is concerned about costs might avoid charging
when prices are high, instead she might wait until
electricity prices drop, in the case of variable pricing,
or choose to drive less to reduce costs. These prefer-
ences are encompassed in each EV owner’s valuation
function and drive their charging decisions. EV own-
ers are represented by intelligent DSS, which are
responsible for satisfying the individual objectives of
each EV owner, given private constraints and prefer-
ences. In this way, EV owners can beneﬁt the most
from price variations without inconveniences (e.g.,
when low prices are broadcast during the night), as
the DSS will be optimizing the charging, without
them having to be involved in the actual charging
schedule adjustment process.
The communication between grid and EV own-
ers
is
intended
to
induce
desired
charging
demand.
Therefore,
grid
operators
need
to
set
their price signals in such a way that when cus-
tomers evaluate them based on their preferences,
they will charge their EVs in a desired manner.
This is a complex problem which requires the grid
operator
to
observe
EV
owner
actions
and
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
6
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

preferences and adjust prices accordingly. An erro-
neously-set
pricing
scheme
might
create
large
demand peaks and increase demand volatility due
to herding, destabilizing the operation of the grid.
3.1. Model Assumptions
Below we list our model’s assumptions and Appendix S1
summarizes the notation used throughout our model.
3.1.1.
Electric
Mobility. We
are
interested
in
examining the effect of massive EV adoption in the
market, therefore, we assume only purely electric cars
in our population (hybrid EVs are out of the scope of
this study).
3.1.2.
Charging
Location. Each EV owner can
charge either at home or at her workplace, assuming
that modern businesses allow for EV charging at their
premises. Irrespective of charging location, we assume
the EV owner is billed for the electricity charged in her
battery.
3.1.3.
Planning Horizon and Time Granularity.
EV owners have planning horizons T. This time hori-
zon is divided in time intervals t of duration Dt > 0.
The size of each interval Dt can be selected based on
the modeling needs.
3.1.4.
Pricing. EV owners receive prices from the
grid. These prices are the same for all EV owners in
the population and can serve as a signal for consum-
ing or not. They are broadcast to EV owners for the
whole planning horizon T and are known to them
before the planning begins.
3.1.5.
Electricity Valuation. EV owners have dif-
ferent EV charging valuation functions which express
the value they put on certain amounts of EV charge.
3.1.6.
DSS Representing EV Owners. EV owners
are represented by intelligent DSS that are responsible
for optimizing EV charging on their behalf, ensuring
satisfaction of their individual preferences. This DSS is
a bottom-up design aimed at satisfying the EV owner’s
objectives and needs to be calibrated to each EV own-
er’s preferences. It is not uncommon to use DSS to rep-
resent rational EV owners, as any convenience barriers
that might be posed by the need to charge the car dur-
ing inconvenient times (e.g., at night) will be overcome.
3.1.7.
Driving Region. All EVs drive within a
region that has consistent energy prices.
3.1.8.
EV Types. The EV population examined in
this study owns different types of EVs such as Nissan
Leaf8 and Tesla S9 with different battery capacities
and driving ranges.
3.2. EV Owner’s Problem
EV owners receive prices from the grid operator over
a future time horizon T and decide when and how
much to charge. In order to make well-informed deci-
sions with respect to charging their vehicles, EV own-
ers are assisted by smart systems that learn from their
behavior and propose beneﬁcial charging plans.
Being supported by a DSS, EV owners can overcome
potential cognitive overload and process all available
information
(volatile
prices,
driving
preferences,
renewable availability, etc.) more effectively in order
to arrive at better decisions. Next, we demonstrate
how such a DSS might function using Equations (1)–
(12).
We assume EV owners have as their main objective
to maximize expected utility UðÞ from EV charging ct
over time horizon T. The DSS representing each EV
owner
solves
the
utility
maximization
problem
described below (Equation (1)) and derives an opti-
mal EV charging demand vector c0 ¼ c0
1; . . .; c0
T


(in
kWh) over the planning horizon T.
max
½c1;...;cT E
X
T
t¼1
UðctÞ  ct
(
)
ð1Þ
subject to constraints (2), (3), (4), (5).
0  ct  pmax;t  Dt  t
8t 2 T;
ð2Þ
SoC0 þ
X
td
t¼1
ct 
X
td
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ  Ed
8td 2 d;
ð3Þ
SoC0 ¼ SoCinitial;
ð4Þ
SoC0 þ
X
T
t¼1
ct ¼
X
d
j j
d¼1
Ed þ
X
T
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ:
ð5Þ
The parameter kt is a binary variable and denotes
the charging availability of the EV during time t 2 T.
We assume that kt = 1 any time t when the EV is avail-
able for charging, that is, not driving and close to a
plug or a charging pole. Constraint (2) binds EV charg-
ing within the power range allowed by the grid and
the charger (pmax,t). EV charging, ct, ∀t 2 T, is mea-
sured in electricity units (kWh), while the charging
power constraint, pmax,t, is indicated in power units
(kW).10 Therefore, these boundaries need to be multi-
plied by the time granularity Dt to comply with the
units of EV charging. This constraint applies to each
charging pole (depending on infrastructure capabili-
ties) and can vary depending on location. For example,
fast charging stations have higher maximum allowable
charging rates, pmax,t, compared to household charging
installations.11 The right side of Equation (2) restricts
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
7
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

the charging during time periods when the EV is avail-
able for charging (when kt = 1).
Each EV owner has her own driving deadlines
td 2 d. By each deadline td, the EV needs to have
enough energy Ed in the battery to last until the next
td+1 opportunity the EV owner expects to be able to
charge (assuming td < td+1, ∀td 2 d). Furthermore, the
EV owner needs to be able to acquire enough energy
to ensure a positive state-of-charge over all intervals.
Therefore, the energy added to the battery when the
EV is not driving, P
td
t¼1
ct together with the amount
stored in the battery for t = 0, SoC0, reduced by the
electricity spent for driving Dt till the deadline td,
P
td
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ, is at least equal to the amount required
Ed till the next deadline td+1 (Constraint (3)). This
amount Ed is set by the EV owner as the desired state
of charge she wants her EV battery to have by the
deadline td. This value varies across deadlines. The
number jdj and the timing of deadlines td, as well as
the charging requirements Ed and the electricity spent
for driving Dt by each deadline vary across EV owners
and are not known to the grid operator. The parameter
SoC0 denotes the state of charge at time t = 0.
Constraint (4) models the initial charge level of the
battery at the beginning of planning horizon T. Con-
straint (5) models the total energy that the DSS needs
to have charged at the end of a time horizon T. The
amount P
jdj
d¼1
Ed can be 0, which means that the EV has
charged just enough to cover driving: P
T
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ,
or it can be P
jdj
d¼1
Ed [ 0 depending on how risky an EV
owner is toward charging enough to drive or having
a sufﬁcient surplus of electricity in her battery for
unexpected driving needs.
3.2.1.
Individual Utility. Each EV owner’s objec-
tive function (Equation (1)) maximizes individual
utility U ct
ð Þ of EV charging. We follow the mathemat-
ical modeling deﬁnition of utility function (Russell and
Norvig 1995): “The agent’s preferences are captured
by a utility function, U ð Þ, which assigns a single
number to express the desirability of a state.” In our
formulation, the DSS assigns a value to each state
(state is an expected EV charge level) depending on
the consumer’s desire for this state.12
This utility function U ct
ð Þ consists of the value that
this amount of electricity has for an EV owner, V ct
ð Þ,
reduced by the cost of this amount, ct  Pt, ∀t 2 T
(Bhattacharya et al. 2014, Robu et al. 2013). The valua-
tion function V ct
ð Þ varies across EV owners and is a
result of individual preferences. The DSS estimates
this valuation function from previous actions (train-
ing period). During this training period, the DSS is
presenting the EV owner with a set of combinations
of charging amounts and corresponding total costs to
reach a certain state of charge. From the EV owner
choices, the DSS can infer an approximation of her
valuation function. We describe this process in detail
in section 3.2.2. By Pt we denote the price per electric-
ity unit (€/kWh), which is broadcast by the grid oper-
ator in advance of the planning horizon T. This price
Pt might have different values across different time
intervals t. For each EV owner’s utility function we
assume the formulation in (6).13
U ct
ð Þ ¼ V ct
ð Þ  ct  Pt;
ð6Þ
Therefore, substituting (6), objective function (1)
becomes:
max
c1;...;cT
½
 E
X
T
t¼1
V ct
ð Þ  ct  Pt
ð
Þ  t
(
)
;
ð7Þ
subject to Equations (2)–(5). Since the prices Pt,
∀t 2 T, as well as the charging availability kt,
∀t 2 T are known to the DSS representing the EV
owner in advance of the planning horizon, the
expectation applies only to the valuation faction
V ct
ð Þ which is different across EV owners and
results from their individual preferences. Therefore,
Equation (7) becomes:
max
c1;...;cT
½

X
T
t¼1
E V ct
ð Þ
f
g  ct  Pt
ð
Þ  t;
ð8Þ
subject to constraints (9), (10), (11), (12).
0  ct  pmax;t  Dt  t
8t 2 T;
ð9Þ
SoC0 þ
X
td
t¼1
ct 
X
td
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ  Ed
8td 2 d;
ð10Þ
SoC0 ¼ SoCinitial;
ð11Þ
SoC0 þ
X
T
t¼1
ct ¼
X
d
j j
d¼1
Ed þ
X
T
t¼1
Dt  1  t
ð
Þ:
ð12Þ
3.2.2.
Estimating Valuation Functions. The valu-
ation function V ct
ð Þ expresses the value that an EV
owner puts on a certain EV charge ct. Therefore, it
results from EV owner preferences and varies across
individuals. It encompasses all idiosyncratic attri-
butes that lead to a person’s preference for an electric-
ity amount c1
t over an electricity amount c2
t (c1
t  c2
t )
for a price Pt. Besides idiosyncratic attributes, this
preference is inﬂuenced by the state of charge (SoCt)
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
8
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

an EV has at the time t of the choice. For example, an
EV owner with a state of charge of 90% might be less
willing to pay a high price for obtaining a certain
amount of electricity, whereas an EV owner with state
of charge of 20% might be more willing to accept a
high price. However, all these choices differ across
individuals. Since we cannot measure all psychologi-
cal attributes which lead to a preference c1
t  c2
t , we
observe the outcome of these idiosyncratic attributes,
as it is reﬂected on the way people make choices. By
observing this outcome, grid operators can make
more informed pricing decisions, as they are learning
about the EV population’s reactions to prices.
We collected user preferences through a real-world
data collection (section 3.2.3) during which we pre-
sented the customers with different charging amount
options c1
t ; c2
t ; . . . tied to a certain monetary value. For
example, assume a scenario where an EV owner has
to charge a certain amount of electricity within a day,
so that she has enough electricity to drive the next
day. In this scenario the EV owner can choose
between charging 3kWh at a total cost €3 (denoted as
B1 = (3kWh, €3)) or wait till prices drop and charge
4kWh at the same total cost of €3, B2 = (4kWh, €3).
This is feasible in our set up because the grid operator
announces the prices well in advance for the whole
time horizon T, therefore, the EV owners can plan
their charging based on their preferences. EV owners
can choose from a continuous space of consumption
values, starting from 0 to to the maximum capacity of
their EV batteries. Choosing B2 (B2 ≻B1) would mean
that an EV owner is willing to pay less per kWh and,
consequently, has lower valuation of each electricity
unit
than
a
person
who
would
choose
B1 ¼
3kWh; €3
ð
Þ, (B1 ≻B2). Repeating this process, we col-
lected user preferences and from the data points
matching electricity amounts to monetary values we
could approximate their function V ct
ð Þ over EV charg-
ing ct. To interact with the population of our data col-
lection and track their preferences, we extended the
mobile app presented by Koroleva et al. (2014). This
mobile app extension demonstrates how the EV
owner DSS elicits individual preferences. This process
is presented in detail in sections 3.2.3–3.2.5.
Assuming a customer has the following preferences
B1 ¼ ð1kWh; €1Þ; B2 ¼ ð2kWh; €3:2Þ, B3 ¼ ð3kWh; €4Þ,
B4 ¼ ð5kWh; €5:3Þ and B5 ¼ ð6kWh; €6Þ,14 they belong
to an implicit trajectory of continuous preferences
representing her valuation function of EV charging
(Chen and Pu 2004, Mitchell 1997). Plotting these pref-
erences on a graph (Figure 1) we can get the best ﬁt
function which connects these preferences and derive
an expectation for function V ct
ð Þ of this particular cus-
tomer. This function provides an estimation of how
this EV owner values the amounts of electricity
charged in her battery, and we use the price the EV
owner is willing to pay as a proxy for this valuation.
An EV owner who is willing to pay a high price for a
certain amount of electricity has a high valuation of
this amount, compared to one who is paying less.15
Literature has assumed that this valuation function
yields non-increasing marginal valuation for each
extra electricity unit (Bhattacharya et al. 2014, Lim-
mer 2019, Robu et al. 2013, Zheng and Shroff 2014).
We derive the structural form of this valuation func-
tion V ct
ð Þ from real-world data (section 3.2.3).
3.2.3.
Mobile App for Preference Collection. The
mobile app TamagoCar, presented by Koroleva et al.
(2014), provides users with the experience of driving
and charging an EV. Speciﬁcally, the app has a virtual
EV battery that gets depleted while the user commutes.
It identiﬁes automatically when a user commutes using
the phone’s accelerometer and tracks the difference
between GPS coordinates. Therefore, it is not possible
for a user to fake a commute. In our setting, we cross-
checked the speed of all commutes to ensure that there
was no gaming of the system (such as fake commutes).
During each commute, the app gets activated automati-
cally and depletes the virtual EV battery, based on the
distance commuted. Furthermore, the app does not
allow charging when commuting.
In order for the user to be able to commute, the EV
battery on the mobile app needs to be charged. Charg-
ing can happen in two ways: a) the user selects to
charge immediately based on the current prices or b)
the user selects to schedule the charging at time inter-
vals when the prices appear to be more beneﬁcial (in
case of price variation during the day). In order to
ensure a fair comparison among users we used an
efﬁciency score (e ¼
Total Cost
Total Electricity Consumption). This score
represents the main logic behind an EV owner who
Figure 1
Preference Trajectory of An Exemplary Customer
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
9
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

strives to minimize cost while covering her driving
needs: charge most of electricity when prices are low
and refrain from charging when prices increase.
Therefore, a consumer with a high efﬁciency score is a
consumer who tried to beneﬁt the most from the price
variation, while satisfying her driving needs and con-
straints. If a user commutes without having the bat-
tery charged enough or runs out of battery while
commuting, she receives a penalty in her efﬁciency
score. Therefore, through the tradeoff of charging
enough to drive but not overpaying, we can derive
the consumer valuation of this amount of electricity,
which can serve as a good approximation for the val-
uation function. The main screens of the mobile app
are presented in Figure 2.
3.2.4.
Preference Collection Process. In order to
elicit user preferences with respect to electricity con-
sumption, we conducted a one-week data collection
with the mobile app described before. The source of
the data collection was a group of business school
graduate students in the Netherlands. This popula-
tion choice is suitable for this context since the sub-
jects of the data collection are young, tech-savvy, and
keen on adopting new technologies such as electric
cars. This population segment is aware of the beneﬁts
of electric mobility (such as sustainability) and uses
mobile apps for many daily activities. Therefore, it is
natural for them to have a mobile app for scheduling
EV charging. In addition, they live and work/study
in
the
Netherlands,
therefore,
they
match
the
commuting patterns and habits of the Dutch data sets
we are using to calibrate our simulation (sections 4
and 5). University students have been used as sub-
jects in numerous data collection processes and
experiments (Bhattacherjee and Premkumar 2004,
Kim and Benbasat 2009, Wang and Benbasat 2009).
Especially in our case, the task they have to perform
is commute and charge their EV, as they would nor-
mally do, without being inﬂuenced by their student
identity.16
The preference data collection took place between
28 September 2015 and 4 October 2015. The partici-
pants were asked to commute at least once per day or
on average at least 6 times per week in order to get
the sign-up bonus. Furthermore, they were asked to
charge enough during each day, so that they have
electricity to drive the next day (planning horizon of
24 hours). We excluded from our sample persons that
did not commute once per day or on average at least 6
times per week. In this way, we ensured that at least
their daily commuting to work (or university) was
captured.
The electricity prices during the data collection
were
the
Dutch
wholesale
electricity
prices
adjusted to account for taxation and network fees
in the Netherlands. These prices were announced
before each day in the form of a price vector, so
that
the
participants
could
plan
their
charging
accordingly. Since they had the requirement to
charge enough electricity within 24 hours to cover
for their commute in the next day, they had no
Figure 2
Mobile App Main Screen, Charge Screen, and Commute Screen [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
10
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

intermediate deadlines within the day to inﬂuence
their decision (except the times they were unavail-
able for charging). Therefore, their decision about
how much to charge was based on their valuation
for
certain
amounts
of
electricity.
We
set
this
charging within 24 hours requirement to disentan-
gle
the
charging
decisions
from
deadlines
that
might appear within this 24-hour horizon. Decid-
ing to charge when prices are high indicates a
high valuation for this particular amount of elec-
tricity (e.g., for charging from a state of charge of
10% to a state of charge of 50%). In contrast, once
a person decides to postpone charging for a lower
price period, it means that this person does not
have a high valuation of this particular amount of
electricity, probably because the state of charge is
high enough to allow for her daily commute. The
battery size calibration for this data collection is
presented in Appendix S2.
3.2.5.
Data
Collection
Sample
and
Valuation
Results. The total number of participants in the data
collection were 154 (56 female, 92 male, and 6 with
gender not reported) in the age range of 20; 27
½
 with a
mean of 23 years old. In order to elicit their prefer-
ences, we asked them to decide when to charge their
EV based on the prices and their driving needs.
Therefore, persons who were willing to pay a higher
price for a certain amount of electricity, had a higher
valuation for this particular amount. For example, in
Figure 3 we show the different charging events for
the customer with ID 23 during the data collection.
On the horizontal axis there is the EV charging
amount in kWh and on the vertical axis the total cost
paid to obtain each amount. Over a week time period,
customer 23 charged her battery 6 times (some of the
charges coincide on the same line, for example there
are two charges from 0 to 4 kWh). Each charge has a
different cost depending on the electricity prices at
this time of the day. We normalized all charging
events so that they are in the same system of coordi-
nates (start from 0) and reﬂect the starting state of
charge of each event. In this way the events are
directly comparable.
We
observe
that
customer
23
charges
small
amounts of electricity when the costs are high and lar-
ger amounts when the prices are lower. From these
charging choices, we derive an approximation of the
V ct
ð Þ function, as illustrated in Figure 1. In our con-
text, the customers had to choose between charging a
speciﬁc amount at a certain electricity price, or wait
till another point in time during the day that the
prices will be different. They had the option choose
through all possible choices, since they knew the
prices in advance. For example, a person might have
to choose between charging 3kWh at a total cost €3
(choice B1 = (3kWh, €3)) and some other options like
waiting till prices drop and charge 4kWh at the total
cost of €3, B2 = (4kWh, €3). All these choices indicate
each person’s preferences and will help the DSS maxi-
mize the utility function U ct
ð Þ, given the derived
approximation of the V ct
ð Þ function for this EV
owner.
Deriving the best ﬁt polynomial concave function
of the charging options in Figure 3, we get a quadratic
valuation
function
of
EV
charging
(adjusted
R2 = 97.17%). In this quadratic form, we consider only
the upward part of the parabola (growing until the
maximum point at a decreasing rate). In the example
of customer 23, we observe that the valuation for elec-
tricity differs depending on the battery’s state of
charge. From 0kWh to 3kWh we see a steeper increase
in the valuation than from 3kWh to 4kWh, which
indicates the change in the preferences once the EV
owner has some electricity stored in the battery
(3kWh) compared to the situation when the battery is
empty (0kWh). This means that when an EV owner
has an empty battery, she is more prone to charging
at higher prices, hence, she puts higher valuation to
EV charging.
We repeat the process followed for customer 23 for
all 154 subjects in our sample and we calculate the
valuation function over the whole population. In Fig-
ure 4, we show the individual charging events of all
Figure 3
Individual Charging Preferences and Associated Costs for
Customer with ID 23 [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyon
linelibrary.com]
Figure 4
Individual Charging Preferences and Associated Costs for All
Participants and Valuation Function of the Population [Color
ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
11
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

subjects as data points starting from 0 state of charge
and the average valuation function of this population.
In this population, the best-ﬁt valuation function
approximation is the quadratic curve V ct
ð Þ ¼ 0:13
c2
t þ 1:56  ct (adjusted R2 = 93.18%). This result veri-
ﬁes the non-increasing marginal valuation modeling
assumptions made in the literature (Bhattacharya
et al. 2014, Galus and Andersson 2008, Limmer 2019,
Robu et al. 2013, Zheng and Shroff 2014). Further-
more, this result’s structural form is consistent with
the prior literature, as quadratic valuation functions
for EV charging have been commonly proposed by
previous work (Fahrioglu and Alvarado 1999, Ghosh
and Aggarwal 2017, Han et al. 2012, Li et al. 2011, Lu
et al. 2017, Luo et al. 2018, Samadi et al. 2010, Shak-
erighadi et al. 2018, Shuai et al. 2016, Tushar et al.
2012, Weckx et al. 2014, Xiang and Wei 2017). Limmer
(2019), in his review of EV charging utility functions,
ﬁnds that the quadratic is the most commonly
assumed
structural
form
of
this
function.
This
assumption regarding the structural form of the valu-
ation function is based on the fact that having low
state of charge in an EV’s battery has more severe
impact on people’s driving, as compared to just not
having a full state of charge. Therefore, the higher the
state of charge, the lower the marginal satisfaction the
EV owners enjoy, or, as Limmer (2019) states “a user
gains more satisfaction from increasing the state of
charge (SoC) of the battery from 50% to 60% than
from 90% to 100%.”
The expectation of V ct
ð Þ for each EV owner is esti-
mated by the DSS representing her in the market and
it is private information, not available to the grid
operator or other EV owners. In the rest of the study,
in accordance with the literature (Bhattacharya et al.
2014, Galus and Andersson 2008, Robu et al. 2013,
Zheng and Shroff 2014) and our ﬁndings, we assume
a valuation function with non-increasing marginal
valuation for each extra electricity unit charged. In
Appendix S4, we relax this quadratic valuation func-
tion, V ct
ð Þ ¼ 0:13  c2
t þ 1:56  ct, assumption, and we
show that our results are robust even if this assump-
tion does not hold on the EV owner side.
3.3. Smart Grid Operator’s Problem—Adaptive
Pricing
To induce a desired electricity demand proﬁle, grid
operators broadcast prices to the EV population.
These
prices
inﬂuence
the
overall
EV
charging
demand and can be used as signals to shape it. In
order to set electricity prices in a way that will induce
a desired EV charging demand, grid operators need
to know the individual valuation functions of the EV
owners in the population, their charging availability
vectors and their speciﬁc deadlines. However, these
parameters are private and not communicated to the
grid operators. Thus, it is not possible for grid opera-
tors to analytically calculate the optimal prices for
inducing a desired charging proﬁle, with the EV
owner information they have at their disposal. To
address this challenge, we propose a price setting
method, called adaptive pricing, which is based on
learning the average valuation function of an EV pop-
ulation from its reaction to a priori non-optimized
prices. First, we show the price setting of optimal
prices in a scenario where the EV population’s valua-
tion function V ct
ð Þ is known (perfect information sce-
nario).
3.3.1.
Optimal Prices: Perfect Information. Ideally,
the grid operator would like to have access to the
exact decision function U ct
ð Þ ¼ V ct
ð Þ  ct  Pt of each
EV owner, or of the whole population on average. If
the grid operator had this information, she would be
able to solve the EV population utility maximization
problem and calculate the optimal prices that can
induce a certain demand proﬁle.
In each EV owner’s utility function U ct
ð Þ, the valua-
tion function V ct
ð Þ is the only unknown component,
since the prices Pt are determined by the grid operator
and broadcast to all EV owners. First, we show how
given a certain valuation function of an EV popula-
tion, V ct
ð Þ ¼ a  c2
t þ b  ct, with parameters a and b
known to the grid operator, the optimal prices can be
set so that a desired demand proﬁle is achieved in
horizon T. And later, we relax the assumption of
knowing the valuation function of the population,
and introduce adaptive pricing to learn an estimation
of these valuation function parameters. The former
scenario represents the theoretically optimal case,
when grid operators have all information about the
EV owner decision making process and serves as a
benchmark for our approach. The latter scenario rep-
resents a more realistic scenario, since grid operators
cannot have access to all private valuation and prefer-
ence information of the EV owner population they are
facing.
The optimal prices under perfect information are
presented in Proposition 1 and this result serves as an
intermediate step for calculating the adaptive prices
(Proposition 2). In order to derive Proposition 1 the
following assumptions are made:
•
We
assume
an
average
customer
in
the
EV population. This average customer is decid-
ing
on
charging
based
on
Equation (8):
max
c1;...;cT
½

P
T
t¼1
E V ct
ð Þ
f
g  ct  Pt
ð
Þ  t:
•
Since the grid operator has no information
about the population’s charging availability, it
assumes that the average customer in the pop-
ulation
is available to charge during time
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
12
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

horizon T. Furthermore, the grid operator does
not have information about individual deadli-
nes and preferences, hence, these deadlines are
not accounted for in the price calculation.
•
From past observations, the grid operator can
observe how much electricity the EV owners
charge on average over time horizon T.
These assumptions allow grid operators to derive
approximate solutions, close to the theoretically opti-
mal ones. Despite making these assumptions, the
resulting prices are capable of inducing EV charging
quite close to the desired one, as we show in section 5.
In section 5, we evaluate these approximate solutions
in a simulation where the EV owner population has
diverse intermediate charging deadlines and avail-
abilities. There, we observe that our approximate
solutions yield very good results, close to the theoreti-
cally optimal ones, while they outperform all bench-
marks.
PROPOSITION 1.
When the grid operator has access to the
EV population’s valuation function V ct
ð Þ ¼ a  c2
t þ b  ct,
the optimal prices to induce an average desired proﬁle
c ¼ c
1; . . .; c
T


are:
P1  2  a  c
1 ¼ . . . ¼ PT  2  a  c
T:
ð13Þ
The
proof
of
Proposition 1
is
found
in
Appendix S3. Proposition 1 shows that all prices over
time horizon T are related through P1  2  a  c
1 ¼
. . . ¼ PT  2  a  c
T. Furthermore, it shows that there is
a set of optimal price vectors, all of which need to sat-
isfy the relationship in Proposition 1. To select one of
these optimal price vectors, the grid operators need to
select one of the prices, for example, P1 and express
the rest Pt, 8t 2 2; . . .; T
f
g as: Pt ¼ P1 þ 2  a  c
t  c
1


8t 2 2; . . .; T
f
g.
The optimal prices do not take into account individ-
ual deadlines and preferences of the population, since
these attributes are private to the EV owners and the
DSS representing them. Therefore, the optimal prices
achieve a result very close to the desired proﬁle but
not exactly the same. Despite this limitation, the opti-
mal prices provide a very good benchmark of how
the mechanism would perform, given that these pri-
vate deadlines are not accessible by grid operators
and energy providers.
3.3.2.
Imperfect Information: Adaptive pricing. In
reality, the valuation function V ct
ð Þ is not available to
the grid operator, since it encompasses all idiosyn-
cratic characteristics of each EV population the grid is
facing. One assumption that the grid operator can
make is that this valuation function V ct
ð Þ yields non-
increasing marginal valuation for each extra electric-
ity unit (V ct
ð Þ ¼ a  c2
t þ b  ct), which is a common
assumption made by EV charging literature (Limmer
2019) and validated by our real-world data in sec-
tion 3.2.3. Based on this assumption, grid operators
know that the optimal prices should be satisfying
P1  2  a  c
1 ¼ . . . ¼ PT  2  a  c
T (Proposition 1), but
the parameters a and b of this population are
unknown. The parameter b is not inﬂuencing the opti-
mal prices, hence, it is not required to be learned by
the grid operators. The parameter a is the one inﬂu-
encing the optimal prices and needs to be learned
from the EV owners’ reaction to prices. To learn this
parameter, grid operators interact with the EV popu-
lation and estimate it from the EV charging responses
they receive. We call this price setting method adaptive
pricing, because of its ability to adapt to customers’
responses and market conditions.
Adaptive pricing is ﬂexible in terms of ofﬂine cali-
bration, and potential additions of customers with dif-
ferent valuation functions or drop-outs of existing
customers can be observed online and the grid opera-
tor can adapt the broadcast prices. Speciﬁcally, there
are two parameter groups that ideally should be cali-
brated ofﬂine: (a) the parameters of the valuation
function (a and b) and (b) the average amount of elec-
tricity consumed in EV charging during time horizon
T. However, both parameter groups can be learned
online, contributing to the ﬂexibility of our proposed
method. Regarding the ﬁrst one—valuation function
parameters a and b—adaptive pricing can work with-
out having any prior knowledge of these parameters,
as shown in Proposition 2. It can progressively esti-
mate them from the population’s sub-optimal reac-
tions to prices. Therefore, even in an online setting,
adaptive pricing will adapt to the reactions of the popu-
lation, after a time horizon T. The same holds for the
second parameter—average amount of electricity con-
sumed in EV charging during time horizon T. This
parameter is estimated by grid operators based on the
population they are facing. In case there are changes
in the populations, such as potential additions of EVs,
EV drop-outs, etc., these can be observed at the end of
time horizon T, and the pricing scheme will be
adjusted. Therefore, the presented mechanism will
work similarly in an online setting, it will just need a
time horizon T to adapt to any potential changes. We
show, next, how adaptive pricing works and in sec-
tion 5 we evaluate its performance in simulations,
comparing it with commonly used benchmarks.
Assume the grid operator broadcasts a priori non-
optimized prices P0
t, ∀t 2 T, since she has no infor-
mation about the parameters a and b in the valuation
function
V ct
ð Þ ¼ a  c2
t þ b  ct.
After
broadcasting
prices P0
t, ∀t 2 T, the grid operator observes an aver-
age charging proﬁle c0 ¼ c0
1; . . .; c0
T


in the EV owner
population, which is not the desired proﬁle c* 6¼ c’.
In
order
to
derive
Proposition 2,
the
same
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
13
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

assumptions as Proposition 1 (described in sec-
tion 3.3.1) hold.
PROPOSITION 2.
When the grid operator has no informa-
tion about the parameters a and b of the EV population’s
valuation
function
V ct
ð Þ ¼ a  c2
t þ b  ct,
and
only
observes the average charging demand c0 ¼ c0
1; . . .; c0
T


resulting from a priori non-optimized prices Pt’, ∀t 2 T,
the adaptive prices to induce an average desired proﬁle c*
are:
P1  2  ^a  c
1 ¼ . . . ¼ PT  2  ^a  c
T;
ð14Þ
where ^a ¼
PN
t¼2
P0
1P0
t
2ðc0
1c0
tÞ
N1
and N is the subset of T(N ⊆T)
that includes only the time intervals t for which c’t 6¼ 0:
N ¼
tjc0t6¼0
n
o
.
Appendix S3 shows the derivation of the adaptive
prices based on learning from reactions to a priori non-
optimized prices. Adaptive prices are not optimal, how-
ever, they provide a good approximation for setting
the prices so that a desired proﬁle is achieved. We
compare their performance against benchmarks and
the optimal prices assuming perfect information on
the grid operator’s side.
4. Data Calibration
In order to assess the impact of our method in the
grid, we calibrate it with real-word data. We use the
Netherlands as a setting for our tests; all calibration
data sets originate from this country. The data sets
used include driving proﬁles of EV owners, different
battery and range speciﬁcations depending on the EV
type a driver owns, as well as commonly used pricing
benchmarks.
4.1. Driving Proﬁles
Each EV owner’s driving proﬁle includes the num-
ber of deadlines d
j j throughout the day, the timing
of each deadline td 2 d, the charging availability
vector k ¼ 1; . . .; T
½
 over time horizon T, the driv-
ing needs vector D ¼ D1; . . .; DT
½
, as well as the
expected electricity Ed required to be charged by
each deadline td. For the driving proﬁle calibration,
we
use
real-world
data
distributions
from
the
Dutch Bureau of Statistics.17 From these data distri-
butions we derive times of arrival and departure,
different trips during the day per customer and
average distance per trip. An aggregation of 1000
driving proﬁles averaged over a day is presented
in Figure 5. We observe a morning peak until 10:00
and an afternoon peak starting from 13:00 and
decreasing until 20:00, when most commuters have
returned home. This dataset contains urban driving
data within the city, hence, we do not observe long
distance commutes. Finally, it includes both week-
day and weekend commutes.
4.2. EV Types
Different EVs have different battery sizes and require
different time to be charged fully. In our simulations,
we assume different EV types as displayed in
Table 2.18 Since the shares of population that own
each car are unknown, we draw from a distribution
where Nissan Leaf has a 40% probability of appear-
ance and each Tesla model has a 20% probability of
appearance. These probabilities are chosen due to the
fact that Nissan Leaf is a more affordable car.
4.3. Pricing Schemes – Benchmarks
Since the aim of this paper was to examine the effect
of adaptive pricing in creating certain desired demand
proﬁles, we use currently used pricing schemes as
benchmarks. These pricing schemes are the most
commonly used in electricity markets, and aim to
induce different demand patterns. First, we present
EV charging results under the current pricing (ﬂat
pricing) without the use of a smart charging DSS on
the EV owner’s side. We obtained charging demand
data from the Netherlands during 2013, when the EV
owners were paying a ﬂat tariff (per kWh) for charg-
ing their EVs. Second, we use two more advanced
pricing schemes, namely, time-of-use (TOU) and vari-
able pricing.
In all our simulation experiments we assume that
these prices are known to the EV owners ahead of
time,19
as
this
is
the
current
situation
in
the
Netherlands, where our data comes from. In other
Table 2
EV Types and Battery Speciﬁcations
Tesla S
Nissan Leaf
Battery capacity (kWh)
40
60
85
30
Distance with full battery (km)
257.6
370.1
563.3
172.2
Charging time for full battery at
low-speed charging (h)
12
17.5
23
7
Figure 5
Driving
Demand
(Source:
Central
Bureau
of
Statistics,
Netherlands)
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
14
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

countries, such as USA, this assumption might not
hold, as the EV charging price might be the spot
price, which is unknown ahead of time (Jiang and
Powell 2016). However, to ensure coherence of our
data and results we will assume the prices known
ahead of time T.
4.3.1
Flat Pricing - NL Data. This benchmark
consists of data from the Netherlands during 2013.
This data set includes EV charging transactions start-
ing from 11 January 2013 to 31 December 2013
(source: charging infrastructure company). In total, it
represents 1500 EV owners and 231,995 charging
transactions with the grid. All these charging transac-
tions took place under ﬂat pricing schemes, providing
no incentives for the EV owners to optimize or shift
EV charging based on cost savings. The mean and
standard deviation of the daily charging demand are
shown in the boxplot diagram of Figure 6. We see that
most of the customers charge their cars from 9:00 to
15:00, which indicates charging at work. Another
peak occurs between 19:00 and 20:00 when they have
returned home. This benchmark serves as our base-
line, reﬂecting the current EV charging situation. It
does not assume any smart charging DSS on the EV
owners’ side. Instead, it reﬂects EV charging purely
driven by convenience.
4.3.2.
Time-Of-Use
Pricing. Time-of-use
(TOU)
pricing is a form of tiered electricity pricing used by
energy providers to counter-incentivize consumption
during part-peak or peak hours (Dong et al. 2017,
Palensky and Dietrich 2011). This form of pricing is
quite common for household consumption subscrip-
tions but not as common for EV charging pricing. At
the moment Paciﬁc Gas and Electric Company has
implemented a TOU pricing scheme for EVs in the
form of a three-part tariff (Figure 6).20 We use this
pricing scheme to run simulations, where EV owners
are equipped with the presented smart charging DSS.
We have converted the currency to reﬂect European
prices since all our data originate from the Nether-
lands. The converted prices are: €0.38 for Peak [14:00–
21:00], €0.20 for Part Peak [7:00–14:00] and [21:00–
23:00], and €0.10 for Off peak [23:00–7:00] (Figure 7).
4.3.3.
Variable Pricing. One of the most advanced
electricity pricing schemes are the variable pricing
schemes, also known as real-time pricing schemes
(M€arkle-Huß et al. 2018, Palensky and Dietrich 2011),
which are effective in incentivizing electricity consump-
tion when demand is low and providing counter-incen-
tives when demand is high. These pricing schemes
reﬂect the actual matching between demand and sup-
ply and can have price rates which change every 1 hour
(M€arkle-Huß et al. 2018) or even 15 minutes.
Since there is no variable pricing scheme for EV
charging in the current electricity market, we con-
struct a variable pricing scheme that reﬂects the
matching of demand and supply in the wholesale
market. Through this pricing scheme, we aim to cap-
ture the availability of supply in the electricity mar-
ket. For this purpose, we use the European Power
Exchange (EPEX) SPOT clearing prices21 (Figure 8), in
which the price variation indicates the energy avail-
ability. Figure 8 depicts a typical daily price curve.
In order to compare the outcome of these schemes,
they must bring the same revenue to the energy pro-
vider over a time period T (revenue equivalent),
Figure 6
Mean EV Charging Demand and Variability under Flat Pricing
(Steady-State Curve Over the Period 11 January 2013–31
December 2013)
Figure 7
Time-Of-Use Prices Converted to EU Currency (Source: Paci-
ﬁc Gas and Electric Company) [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 8
Variable Daily Price Curve (Constructed Using EPEX SPOT
Clearing Prices)
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
15
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

therefore, we normalized the variable pricing scheme
to give the same daily average price per kWh as the
TOU scheme. These prices serve as an example of
variable schemes, without loss of generality any other
variable scheme could be used.
5. Evaluation: Scenario Analysis
5.1. Simulation Environment
We build a simulation environment that approxi-
mates the conditions of an energy market where EV
owners have to purchase electricity to charge their
EVs. Our simulation is based on Power Trading
Agent Competition (Power TAC) (Ketter et al. 2016a,
b) software platform which allows to implement
large-scale smart grid simulations. In this simulation,
we model a grid operator broadcasting electricity
prices and a population of EV owners, each of whom
is represented by a DSS. This DSS is responsible for
deciding on the optimal EV charging proﬁle based on
the utility maximization objective (Equation (8)). In
this simulation environment, we use all aforemen-
tioned benchmarks and the theoretically optimal
result in comparison with adaptive pricing to evaluate
its performance.
5.1.1.
Simulation Parameter Calibration. We cali-
brate the parameters of our simulation as described
below.
Charging infrastructure constraints: We assume
that EV owners can charge at different charging rates
depending on the charging infrastructure: Level 1
(3.3–3.6 kW), which is the lowest charging rate avail-
able by the infrastructure, Level 2 (7.2 kW), Level 3
(25 kW). Level 3 charging is often found as “fast
charging” and it is typically available in public charg-
ing poles. There are higher levels of charging not
modeled in this study as they are not available in all
locations.
Time discretization: We assume time granularity
of Dt = 1h. Any Dt > 0 could be chosen depending on
the modeling assumptions.
Planning horizon: We assume pricing and planning
horizons of T = 168h (weekly horizons). Any other
value can be chosen for T without loss of generality.
Simulation duration: For each reported result, we
run the simulation for time 3  T and we report the
results during time t 2 T; . . .; 2  T
f
g so that we remove
any starting or ending effects of the simulation that
might inﬂuence the results (Law and Kelton 2000).
DSS inputs: The DSS receives as input from the EV
owner the following parameters: the number of dead-
lines jdj throughout the planning horizon T, the tim-
ing of each deadline td 2 d, the charging availability
vector
k ¼ 1; . . .; T
½
,
the
driving
needs
vector
D ¼ D1; . . .; DT
½
, as well as the expected electricity Ed
required to be charged by each deadline td. Further-
more, the DSS receives Pt as broadcast by the grid
operator over time horizon T. These prices can be ﬂat,
TOU, variable or adaptive. Finally, the DSS infers each
EV owner’s valuation function V ct
ð Þ using the method
presented in section 3.2.3.
DSS objective function: The DSS has as its objec-
tive
to
ﬁnd
the
optimal
charging
vector
c0 ¼ c01; . . .; c0T
½
 that maximizes its expected utility
U ct
ð Þ over T, subject to individual constraints.
DSS output: The DSS returns to the grid the EV
owner’s vector c0 ¼ c01; . . .; c0T
½
. The grid observes the
aggregate EV charging demand coming from all EV
owners in the population.
5.1.2
Evaluation Metrics. To quantify the effect of
adaptive pricing, compared to ﬂat, time-of-use and
variable prices, as well as the theoretically optimal
result we use different metrics depending on the
desired outcome.
When a ﬂat demand proﬁle with low volatility is
desirable, we use the peak-to-average ratio (PAR)
metric (PAR ¼ maxtTc0
t
c0
rms
¼
maxtTc0
t
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
T
PT
t¼1 c02
t
q
) and the absolute
peak of the charging demand maxt2Tc’t. PAR is also
known as “crest factor” and indicates how extreme
the peaks in a waveform are. PAR reduction is impor-
tant because much of the cost of energy supply is dri-
ven by peak demand (Liu et al. 2014, Mohsenian-Rad
et al. 2010). A PAR value closer to 1 indicates low
volatility. The absolute peak, maxt2Tc’t, is an indicator
of the extra infrastructure needed to accommodate
peak demand. Therefore, we are interested in meth-
ods that reduce the absolute peaks.
When a very volatile demand proﬁle is desirable,
matching for example the generation pattern of a RES,
the PAR and absolute peak metrics are not suitable,
since they evaluate the smoothness of a curve.
Instead, we use the mean absolute percentage error as
metric to evaluate how close the induced proﬁle is to
the desired one: MAPE ¼ 100
T
PT
t¼1 j c
t c0
t
c
t
j, where c’t is
the observed charging.
5.2. Adaptive Pricing: Performance
To evaluate the performance of adaptive pricing, we
examine its ability to induce certain demand patterns.
We compare this ability with the pricing benchmarks
presented in section 4.3.
Typically, grid operators are interested in a ﬂat
demand proﬁle, assuming that the supply proﬁle is
also ﬂat. In this way, there is high match between
demand and supply and low risk of black- or brown-
outs in the grid. Therefore, we show, ﬁrst, a scenario
where the desired charging proﬁle is entirely ﬂat
c
t ¼ 1kWh 8t 2 T (Figure 9). This scenario represents
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
16
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

the current situation, that is, what our mechanism can
contribute
currently
to
a
sustainable
grid
(row
“Today” in Table 1). Figure 9 shows that adaptive pric-
ing performed very well in inducing a proﬁle close to
the ideal ﬂat one. We compare this result (Table 3)
with the baseline scenario of EV charging under ﬂat
pricing shown in 4.3. However, the most reﬂective
comparison is the one with the perfect information
scenario. We should mention that even in the perfect
information scenario, in which the grid operator has
perfect knowledge about the EV population’s valua-
tion function, the resulting charging proﬁle is not
entirely ﬂat, due to individual deadlines and prefer-
ences that are unknown to the grid.
Table 3 shows the evaluation metrics PAR and
absolute peak for adaptive pricing, as well as the theo-
retically optimal result under perfect information.
PAR needs to be as close as possible to 1, indicating a
demand curve with low volatility and the absolute
peak needs to be as low as possible. We see that adap-
tive pricing induces a charging demand very close to
the desired proﬁle and has much lower PAR and
absolute peak than the current situation in NL (ﬂat
pricing).
Besides entirely ﬂat proﬁles, grid operators cur-
rently use TOU and variable pricing schemes to
induce
proﬁles
that
complement
pre-existing
demand, such as household demand. Therefore, the
TOU and variable pricing schemes aim to create vola-
tile demand proﬁles. We show, next, how adaptive
pricing performs, if it aims to create the same proﬁle
as the TOU pricing scheme shown in section 4.3.
These
two
scenarios
still
represent
the
current
situation (row “Today” in Table 1). The desired pro-
ﬁles, c*, in the TOU and variable pricing cases are not
ﬂat, instead they are aiming to complement some
existing demand. Therefore, in the next comparisons,
the MAPE metric will serve as an indicator for good-
ness of ﬁt.
In Figure 10, we show a scenario where adaptive
pricing has to induce demand as shown in the desired
demand proﬁle c*. This desired proﬁle is in accor-
dance to what a TOU pricing would induce. We see,
in Figure 10, that adaptive pricing is inducing a proﬁle
which is closer to what TOU pricing would induce,
and very close to what the optimal pricing under per-
fect information would induce. To quantify this effect,
we show the respective MAPE values in Table 4. We
see that adaptive pricing has a lower MAPE (MAPE
16.21%) compared to TOU pricing (MAPE 20.21%)
and a MAPE quite close to the optimal scenario under
perfect
information
(MAPE
13.79%).
This
result
shows that even when adaptive pricing has to induce
non-ﬂat demand, it can outperform currently used
benchmarks, approaching the theoretically optimal
scenario.
Next, we test adaptive pricing’s performance in
inducing a demand pattern that a variable pricing
scheme would desire to induce. This proﬁle, c*, is
volatile, aiming to complement existing demand. This
desired proﬁle is shown in Figure 11, together with
the demand created by variable and adaptive pricing,
and the optimal charging that would ideally take
place under perfect information. The quantiﬁed com-
parison in terms of MAPE is presented in Table 5,
Figure 9
EV Charging Convergence to the Desired Charging Proﬁle
c
t ¼ 1kWh
8t 2 T-Benchmarking with The Optimal Charg-
ing under Perfect Information [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 3
PAR and Absolute Peak Comparison
PAR
Absolute
peak (kWh)
Flat pricing - NL data
1.51
2.04
Adaptive pricing (desired proﬁle c
t ¼ 1kWh
8t 2 T)
1.13
1.16
Average optimal charging (perfect information)
1.12
1.15
Figure 10
EV Charging Convergence to the Desired Charging Proﬁle
c* - Benchmarking with the Optimal Charging under Perfect
Information and TOU Pricing [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 4
MAPE Comparison—Benchmarking with the Optimal Charging
under Perfect Information and TOU Pricing
MAPE (%)
TOU pricing
20.21
Adaptive pricing (desired proﬁle c* - in accordance to
what TOU pricing would induce)
16.21
Average optimal charging (perfect information)
13.79
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
17
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

where it is shown that adaptive pricing is creating a
demand proﬁle closer to the desired one (MAPE
21.37%), compared to the variable pricing (MAPE
28.12%) and a demand close to the one that would be
theoretically optimal, if the grid operator had perfect
information (MAPE 18.88%). In this result, the desired
demand is more volatile than before, being harder to
be matched by the EV charging demand. Consistently
with the previous result, adaptive pricing is outper-
forming the currently used variable pricing, and is
approaching the theoretically optimal scenario, devi-
ating by less than 2.5% of MAPE.
However, when RES become broadly adopted as
electricity supply sources, a demand proﬁle with
higher volatility than the previous one would be
required. The reason is that many RES (such as wind
turbines, photovoltaic panels, etc.) have volatile pro-
duction patterns - sometimes weather dependent, and
therefore, they require a similarly volatile demand
pattern to ensure the reliable operation of the grid
(Golari et al. 2017). Using adaptive pricing, energy
stakeholders can induce EV charging demand proﬁles
of any shape, catering to the needs of a grid with large
RES adoption. This scenario is an example of the row
labeled “Tomorrow” in Table 1, and shows how our
mechanism can facilitate a sustainable EV transition
coupled with high RES adoption.
To test adaptive pricing’s ability to induce any type
of volatile demand proﬁles, we run simulation scenar-
ios in which the desired charging proﬁle was drawn
from a uniform distribution c
t U 0:1; 6
ð
Þ, ∀t 2 T.
The number 0.1 is selected on the basis that a RES has
an output greater than 0, whereas the number 6 is ran-
domly chosen. This approach allows for benchmark-
ing adaptive pricing against any randomly generated
stochastic proﬁle, making our results generalizable to
unpredictable generation proﬁles.
Due to the stochastic nature of the desired proﬁle
(c
t U 0:1; 6
ð
Þ, ∀t 2 T), we run 100 simulation scenar-
ios where c
t U 0:1; 6
ð
Þ, ∀t 2 T. These simulation sce-
narios represent rather volatile demand proﬁles and
can serve as extreme evaluation cases, which are, typi-
cally, difﬁcult to be matched with traditional TOU or
variable pricing schemes. The daily average of one of
the 100 proﬁles (randomly selected) is depicted in
Figure 12.
In Figure 12, the charging under adaptive pricing
compared to the desired one has a MAPE of 16.73%,
whereas the charging under optimal prices assuming
the grid operator has perfect information about the
population’s
valuation
function
has
a
MAPE
of
12.20%. This result shows that adaptive pricing can
achieve results very close to the ones that a grid opera-
tor would achieve, if she had perfect information, even
when the desired demand is extremely volatile.
We compute the average MAPE across all 100 simu-
lation scenarios. Comparing the average charging
under adaptive pricing with the desired proﬁle c*, we
get a MAPE in the range 13:50%; 30:07%
½
 with an aver-
age value of 20.84%, across 100 simulation runs. Com-
paring the desired charging with the optimal charging
under perfect information, we get a MAPE in the range
9:69%; 24:67%
½
 with an average value of 15.71% across
100 simulation runs. The comparison of the two results
is presented in the boxplot of Figure 13. The difference
between the two means is statistically signiﬁcant with a
p-value of 2.96  1019.
Figure 13 shows that adaptive pricing is deviating on
average by 20.84% from the desired proﬁle, compared
to 15.71% that the charging would deviate from the
desired, if the grid operator had perfect information
about the population’s decision function. This 15.71%
is attributed to all private deadlines td, charging
requirements Ed, charging availability vectors k and all
Figure 12
EV Charging Convergence to a Desired Charging Proﬁle
c
t U 0:1; 6
ð
Þ, ∀t 2 T [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wile
yonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 11
EV Charging Convergence to the Desired Charging Proﬁle
c* - Benchmarking with the Optimal Charging under Perfect
Information and Variable Pricing [Color ﬁgure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 5
MAPE Comparison-Benchmarking with the Optimal Charging
under Perfect Information and Variable Pricing
MAPE (%)
Variable pricing
28.12
Adaptive pricing (desired proﬁle c* - in accordance
to what variable pricing would induce)
21.37
Average optimal charging (perfect information)
18.88
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
18
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

other private constraints that vary across individuals
and cannot be captured by the grid operator. This out-
come indicates that adaptive pricing is performing very
well in inducing a proﬁle not that far from the charg-
ing a grid operator would induce, if she had perfect
information about the exact valuation function of the
EV population (theoretically optimal scenario). The
desired proﬁles, in these 100 simulation runs, are very
volatile, hence, quite difﬁcult to be matched with any
traditional TOU or variable pricing scheme. Therefore,
adaptive pricing can be a useful tool for grid stakehold-
ers toward creating volatile EV charging demand.
In Appendix S4, we relax the previous quadratic
valuation function assumption, and we run all results
without this assumption in place. We show that our
results are robust even if this assumption does not
hold on the EV owner side.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
Electricity markets are complex and volatile environ-
ments, in which decisions must be made fast in order
for the grid to be stabilized. The addition of EVs in
these fast-paced environments creates new chal-
lenges,
since
signiﬁcant
amounts
of
electricity
demand need to be managed to ensure grid stability.
Energy policymakers are interested in ways to design
pricing schemes (price-based DR) that will re-distri-
bute part of the peak demand in order to alleviate the
grid infrastructure and ensure its reliable operation.
In this effort to set the right pricing schemes, new
peaks might be created at low-price periods. This
effect is expected to be ampliﬁed when EV owners
adopt smart charging decision support, to assist them
with optimal charging decisions. Therefore, grid
stakeholders such as grid operators or energy provi-
ders can beneﬁt from advanced pricing schemes that
are able to smooth the demand or induce demand that
approaches a desired proﬁle.
We presented adaptive pricing, a method to learn
from EV owners’ reactions to a priori non-optimized
prices and adjust the broadcast prices accordingly.
We evaluated our results in simulations, where we
found that adaptive pricing outperforms the current
electricity pricing schemes, yielding results close to
the theoretically optimal ones. We tested our method
in inducing both ﬂat and extremely volatile demand
proﬁles, and we saw that in both cases it induces pro-
ﬁles close to the theoretical optimum under perfect
information. Speciﬁcally, our method achieved a PAR
of 1.13, which indicates reduced volatility in the EV
charging
demand.
Furthermore,
in
very
volatile
demand scenarios, our method achieved a demand
proﬁle deviating on average by 20.84% from the desir-
able one, while the best achievable result given pri-
vate constraints was deviating on average by 15.71%.
Finally, we showed that our method can yield robust
results even when EV owners deviate from the pre-
assumed way of reacting to prices, making it prefer-
able over currently used benchmarks.
Our method requires no prior knowledge about the
EV population, as it can learn from interactions with
the EV owners. That makes it ﬂexible and applicable
to any EV population. Furthermore, it supports grid
stability and sustainability by inducing ﬂat demand
proﬁles or proﬁles that follow RES generation pat-
terns. Therefore, grid operators and energy providers
can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly in their effort to facilitate a
sustainable EV transition. Speciﬁcally, grid operators
can be assisted in planning grid capacity, so that
demand and supply are matched and the reliable
operation of the grid is not threatened. In addition,
energy providers can integrate rather volatile RES in
their
generation
portfolios
without
risking
high
imbalance charges, being at the same time compliant
with the emissions regulations. Thus, adaptive pricing
can be a useful incentive tool for grid stakeholders in
their effort to plan their operations more effectively
under imperfect information scenarios.
In this work, we made some assumptions that if
relaxed can open interesting pathways for future
research. First, we assumed that EV owners are repre-
sented by DSS assisting them with their EV charging
decisions. This assumption might not be the norm
currently in all EVs. In a scenario where such a DSS is
not largely available, it might be that advanced pric-
ing schemes, such as adaptive pricing, do not reach
their full potential as users do not beneﬁt the most
from price variations, for example, because of cogni-
tive overload or lack of time. However, even in such a
scenario an improvement toward shaping the electric-
ity demand will take place. It would be interesting for
future work to assess the level of maturity of such
technologies and draw a timeline from partial to full
adoption. Such a timeline will allow stakeholders to
anticipate when advanced pricing schemes will be
able to reach their full potential, as well as evaluate
Figure 13
MAPE of the Average Charging under Adaptive Pricing Com-
pared to the Average Desired Proﬁle c* and MAPE of the
Optimal Charging Compared to the Average Desired Proﬁle
c* [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
19
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

the degree of improvement achieved on the way to
full adoption.
Moreover, we assumed quadratic EV charging valu-
ation functions. Even though this assumption has been
made in the literature, and our results are shown to be
robust to this assumption (Appendix S4), there are
other structural forms that could be considered. The
impact of this assumption is mainly reﬂected on the
EV charging demand, as the valuation function deter-
mines the EV driver response to prices (Limmer 2019).
If this assumption gets relaxed, adaptive pricing might
not yield the best possible results, however, because of
its adaptive nature, some improvement will take place
compared to the currently used benchmarks. Future
research can explore this assumption further by con-
ducting a large-scale data collection via interactions
with EV owners and elicit the exact structural form of
this valuation function. In this way, future work could
quantify precisely the responses of EV owners and
evaluate this assumption at a larger scale.
In addition, we assumed that our model receives
the required inputs directly from the EV owner. A
future extension would be to learn these inputs pro-
gressively, using machine learning. Finally, it would
be valuable to electricity pricing literature and smart
grid practitioners to examine the effect of adaptive pric-
ing within energy cooperatives which act as groups of
consumers with common objectives (Akasiadis and
Chalkiadakis 2017, Robu et al. 2012). In such coopera-
tives, matching EV charging with RES generation can
create signiﬁcant energy and cost savings. Further-
more, relaxing the private valuation function assump-
tion, EV owners can identify other owners with
valuation functions matching their coalition objectives
and try to attract them in their coalition.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Angelos Tsereklas-Zafeirakis and Govert
Buijs for their support during the TamagoCar data collection.
Notes
1http://energy.gov/articles/history-electric-car
[Accessed
19 January 2020]
2https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=97&t=3
[Accessed 19 January 2020]
3https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/onh00/bar8.htm [Accessed
19 January 2020]
4https://pushevs.com/2016/11/23/electric-cars-range-eff
iciency-comparison/ [Accessed 19 January 2020]
5https://www.pge.com/en_US/residential/rate-plans/rate-
plan-options/electric-vehicle-base-plan/electric-vehicle-base-
plan.page [Accessed 19 January 2020]
6https://www.zap-map.com/charge-points/ev-energy-tariff
s/ [Accessed 19 January 2020]
7https://www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid/operation_ce
nters.html [Accessed 19 January 2020]
8http://www.nissanusa.com/electric-cars/leaf/ [Accessed
19 January 2020]
9https://www.tesla.com/models [Accessed 19 January 2020]
10EV charging is constrained by the power rate (in kW)
allowed by the charger (charging speed), and depending
on that rate, charging might take longer or shorter to
obtain a desired amount of electricity (in kWh).
11We assume the EV is not feeding electricity back to the
grid (vehicle-to-grid, V2G), since this functionality is not
currently available to most EV owners. A future extension
would relax this assumption by incorporating V2G.
12In behavioral economics literature the term utility is tied
to the notion of uncertainty and risk (Kahneman and
Tversky 1979, Wakker and Deneffe 1996) and mainly
refers to human decision makers. In our context, the DSS
is the decision maker (and not a human) and the utility
function represents its decision function as described by
Russell and Norvig (1995).
13In the literature the inverse conversion can be found, as
well: V ct
ð Þ ¼ U ct
ð Þ  ct  Pt. We adopt the notation in Eq. (6)
similar to Robuet al. (2013), Bhattacharya et al. (2014).
14These numbers serve as an illustrative example and they
do not represent real data.
15EV charging valuation encompasses many idiosyncratic
attributes that lead to a choice of a certain mount of EV
charging. Since we cannot measure them, we use the price as
a proxy of this valuation, assuming that it expresses people’s
degree of desire for a certain amount of EV charging.
16Their motivation was tied to their course grades: they
were given a sign-up bonus grade for participating in the
process and an extra bonus for being in the top 30 list of
the leaderboard. In this way, they were incentivized both
to participate and to make the best use of the price varia-
tions and have cost savings.
17www.cbs.nl [Accessed 19 January 2020]
18The distance with full battery comes from the company’s
speciﬁcations.
19http://www.idolaad.com/shared-content/blog/rick-wolbe
rtus/2016/charge-tarrifs.html [Accessed 19 January 2020]
20https://www.pge.com/en_US/residential/rate-plans/ra
te-plan-options/electric-vehicle-base-plan/electric-vehicle-
base-plan.page [Accessed 19 January 2020]
21http://www.epexspot.com/en/ [Accessed 19 January 2020]
References
Aasness, J., B. Holtsmark. 1993. Consumer Demand in a General
Equilibrium Model for Environmental Analysis. Central Bureau
of Statistics, Norway.
Aﬂaki, S., P. R. Kleindorfer, M. Polvorinos, V. S0aenz. 2013. Find-
ing and implementing energy efﬁciency projects in industrial
facilities. Prod. Oper. Manag. 22(3): 503–517.
Akasiadis, C., G. Chalkiadakis. 2017. Cooperative electricity con-
sumption shifting. Sustain. Energy Grids Net. 9: 38–58.
Albadi, M., E. Elsaadany. 2008. A summary of demand response
in electricity markets. Elec. Power Syst. Res. 78(11): 1989–1996.
Almuhtady, A., S. Lee, E. Romeijn, M. Wynblatt, J. Ni. 2014. A degra-
dation-informed battery-swapping policy for ﬂeets of electric or
hybrid-electric vehicles. Transport. Sci. 48(4): 609–618.
Araman, V. F., R. Caldentey. 2009. Dynamic pricing for nonper-
ishable products with demand learning. Oper. Res. 57(5):
1169–1188.
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
20
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

Atasu, A., C. J. Corbett, X. Huang, L. B. Toktay. 2020. Sustainable
operations management through the perspective of manufac-
turing & service operations management. Manuf. Serv. Oper.
Manag. 22(1): 146–157.
Avci, B., K. Girotra, S. Netessine. 2015. Electric vehicles with a
battery
switching
station:
Adoption
and
environmental
impact. Management Sci. 61(4): 772–794.
Ba, S., L. L. Lisic, Q. Liu, J. Stallaert. 2013. Stock market reaction
to green vehicle innovation. Prod. Oper. Manag. 22(4): 976–990.
Baker, P., R. Blundell, J. Micklewright. 1989. Modelling household
energy expenditures using microdata. Econ. J. 99(397): 720–
738.
Ban, G. Y., N. B. Keskin. (2017). Personalized dynamic pricing
with machine learning. Available at https://ssrn.com/abstrac
t=2972985orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn
(accessed
date
may 23, 2017).
Beenstock, M., E. Goldin, D. Nabot. 1999. The demand for electric-
ity in Israel. Energy Econ. 21(2): 168–183.
Bernard, J. T., D. Bolduc, D. Belanger. 1996. Quebec residential
electricity demand: A microeconometric approach. Ca. J. Econ.
92–113.
Bernstein, M. A., J. Grifﬁn. (2006). Regional differences in the
price-elasticity
of
demand
for
energy.
Technical
report,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO.
Besiou, M., L. N. Van Wassenhove. (2015). Addressing the chal-
lenge of modeling for decision-making in socially responsible
operations. Prod. Oper. Manag., 24(9):1390–1401.
Bhattacharya, S., K. Kar, J. H. Chow, A. Gupta. 2014. Extended
second price auctions for plug-in electric vehicle (PEV) charg-
ing in smart distribution grids. American Control Conference
(ACC), 2014, 908–913 (IEEE).
Bhattacherjee, A., G. Premkumar. 2004. Understanding changes in
belief and attitude toward information technology usage: A
theoretical model and longitudinal test. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q.
28(2): 229–254.
Bichler, M., A. Gupta, W. Ketter. 2010. Designing smart markets.
Inf. Syst. Res. 21(4): 688–699.
Biviji, M., C. Uckun, G. Bassett, J. Wang, D. Ton. 2014. Patterns of
electric vehicle charging with time of use rates: Case studies
in California and Portland. Innovative Smart Grid Technolo-
gies Conference (ISGT), 2014 IEEE PES, 1–5 (IEEE).
Blumsack, S., A. Fernandez. 2012. Ready or not, here comes the
smart grid!. Energy 37(1): 61–68.
den Boer, A. V. 2015. Dynamic pricing and learning: Historical
origins, current research, and new directions. Surv. Oper. Res.
Manag. Sci. 20(1): 1–18.
Bohi, D. R., M. B. Zimmerman. 1984. An update on econometric
studies of energy demand behavior. Ann. Rev. Energy 9(1): 105–
154.
Borenstein, S. 2005. The long-run efﬁciency of real-time electricity
pricing. Energy J. 26(3).
Branch, E. R. 1993. Short run income elasticity of demand for resi-
dential electricity using consumer expenditure survey data.
Energy J. 111–121.
vom Brocke, J., R. T. Watson, C. Dwyer, S. Elliot, N. Melville.
2013. Green information systems: Directives for the IS. Com-
mun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 33(30): 509–520.
Broneske, G., D. Wozabal. 2017. How do contract parameters
inﬂuence the economics of vehicle-togrid? Manuf. Serv. Oper.
Manag. 19(1): 150–164.
Chen, M., Z. L. Chen. 2015. Recent developments in dynamic
pricing research: Multiple products, competition, and limited
demand information. Prod. Oper. Manag. 24(5): 704–731.
Chen, L., P. Pu. 2004. Survey of preference elicitation methods. Tech-
nical report, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne.
Choi, D. G., M. K. Lim, K. Murali, V. M. Thomas. 2019. Why have
voluntary time-of-use tariffs fallen short in the residential sec-
tor? Prod. Oper. Manag. 29(3): 617–642.
Chrysopoulos, A., C. Diou, A. Symeonidis, P. Mitkas. 2014. Bottom-
up modeling of small-scale energy consumers for effective
demand response applications. Eng. Appl. Art. Intell. 35: 299–315.
Dao, V., I. Langella, J. Carbo. 2011. From green to sustainability:
Information
technology
and
an
integrated
sustainability
framework. J. Strategic Inf. Syst. 20(1): 63–79.
Dennerlein, R. K. H. 1987. Residential demand for electrical appli-
ances and electricity in the federal republic of Germany.
Energy J. 8(1): 69–86.
Derinkuyu, K., F. Tanrisever, N. Kurt, G. Ceyhan. 2019. Optimiz-
ing day-ahead electricity market prices: Increasing the total
surplus for energy exchange istanbul. Manuf. Serv. Oper.
Manag. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0767
Dong, C., C. T. Ng, T. Cheng. 2017. Electricity time-of-use tariff
with stochastic demand. Prod. Oper. Manag. 26(1): 64–79.
Drake, D. F., P. R. Kleindorfer, L. N. Van Wassenhove. 2016.
Technology choice and capacity portfolios under emissions
regulation. Prod. Oper. Manag. 25(6): 1006–1025.
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity.
2018. Completing the map. The Ten-Year Network Development
Plan 2018 System Needs Analysis. ENTSOE, Brussels, Belgium.
Fahrioglu, M., F. L. Alvarado. 1999. Designing cost effective
demand management contracts using game theory. IEEE
Power Engineering Society. 1999 Winter Meeting (Cat. No.
99CH36233), 1, 427–432 (IEEE).
Fan, S., R. J. Hyndman. 2011. The price elasticity of electricity
demand in South Australia. Energy Pol. 39(6): 3709–3719.
Farias, V. F., B. Van Roy. 2010. Dynamic pricing with a prior on
market response. Oper. Res. 58(1): 16–29.
Fridgen, G., P. Mette, M. Thimmel. 2014. The value of information
exchange in electric vehicle charging. Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS).
Galus, M., G. Andersson. 2008. Demand management of grid con-
nected plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV). IEEE, ed.,
Energy 2030, 2008 IEEE (Atlanta, Georgia).
Gerding, E., S. Stein, V. Robu, D. Zhao, N. R. Jennings. 2013.
Two-sided online markets for electric vehicle charging. The
Twelfth
International
Joint
Conference
on
Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 2013) 989–996.
Ghosh, A., V. Aggarwal. 2017. Control of charging of electric vehi-
cles through menu-based pricing. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 9(6):
5918–5929.
Golari, M., N. Fan, T. Jin. 2017. Multistage stochastic optimization
for production-inventory planning with intermittent renew-
able energy. Prod. Oper. Manag. 26(3): 409–425.
Goodarzi, S., S. Aﬂaki, A. Masini. 2019. Optimal feed-in tariff
policies: The impact of market structure and technology char-
acteristics. Prod. Oper. Manag. 28(5): 1108–1128.
Gottwalt, S., W. Ketter, C. Block, J. Collins, C. Weinhardt. 2011.
Demand side management - a simulation of household behav-
ior under variable prices. Energy Pol. 39: 8163–8174.
Guha, S., S. Kumar. 2018. Emergence of big data research in oper-
ations management, information systems, and healthcare: Past
contributions and future roadmap. Prod. Oper. Manag. 27(9):
1724–1735.
Han, Y., Y. Chen, F. Han, K. R. Liu. 2012. An optimal dynamic
pricing and schedule approach in V2G. Proceedings of The
2012 Asia Paciﬁc Signal and Information Processing Associa-
tion Annual Summit and Conference, 1–8 (IEEE).
He, L., H. Y. Mak, Y. Rong, Z. J. M. Shen. 2017. Service region
design for urban electric vehicle sharing systems. Manuf. Serv.
Oper. Manag. 19(2): 309–327.
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
21
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

Hu, J., S. You, M. Lind, J. Ostergaard. 2014. Coordinated charging
of electric vehicles for congestion prevention in the distribu-
tion grid. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 5(2): 703–711.
Hu, J., H. Morais, T. Sousa, M. Lind. 2016a. Electric vehicle ﬂeet man-
agement in smart grids: A review of services, optimization and
control aspects. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 56: 1207–1226.
Hu, Z., K. Zhan, H. Zhang, Y. Song. 2016b. Pricing mechanisms
design for guiding electric vehicle charging to ﬁll load valley.
Appl. Energy 178: 155–163.
Huang, S., Q. Wu, S. S. Oren, R. Li, Z. Liu. 2015. Distribution loca-
tional marginal pricing through quadratic programming for
congestion management in distribution networks. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst. 30(4): 2170–2178.
International Energy Agency. 2008. The role of advanced metering
and load control in supporting electricity networks. Project report,
Stockholm.
International Energy Agency. 2017. Global EV Outlook. Organisa-
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
International Energy Agency. 2018. Global EV Outlook. Organisa-
tion for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
Jardini, J., C. Tahan, M. Gouvea, S. Ahn, F. Figueiredo. 2000. Daily
load proﬁles for residential, commercial and industrial low volt-
age consumers. IEEE Trans. Power Delivery 15(1): 375–380.
Jessoe, K., D. Rapson. 2015. Commercial and industrial demand
response under mandatory time-of-use electricity pricing.
J. Ind. Econ. 63(3): 397–421.
Jiang, D. R., W. B. Powell. 2016. Practicality of nested risk mea-
sures for dynamic electric vehicle charging. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.02848.
Kahlen, M. T., W. Ketter, J. van Dalen. 2018. Electric vehicle vir-
tual power plant dilemma: Grid balancing versus customer
mobility. Prod. Oper. Manag. 27(11): 2054–2070.
Kahneman, D., A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of
decision under risk. Econometrica 47(2): 263–292.
Ketter, W., M. Peters, J. Collins, A. Gupta. 2016a. Competitive
benchmarking: An IS research approach to address wicked
problems with big data and analytics. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 40
(4): 1057–1080.
Ketter, W., M. Peters, J. Collins, A. Gupta. 2016b. A multiagent
competitive gaming platform to address societal challenges.
Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 40(2): 447–460.
Khuntia, J., T. J. Saldanha, S. Mithas, V. Sambamurthy. 2018.
Information technology and sustainability: Evidence from an
emerging economy. Prod. Oper. Manag. 27(4): 756–773.
Kim, D., I. Benbasat. 2009. Trust-assuring arguments in B2C
e-commerce: Impact of content, source, and price on trust.
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 26(3): 175–206.
Kim, J. H., A. Shcherbakova. 2011. Common failures of demand
response. Energy 36(2):873–880, ISSN 0360-5442.
King, K., P. Shatrawka. 1994. Customer response to real-time pric-
ing in Great Britain. ACEEE 1994 Summer Study on Energy
Efﬁciency in Buildings.
Kirschen, D. 2003. Demand-side view of electricity markets. IEEE
Trans. Power Syst. 18(2): 520–527.
Kirschen, D., G. Strbac. 2005. Fundamentals of Power System Eco-
nomics. John Wiley & Sons.
Kleindorfer, P. R., K. Singhal, L. N. Wassenhove. 2005. Sustainable
operations management. Prod. Oper. Manag. 14(4):482–492.
Knezovic, K., M. Marinelli, A. Zecchino, P. B. Andersen, C. Trae-
holt. 2017. Supporting involvement of electric vehicles in dis-
tribution
grids:
Lowering
the
barriers
for
a
proactive
integration. Energy 134(1): 458–468.
Koroleva, K., M. Kahlen, W. Ketter, L. Rook, F. Lanz. 2014. Tamago-
car: Using a simulation app to explore price elasticity of demand
for electricity of electric vehicle users. Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS).
Kumar, S., V. Mookerjee, A. Shubham. 2018. Research in opera-
tions management and information systems interface. Prod.
Oper. Manag. 27(11): 1893–1905.
Law, A. M., W. Kelton. 2000. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 3rd
edn. McGraw-Hill, New York, USA. ISBN 0-07-059292-6.
Li, N., L. Chen, S. H. Low. 2011. Optimal demand response based
on utility maximization in power networks. 2011 IEEE Power
and Energy Society General Meeting, 1–8 (IEEE).
Li, R., Q. Wu, S. S. Oren. 2014. Distribution locational marginal
pricing for optimal electric vehicle charging management.
IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 29(1): 203–211.
Limmer, S. 2019. Dynamic pricing for electric vehicle charging – a
literature review. Energies 12(18): 3574.
Liu, Y., C. Yuen, S. Huang, N. U. Hassan, X. Wang, S. Xie. 2014.
Peak-to-average ratio constrained demand-side management
with consumer’s preference in residential smart grid. IEEE J.
Selected Topics Signal Process. 8(6): 1084–1097.
Loock, C., T. Staake, F. Thiesse. 2013. Motivating energy-efﬁcient
behavior with Green IS: An investigation of goal setting and
the role of defaults. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 37(4): 1313–1332.
Lu, Z., J. Qi, J. Zhang, L. He, H. Zhao. 2017. Modelling dynamic
demand response for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles based on
real-time charging pricing. IET Gen. Trans. Distrib. 11(1): 228–235.
Luo, C., Y. F. Huang, V. Gupta. 2018. Stochastic dynamic pricing
for ev charging stations with renewable integration and
energy storage. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 9(2): 1494–1505.
Mak, H. Y., Y. Rong, Z. J. M. Shen. 2013. Infrastructure planning
for electric vehicles with battery swapping. Management Sci.
59(7): 1557–1575.
Malhotra, A., N. P. Melville, R. T. Watson. 2013. Spurring impact-
ful research on information systems for environmental sus-
tainability. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 37(4): 1265–1274.
M€arkle-Huß, J., S. Feuerriegel, D. Neumann. 2018. Large-scale
demand response and its implications for spot prices, load
and policies: Insights from the German-Austrian electricity
market. Appl. Energy 210: 1290–1298.
Melville, N. P. 2010. Information systems innovation for environ-
mental sustainability. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 34(1): 1–21.
Mili, L., K. Dooley. 2010. Risk-based power system planning inte-
grating social and economic direct and indirect costs. Econ.
Market Design Plann. Elec. Power Syst. 161.
Mitchell, T. M. 1997. Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill.
Mohsenian-Rad, A. H., V. W. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, A.
Leon-Garcia. 2010. Autonomous demand-side management
based on game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for
the future smart grid. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 1(3):320–331.
Mu~noz, E. R., G. Razeghi, L. Zhang, F. Jabbari. 2016. Electric vehi-
cle charging algorithms for coordination of the grid and dis-
tribution transformer levels. Energy, 113:930–942.
Mwasilu, F., J. J. Justo, E. K. Kim, T. D. Do, J. W. Jung. 2014. Elec-
tric vehicles and smart grid interaction: A review on vehicle
to grid and renewable energy sources integration. Renew. Sus-
tain. Energy Rev. 34: 501–516.
Nesbakken, R. 1999. Price sensitivity of residential energy con-
sumption in Norway. Energy Econ. 21(6): 493–515.
Oren, S. S., S. A. Smith, R. B. Wilson. 1982. Linear tariffs with
quality discrimination. Bell J. Econ. 455–471.
Palensky,
P.,
D.
Dietrich.
2011.
Demand
side
management:
Demand response, intelligent energy systems, and smart
loads. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 7(3): 381–388.
Papier, F. 2016. Managing electricity peak loads in make-to-stock
manufacturing lines. Prod. Oper. Manag. 25(10): 1709–1726.
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
22
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179

Parker, G. G., B. Tan, O. Kazan. 2019. Electric power industry:
Operational and public policy challenges and opportunities.
Prod. Oper. Manag. 28(11): 2738–2777.
Parti, M., C. Parti. 1980. The total and appliance-speciﬁc condi-
tional demand for electricity in the household sector. Bell J.
Econ. 309–321.
Pecas Lopes, J., S. A. Polenz, C. Moreira, R. Cherkaoui. 2010.
Identiﬁcation of control and management strategies for LV
unbalanced microgrids with plugged-in electric vehicles. Elec-
tric Power Syst. Res., 80(8):898–906.
Qi, W., Z. J. M. Shen. 2019. A smart-city scope of operations man-
agement. Prod. Oper. Manag. 28(2): 393–406.
Reiss, P. C., M. W. White. 2005. Household electricity demand,
revisited. Rev. Econ. Stud. 72(3): 853–883.
Robu, V., R. Kota, G. Chalkiadakis, A. Rogers, N. R. Jennings. 2012.
Cooperative virtual power plant formation using scoring rules.
Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Robu, V., E. H. Gerding, S. Stein, D. C. Parkes, A. Rogers, N. R.
Jennings. 2013. An online mechanism for multi-unit demand
and its application to plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging.
J. Artiﬁ. Intell. Res. 48: 175–230.
Russell, S. J., P. Norvig. 1995. Artiﬁcial intelligence: a modern
approach. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.
ISBN 0-13-103805-2.
Samadi, P., A. Mohsenian-Rad, R. Schober, V. W. Wong, J. Jatske-
vich. 2010. Optimal real-time pricing algorithm based on util-
ity maximization for smart grid. 2010 First IEEE International
Conference
on
Smart
Grid
Communications
(SmartGrid-
Comm), 415–420 (IEEE).
Schroeder, A., T. Traber. 2012. The economics of fast charging
infrastructure for electric vehicles. Energy Pol. 43: 136–144.
Shakerighadi, B., A. Anvari-Moghaddam, E. Ebrahimzadeh, F.
Blaabjerg, C. L. Bak. 2018. A hierarchical game theoretical
approach for energy management of electric vehicles and
charging stations in smart grids. IEEE Access 6: 67223–67234.
Shuai, W., P. Maill0e, A. Pelov. 2016. Charging electric vehicles in
the smart city: A survey of economy-driven approaches. IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transport. Syst. 17(8): 2089–2106.
Singh, V. K., K. Dutta. 2015. Dynamic price prediction for amazon
spot instances. 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS), 1513–1520 (IEEE).
Sioshansi, R. 2012. OR forum – modeling the impacts of electricity
tariffs on plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging, costs, and
emissions. Oper. Res. 60(3): 506–516.
Soltani, N. Y., S. J. Kim, G. B. Giannakis. 2015. Real-time load
elasticity tracking and pricing for electric vehicle charging.
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 6(3): 1303–1313.
Sovacool, B., R. Hirsh. 2009. Beyond batteries: An examination of
the beneﬁts and barriers to plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
(PHEVs) and a vehicle-to-grid (V2G) transition. Energy Pol.
37(3): 1095–1103.
Spees, K., L. Lave. 2008. Impacts of responsive load in PJM: Load
shifting and real time pricing. Energy J. 29(2): 101–122.
Strbac, G. 2008. Demand side management: Beneﬁts and chal-
lenges. Energy Pol. 36(12):4419–4426, ISSN 03014215.
Su, W., H. Eichi, W. Zeng, M. Y. Chow. 2012. A survey on the
electriﬁcation of transportation in a smart grid environment.
IEEE Trans. Indus. Inf. 8(1):1–10.
Tang, Y., J. Zhong, M. Bollen. 2016. Aggregated optimal charging
and vehicle-to-grid control for electric vehicles under large
electric vehicle population. IET Gen. Transmiss. Distrib. 10(8):
2012–2018.
Thompson, M., M. Davison, H. Rasmussen. 2009. Natural gas
storage valuation and optimization: A real options applica-
tion. Nav. Res. Logisti. 56(3): 226–238.
Tushar, W., W. Saad, H. V. Poor, D. B. Smith. 2012. Economics of
electric vehicle charging: A game theoretic approach. IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid 3(4): 1767–1778.
Valogianni, K., W. Ketter. 2016. Effective demand response for
smart grids: Evidence from a real-world pilot. Decis. Supp.
Syst. 91: 48–66.
Valogianni, K., W. Ketter, J. Collins, D. Zhdanov. 2018. Facilitating
a sustainable electric vehicle transition through consumer util-
ity driven pricing. Proceedings of the 39th International Con-
ference on Information Systems (ICIS).
Valogianni, K., A. Gupta, W. Ketter, S. Sen, E. van Heck. 2019.
Multiple vickrey auctions for sustainable electric vehicle
charging. Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
Information Systems (ICIS).
Vandael, S., B. Claessens, M. Hommelberg, T. Holvoet, G. Decon-
inck. 2013. A scalable three-step approach for demand side
management of plug-in hybrid vehicles. IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, 4(2):720–728, ISSN 1949-3053.
Wakker, P., D. Deneffe. 1996. Eliciting von Neumann-Morgenstern
utilities when probabilities are distorted or unknown. Manage-
ment Sci. 42(8): 1131–1150.
Wang, W., I. Benbasat. 2009. Interactive decision aids for con-
sumer decision making in e-commerce: The inﬂuence of per-
ceived strategy restrictiveness. Manag. Inf. Syst. Q. 293–320.
Wang, B., B. Hu, C. Qiu, P. Chu, R. Gadh. 2015. EV charging algo-
rithm implementation with user price preference. 2015 IEEE
Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT), 1–5 (IEEE).
Watson, R. T., M. C. Boudreau, A. J. Chen. 2010. Information sys-
tems and environmentally sustainable development: Energy
informatics and new directions for the IS community. Manag.
Inf. Syst. Q. 34(1): 23–38.
Weckx, S., R. DHulst, B. Claessens, J. Driesensam. 2014. Multia-
gent charging of electric vehicles respecting distribution trans-
former loading and voltage limits. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 5
(6):2857–2867.
Xiang, D., E. Wei. 2017. Improving social welfare by demand
response general framework and quantitative characteriza-
tion. 2017 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
Processing (GlobalSIP), 1030–1034 (IEEE).
Zheng, Z., N. Shroff. 2014. Online welfare maximization for elec-
tric vehicle charging with electricity cost. Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Future Energy Systems, 253–
263 (ACM).
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found online
in the Supporting Information section at the end of the
article.
Appendix S1: Summary of Notation.
Appendix S2: Preference Data Collection: Battery Calibration.
Appendix S3: Proofs and Analytical Derivations.
Appendix S4: Robustness Checks.
Valogianni, Ketter, Collins, and Zhdanov: Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging
Production and Operations Management 0(0), pp. 1–23, © 2020 Production and Operations Management Society
23
Please Cite this article in press as: Valogianni, K., et al. Sustainable Electric Vehicle Charging using Adaptive Pricing. Production and
Operations Management (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13179