TITLE: Donor ProductвҖҗSubsidies to Increase Consumption: Implications of Consumer Awareness and ProfitвҖҗMaximizing Intermediaries
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2019
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13001
---

UC Berkeley
UC Berkeley Previously Published Works
Title
Donor ProductвҖҗSubsidies to Increase Consumption: Implications of Consumer Awareness and 
ProfitвҖҗMaximizing Intermediaries
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/63c5m2tw
Journal
Production and Operations Management, 28(7)
ISSN
1059-1478
Authors
Taylor, Terry A
Xiao, Wenqiang
Publication Date
2019-07-01
DOI
10.1111/poms.13001
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Donor Product-Subsidies to Increase Consumption: Implications
of Consumer Awareness and Proп¬Ғt-Maximizing Intermediaries
Terry A. Taylor and Wenqiang Xiao
Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley
Stern School of Business, New York University
September 2014
Abstract
Increasingly, donors that subsidize socially-desirable products in the developing world are shift-
ing from distributing through non-commercial to commercial channels, ceding control of the product
price to for-proп¬Ғt intermediaries. This paper advises a donor as to how the donorвҖҷs loss of price con-
trol and the level of consumer awarenessвҖ“deп¬Ғned as the fraction of the consumer population that
is informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬ҒtsвҖ“inп¬Ӯuence the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy and utility: First, in
shifting to the commercial channel, the donor should increase (decrease) the subsidy when consumer
awareness is low (high). Second, with the commercial channel, the donor should be prepared to
increase the subsidy as awareness increases, which is contrary to her actions with a non-commercial
channel. Third, contrary to the lesson obtained with non-commercial distribution, with commer-
cial distribution the donor can be hurt by increased awareness. This occurs when awareness is
moderate, and the implication is that then the donor should be wary of encouraging entities (e.g.,
governments, non-governmental organizations) to institute campaigns that increase the awareness
of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. The intermediaryвҖҷs decision of whether to target either only informed
consumers or the broad market drives our results.
вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“вҖ“
вҖ”1
Introduction
Donors fund subsidies to lower the price, and hence increase the purchase and use, of socially-
beneп¬Ғcial products in the developing world. For example, malaria is estimated to cause more than
200 million illnesses and 600,000 deaths annually (World Health Organization 2013). Because the
recommended drugs to treat malaria, artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs), are expensive to
produce, they are unaп¬Җordable to many in sub-Saharan Africa, the region which bears the heaviest
burden of malaria (Morris et al. 2014). Historically, donor eп¬Җorts to lower the cost of malaria
drugs have focused on non-commercial channels, such as public health systems. In recent years,
donors have shifted their eп¬Җorts in subsidizing recommended malaria drugs to commercial channels,
1

because for-proп¬Ғt п¬Ғrms such as drug shops are an important source for those seeking treatment for
malaria (Adeyi and Atun 2009, Morris et al. 2014). A key distinction between these two types
of channels, and a cause for concern for donors in making this transition, is that for-proп¬Ғt п¬Ғrms
control the price (Arrow et al. 2004, Adeyi and Atun 2009).
Similarly, donors fund subsidies to increase the purchase and use of improved cook stoves (ICS)
because they are more energy-eп¬ғcient and less-polluting than traditional cook stoves. Historically,
donor eп¬Җorts to lower the price of ICS have focused on non-commercial channels, with distribution
through non-governmental organizations or government agencies (World Bank 2010). These orga-
nizations sell the product to consumers at the п¬Ғxed, reduced price dictated by the subsidy program.
In recent years, donors have shifted their eп¬Җorts to commercial channels (Gaul 2009, Broder 2010,
World Bank 2010, Simon et al. 2014). Although donors can recommend a price to the for-proп¬Ғt
п¬Ғrms that distribute the ICS, those п¬Ғrms control the price. For example, the World Bank (2010)
documents that in a United States Agency for International Development program in Bangladesh,
for-proп¬Ғt п¬Ғrms sold the ICS at a price much higher than what the Agency had recommended.
See Gaul (2009) for additional examples in which donors provide price-setting ICS producers with
per-unit subsidies.
A key common element in the malaria drug- and ICS-subsidy examples is the shift to distribution
through commercial channels, wherein the donor gives up control over the price. A second common
element is that demand for the product is inп¬Ӯuenced by both the price and consumer awareness
of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts, which is often limited (see Cohen et al. 2010 and Morris et al. 2014 for
ACTs, and Gaul 2009, World Bank 2010 and Mobarak et al. 2012 for ICS). Speciп¬Ғcally, only a
fraction of the population is aware of the eп¬Җectiveness of the recommended malaria drugs, and only
a fraction of the population is aware of the fuel-cost savings and reduced-pollution beneп¬Ғts of ICS.
The purpose of this paper is to advise a donor as to how the nature of the distribution channel
and the level of consumer awareness inп¬Ӯuence her subsidy-design decision and utility. Speciп¬Ғcally,
we explore how the donorвҖҷs loss of price control and how the awareness levelвҖ“deп¬Ғned as the fraction
of the consumer population acquainted with the product that is informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬ҒtsвҖ“
inп¬Ӯuence the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy and utility. We show how and why the donorвҖҷs loss of price
control reverses the impact of awareness on the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy and utility.
Intuitively, the donor beneп¬Ғts from consumersвҖҷ increased awareness of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts
because such awareness makes consumers more prone to purchase, increasing the sales quantity.
Indeed, when the donor controls the price, she always beneп¬Ғts from increased awarenessвҖ”due to
this sales quantity eп¬Җect. Our п¬Ғrst contribution is to demonstrate when and how the presence of
2

a price-setting intermediary reverses this result. The driver behind this reversalвҖ”and indeed all of
our key resultsвҖ”is the intermediaryвҖҷs strategic market-targeting decision. As awareness increases, it
becomes increasingly attractive for the price-setting intermediary to abandon the segment that is
not informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. Convincing the intermediary to continue to serve the broad
market requires that the donor increase the subsidy. So long as awareness is not too high, it is
optimal for the donor to incur this additional cost. Consequently, when the awareness is moderate,
the donorвҖҷs utility decreases in the awareness.
Our second contribution is to demonstrate how the presence of a price-setting intermediary
changes the optimal subsidy, and how the subsidy is aп¬Җected by the awareness level. First, ac-
counting for the intermediaryвҖҷs market-targeting decision leads the donor to optimally increase the
subsidy as awareness increases through a moderate range. This reverses the result when the donor
controls the price, wherein the optimal subsidy never increases in the awareness. Second, the pres-
ence of a price-setting intermediary weakly increases the donorвҖҷs subsidy if and only if awareness is
suп¬ғciently low. More precisely, when awareness is moderately low, the donor strictly increases the
subsidy so as to persuade the intermediary to serve the broad market. As awareness increases it be-
comes increasingly expensive for the donor to persuade the intermediary to serve the broad market.
Consequently, the donor gives up on serving the broad market more quickly when she distributes
through a price-setting intermediary. Therefore, the presence of a price-setting intermediary causes
the donor to strictly decrease the subsidy when awareness is moderately high.
The managerial contribution of these reversal results is to provide insight to donors that are
shifting from distributing products through non-commercial channels to commercial channels. The
results provide guidance by illuminating when lessons obtained in a setting with a non-commercial
channel continue to hold and when they are reversed.
There is a growing literature in operations management on the use of subsidies and other mech-
anisms to stimulate the production, purchase and use of socially-beneп¬Ғcial products. Motivated
by the inп¬Ӯuenza vaccine product, a body of research identiп¬Ғes social-welfare enhancing interven-
tions that inп¬Ӯuence manufacturer production decisions in settings where the production yield is
uncertain and consumersвҖҷ purchasing decisions are inп¬Ӯuenced by the fraction of the population
that is vaccinated. Chick et al. (2008) shows that a properly designed supply-side intervention,
namely a cost-sharing contract, induces the manufacturer to produce the welfare-maximizing quan-
tity. ArifoЛҳglu et al. (2012) observe that combining a supply-side intervention with a demand-side
intervention, such as a subsidy, may be beneп¬Ғcial. Mamani et al. (2013) extend Chick et al. (2008)
and propose a subsidy scheme that eп¬Җectively encourages the purchase and use of the vaccine in the
3

geographic location where it is most needed. Adida et al. (2013) shows that a menu of subsidies is
useful in addressing the incentive problem that arises with production yield uncertainty.
Motivated by socially-beneп¬Ғcial products other than vaccines, Cohen et al. (2013), Chemama
et al. (2014), Ovchinnikov and Raz (2014), and Taylor and Xiao (2014) examine subsidizing a
proп¬Ғt-maximizing, price-setting intermediary that faces uncertain demand and makes stocking and
pricing decisions. Cohen et al. (2013) examine the eп¬Җect of demand uncertainty on the optimal
subsidy. Chemama et al. (2014) extend Cohen et al. (2013) and show that the subsidy-designer
should commit to the subsidy level in advance. Ovchinnikov and Raz (2014) and Taylor and Xiao
(2014) examine how a donor should optimally subsidize the intermediary based on its purchases
and/or sales. Our study diп¬Җers from these in that we focus on the impact of consumersвҖҷ awareness
rather than demand uncertainty.
A substantial literature in marketing and economics examines incentives of proп¬Ғt-maximizing
п¬Ғrms to provide information about their products, e.g., through informative advertising. See Dra-
nove and Jin (2010) for a review of literature on disclosure of product-quality information. For
example, in Kuksov and Lin (2010), consumers are uncertain as to whether a product is of low
or high quality, and a п¬Ғrm with a high-quality product communicates this if the cost of doing so
is not too high. Because for-proп¬Ғt п¬Ғrms in the developing world have relatively little incentive to
incur costs to promote socially-beneп¬Ғcial products, we treat the level of consumer awareness as
exogenous.
Complementing this theoretical research are empirical studies on the impact of subsidies for
health products in the developing world. See Morris et al. (2014) for a review of studies on the im-
pact of subsidies for recommended malaria drugs on retail prices and consumer purchases. Evidence
on the simultaneous impact of information and subsidies on demand is mixed. For example, Dupas
(2009) п¬Ғnds that providing information about the negative health consequences of malaria alongside
a subsidy for an insecticide-treated bed net does not impact the demand curve. In contrast, Ashraf
et al. (2013) п¬Ғnd that informing consumers that an unfamiliar product is similar to a familiar
product does impact the demand curve. Our study diп¬Җers in that we focus on consumersвҖҷ existing
awareness of the beneп¬Ғts of a particular product, rather than the provision of other information at
the point of sale.
2
Model
A donor desires to stimulate the purchase and use of a product (e.g., a superior malaria drug or
cook stove) which is sold to end consumers by an intermediary. Although the product is superior
4

to alternatives, not all consumers acquainted with the product understand the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts.
For example, of the consumers that know that the drug is used to treat malaria, only a fraction of
consumers are informed of the eп¬ғcacy of the drug. Uninformed consumers believe that the drugвҖҷs
eп¬ғcacy is typical, whereas informed consumers understand its superior eп¬ғcacy. Similarly, unin-
formed consumers believe that the cook stoveвҖҷs performance in terms of fuel cost requirements and
household pollution is typical, whereas informed consumers understand its superior performance.
The consumer population acquainted with the product is normalized to one. Awareness пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»1]
denotes the fraction of consumers that are informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. A consumer with
valuation intensity пӮөvalues the product at пӮөпҒұпҒүif she is informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts and at
пӮөпҒұпҒ•if she does not, where пҒұпҒүпҖҫпҒұпҒ•пҖҫ0пҖәA particular consumerвҖҷs valuation intensity пӮөwill depend
on her need for the product (e.g., severity of malaria symptoms, intensity of cook stove use) and
economic condition (e.g., income level); пҒұпҒ©represents the consumer-perceived quality level, where
uninformed consumers do not perceive the productвҖҷs full beneп¬Ғts. We assume that for both informed
and uniformed consumers, пӮөis distributed uniformly on [0пҖ»1]пҖәThe assumptions that the consumer
valuation has a multiplicative form and that the valuation intensity has a uniform distribution are
common in the literature on product quality and pricing (e.g., Moorthy 1988 and Choudhary et al.
2005). At price пҒ°вүҘ0 the fraction of the informed segment that purchases is max(1 вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒүпҖ»0) and
the fraction of the uninformed segment that purchases is max(1вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒ•пҖ»0)пҖәHence, the quantity sold
by the intermediary under awareness пҒЎand price пҒ°is пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°) = пҒЎmax(1вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒүпҖ»0)+(1вҲ’пҒЎ) max(1вҲ’
пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒ•пҖ»0)пҖә
The donor (she) provides a per-unit subsidy пҒівүҘ0 to the intermediary (he). The intermediary
sells to end consumers at per-unit price пҒ°вүҘ0 and incurs per-unit cost пҒЈвүҘ0пҖәIf the intermediary
controls the price пҒ°, he chooses пҒ°to maximize his proп¬Ғt
(пҒ°вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі)пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°)пҖә
(1)
Let пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) denote the intermediaryвҖҷs proп¬Ғt-maximizing price. The donor receives utility пҒ¶вүҘ0 per
unit purchased by consumers. The donor chooses the subsidy пҒіto maximize her utility
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі)пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі))пҖә
(2)
If the donor controls the price пҒ°пҖ»then the donor jointly determines the price пҒ°and subsidy пҒі
to maximize her utility
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі)пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°)пҖ»
subject to ensuring that the intermediary does not incur a loss. Because the donorвҖҷs utility is
5

decreasing in пҒ°and the intermediary does not incur a loss if and only if the price exceeds the
intermediaryвҖҷs subsidized cost пҒ°вүҘпҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҖ»the donorвҖҷs optimal price is пҒ°= пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҖәThe subsidy пҒіis
the amount by which the donor reduces the price below the cost пҒЈпҖ»and the intermediaryвҖҷs margin
is zero. Hence, the donor chooses the subsidy пҒіto maximize her utility
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі)пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)пҖә
(3)
This setting corresponds to the case where the intermediary is a non-commercial entity (e.g., a non-
governmental organization) that is willing to distribute the product at the price set by the donor.
It also corresponds to the case where the intermediary is a commercial entity (e.g., a for-proп¬Ғt
retailer) and the donor can enforce strict price control.
For simplicity we have assumed that donorвҖҷs utility is linear in quantity purchased. All of our
results continue to hold when the donorвҖҷs utility is a concave, increasing function of the quantity
purchased. The proofs are available from the authors.
3
Results
В§3.1 and В§3.2 characterize the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy when the donor controls the price and
when the intermediary controls the price, respectively. В§3.3 and В§3.4 show how the presence of a
price-setting intermediary changes the impact of awareness on the subsidy and the donorвҖҷs utility,
respectively.
3.1
Subsidy under Donor Price Control
In this section, we consider the setting where the donor controls the price.
The donorвҖҷs price
пҒ°= пҒЈвҲ’пҒіand she chooses the subsidy пҒіto maximize her utility (3).
Because the maximum
willingness to pay of an uninformed consumer is пҒұпҒ•, the donor serves only informed consumers if
she sets a price higher than пҒұпҒ•, i.e., пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҖҫпҒұпҒ•, or equivalently, oп¬Җers a subsidy пҒіlower than пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•.
If instead the donor oп¬Җers a subsidy higher than пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, then she serves consumers in both the
uninformed and informed segments. In the former case where пҒіпҖјпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, the donorвҖҷs utility is
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = (пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі)пҒ‘пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)пҖ»where пҒ‘пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°) = пҒЎ(1вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒү). In the latter case where пҒівүҘпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, the
donorвҖҷs utility is О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = (пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі)пҒ‘пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)пҖ»where пҒ‘пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°) = пҒЎ(1вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒү)+(1вҲ’пҒЎ)(1вҲ’пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒ•)пҖәWe
say that an entity targets the informed segment if it serves only informed consumers, and targets the
broad market if it serves consumers in both the uninformed and informed segments. The subscript
пҒүis mnemonic for targeting the informed segment and пҒӮis mnemonic for targeting the broad
6

market. From the preceding analysis, we can rewrite the donorвҖҷs problem as
max
(
sup
пҒіпҖјпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖ»
sup
пҒівүҘпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)
)
пҖә
Note that both О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) and О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) are concave in the subsidy пҒіwith maximizers
пҒіпҒү= (пҒ¶+ пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒү)пҖҪ2
and
пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) = [пҒ¶+ пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү)]пҖҪ2пҖә
Throughout the paper, we assume that пҒіпҒүвҲҲ(0пҖ»пҒЈ) and пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вҲҲ(0пҖ»пҒЈ) for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»1], to rule out the
uninteresting extreme cases where the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy is either zero or equal to the purchase
cost пҒЈ. Proposition 1 characterizes the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy as function of the awareness пҒЎпҖә
Proposition 1. Under donor price control and awareness пҒЎ, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy is
пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) =
(
пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)
if пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ
пҒіпҒү
if пҒЎпҖҫbпҒЎпҖ»
(4)
where bпҒЎ= {пҒЎ| О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү) = О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ))}пҖә
Intuitively, when awareness пҒЎis low, the uninformed segment is too large to ignore, and the
donor targets the broad market, serving consumers of both segments. Because consumers that are
not aware of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts have a lower valuation for the product, reaching these consumers
requires that the donor oп¬Җer a generous subsidy пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒіпҒү. In contrast, when awareness пҒЎ
is high so that the informed segment is large, the donor targets the informed segment by oп¬Җering a
stingy subsidy пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүпҖјпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)пҖәThe dashed line in Figure 1 depicts the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy
under donor price control as a function of the awareness пҒЎпҖәWhen awareness is low, so that the
donor targets both segments, the eп¬Җectiveness of the subsidy in increasing sales diminishes as the
size of the informed segment grows because informed consumers are less price sensitive than the
uninformed consumers. Consequently, the optimal subsidy decreases in пҒЎ. When awareness is high,
so that the donor targets the informed segment, the donorвҖҷs problem is one of selling to homogenous
consumers with private valuations. The donorвҖҷs optimal subsidized price is the result of trading oп¬Җ
extracting additional revenue versus increasing the purchase probability, implying that the optimal
subsidized price is independent of the population size of informed consumers.
The role of Proposition 1 is to provide a benchmark to understand how the presence of a
price-setting intermediary changes the impact of awareness on the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy.
7

0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
awareness a
optimal subsidy under donor price control so
optimal subsidy under price-setting intermediary s*
Figure 1: DonorвҖҷs Optimal Subsidy as Function of Awareness. Parameters are пҒЈ= 1пҖә0, пҒ¶= 1пҖә2,
пҒұпҒү= 2пҖә0 and пҒұпҒ•= 0пҖә8. Proposition 1вҖҷs threshold is bпҒЎ= 0пҖә85пҖ»and Proposition 2вҖҷs thresholds are
пҒЎ= 0пҖә26 and пҒЎ= 0пҖә51пҖә
3.2
Subsidy under Price-setting Intermediary
In this section, we consider the setting where the intermediary controls the price. The intermediary
chooses the price пҒ°to maximize his proп¬Ғt (1). The retailerвҖҷs key decision is whether to set a high
price пҒ°пҖҫпҒұпҒ•and target the informed segment or set a low price пҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•and target the broad
market, serving consumers of both segments. The retailerвҖҷs problem is
max
(
sup
пҒ°пҖҫпҒұпҒ•
ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі)пҖ»sup
пҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•
ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі)
)
пҖ»
where ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) = (пҒ°вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі)пҒ‘пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°) and ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) = (пҒ°вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі)пҒ‘пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°). Let пҒ°пҒӘ(пҒі) denote the
maximizer of ОӣпҒӘ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) for пҒӘвҲҲ{пҒӮпҖ»пҒү}пҖәThen пҒ°пҒү(пҒі) = (пҒЈвҲ’пҒі+ пҒұпҒү)пҖҪ2 and пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) = {пҒЈвҲ’пҒі+ пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]}пҖҪ2.
Lemma 1. Under awareness пҒЎand subsidy пҒі, the intermediaryвҖҷs optimal price is
пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) =
(
пҒ°пҒү(пҒі)
if пҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)
пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі)
if пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖ»
where пҒі(пҒЎ) = пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
p
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖә
Intuitively, a more generous subsidy makes it more attractive for the intermediary to sell a
larger quantity, which she does by setting a lower price. When the subsidy is stingy, пҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ), the
intermediary sets a high price пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) пҖҫпҒұпҒ•, targeting the informed segment. When the subsidy
is generous, пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ), the intermediary sets a low price пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) пҖјпҒұпҒ•, targeting the broad market.
Because the threshold пҒі(пҒЎ) is increasing in the awareness пҒЎпҖ»the intermediaryвҖҷs target-market price
8

decision parallels that of the donor: the intermediary targets the informed segment if and only if
the awareness is high.
We now turn to the donorвҖҷs problem. The donor chooses the subsidy пҒіto maximize her utility
(2), where (from Lemma 1) the intermediaryвҖҷs sales quantity is
пҒ‘(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)) =
(
пҒ‘пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°пҒү(пҒі))
if пҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)
пҒ‘пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі))
if пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖә
We can rewrite the donorвҖҷs problem as
max
(
sup
пҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪ2пҖ»sup
пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪ2
)
пҖ»
where О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪ2 represents the donorвҖҷs utility when the subsidy induces the intermediary to target
the informed segment, and О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪ2 represents the donorвҖҷs utility when the subsidy induces the
intermediary to target the broad market. The donorвҖҷs subsidy design problem under a price-setting
intermediary partially parallels the problem under donor price control examined in В§3.1. The main
distinction is that under a price-setting intermediary, the donor must oп¬Җer a larger subsidy to
induce the intermediary to target the broad market пҒі(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•пҖә
Proposition 2. Under a price-setting intermediary and awareness пҒЎ, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy
is
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) =
вҺ§
вҺӘ
вҺЁ
вҺӘ
вҺ©
пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)
if пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ
пҒі(пҒЎ)
if пҒЎпҖјпҒЎвүӨпҒЎ
пҒіпҒү
if пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎпҖ»
(5)
where пҒЎ= {пҒЎ| пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ)} and пҒЎ= {пҒЎ| О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү) = О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ))}.
We discuss Proposition 2 at the start of the next section, wherein we observe how the introduction
of a price-setting intermediary changes the structure of the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy.
3.3
Impact of Awareness on Subsidy
This section examines how the presence of a price-setting intermediary changes the impact of aware-
ness on the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy. Proposition 3, which is illustrated in Figure 1, characterizes
the impact of awareness пҒЎ, the fraction of consumers that are informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts,
on the optimal subsidy пҒіпҖә
To build intuition, we describe the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy under a price-setting intermediary
(Proposition 2), which is depicted graphically as the solid line in Figure 1. In designing a subsidy,
the donorвҖҷs key decision is whether and how to induce the intermediary to target the broad market
9

or the informed segment. The general structure (and intuition for) which segment to target follows
that for the case under donor price control discussed at the end of В§3.1: the donor induces the
intermediary to target the broad market if and only awareness is suп¬ғciently small пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ. However,
the way in which the donor induces the intermediary to target the broad market diп¬Җers structurally
under a price-setting intermediary. For the same reasons discussed at the end of В§3.1, the donorвҖҷs
optimal subsidy under a price-setting intermediary is high and decreasing in awareness пҒЎwhen
awareness is low пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ, and is low and invariant to awareness when awareness is high пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎпҖәHowever,
contrast emerges under a price-setting intermediary when awareness is moderate пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ)пҖәUnder
donor price control, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy weakly decreases in the awareness. In contrast,
under a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy strictly increases in awareness for
пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ).
Because the donor values consumption and because consumption is higher when the interme-
diary targets the broad market, the donor induces the intermediary to target the broad market,
provided that the uninformed segment is not too small, i.e., awareness пҒЎвүӨпҒЎпҖәWhen awareness is
low пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ, so that the uninformed segment is large, serving the broad market is naturally attractive
to the intermediary. However, as awareness пҒЎincreases, it becomes increasingly attractive for the
intermediary to abandon the shrinking uninformed segment. Therefore, persuading the intermedi-
ary to continue to serve the broad market requires that the donor increase the subsidy as awareness
пҒЎincreases through the moderate range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ). This is increasingly costly to the donor, and so
when the awareness пҒЎexceeds the threshold пҒЎпҖ»the donor gives up on persuading the intermediary
to serve the broad market. The donor does so by dropping the subsidy from a high level to a low
one.
Proposition 3. With donor price control, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) weakly decreases in
awareness пҒЎ. With a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) strictly increases
in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ) and weakly decreases for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ) вҲӘ(пҒЎпҖ»1]пҖә
The implication of Proposition 3 is that donors should be careful in changing their subsidies in
response to changes in awareness. Awareness can be inп¬Ӯuenced by a variety of factors. For ex-
ample, public health media campaigns communicate the beneп¬Ғts of products such as a class of
malaria drugs or improved cook stoves (Amin et al. 2007, Rehfuess et al. 2014). For a donor dis-
tributing such a product, the eп¬Җect of such campaigns is to increase the fraction of the population
that is aware of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. How should the donor respond to greater awareness? A
donor that historically distributed products through a non-commercial channel should be wary of
applying lessons from that environment when she shifts to distributing the product through a com-
10

mercial channel. Speciп¬Ғcally, Proposition 3 indicates that a donor distributing products through
a non-commercial channel should respond to greater awareness by reducing the subsidy, because
informed consumers are less price sensitive. Applying this prescription when distributing through
a commercial channel can have the counterproductive consequence of persuading the proп¬Ғt-seeking
intermediary to abandon the uninformed segment.
Consequently, donors distributing products
through commercial channels should be wary of concluding that public health media campaigns
reduce the need for generous subsidies. When awareness is moderate, the opposite is true.
Consider a donor that historically distributed products through a non-commercial channel.
When the donor shifts to distributing through a commercial channel, ceteris paribus, should the
donor increase or decrease the subsidy level? Proposition 4 reveals that the answer to this question
depends on the consumersвҖҷ awareness of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. When awareness is low, the donor
should (weakly) increase the subsidy; when awareness is high, the donor should (weakly) decrease
the subsidy. This result is depicted graphically in Figure 1.
Proposition 4. The presence of a price-setting intermediary increases the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) вүҘпҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) if awareness is low пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ), strictly so if and only if the awareness is moderately
low пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ). The presence of a price-setting intermediary decreases the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) вүӨпҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) if awareness is high пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»1], strictly so if and only if the awareness is moderately
high пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ).
For low levels of awareness пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ, the donor sets a subsidy so as to induce the intermediary
to target the broad market, regardless of whether the donor or the intermediary controls the
price. When the donor controls the price, she dictates through the subsidy level which segments
the intermediary will target.
In contrast, when the intermediary controls the price, the donor
must set the price anticipating the intermediaryвҖҷs self-interested market-targeting decision.
As
awareness increases, it becomes increasingly attractive for a price-setting intermediary to abandon
the shrinking uninformed segment. Consequently, in the upper end of this awareness range пҒЎвҲҲ
(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), persuading the price-setting intermediary to serve the broad market requires the donor to
oп¬Җer a generous subsidy. This explains why at moderately low awareness пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), the presence
of a price-setting intermediary strictly increases the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy.
As awareness increases through the range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»1)пҖ»ensuring that the price-setting intermedi-
ary targets the broad market requires an increasingly generous subsidy. Consequently, when the
awareness пҒЎexceeds the threshold пҒЎпҖ»the donor gives up on persuading the intermediary to serve
the broad market, and instead shifts to a stingy subsidy appropriate for the informed market. In
contrast, the price-setting donor does not face the intermediary price-mark-up problem, so it is at-
11

tractive for the price-setting donor to continue to serve the broad market with a generous subsidy
through the awareness range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ)пҖәThe subsidy targeting the broad market is more generous
because uninformed consumers are more price sensitive. This explains why at moderately high
awareness пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ), the presence of a price-setting intermediary strictly decreases the donorвҖҷs
optimal subsidy.
How might a donor reason about how she should change the subsidy when she shifts from
distributing through a non-commercial to a commercial channel? First, because a price-setting
intermediary passes through only a portion of the donorвҖҷs subsidy to consumers, the presence of
the intermediary reduces the eп¬Җectiveness of the subsidy in increasing the purchase quantity. This
subsidy-eп¬Җectiveness eп¬Җect favors reducing the subsidy.
Second, because the quantity that the
intermediary sells is smaller, due to his price markup, the marginal cost of increasing the subsidy
is reduced because the subsidy is applied to fewer units. This subsidy-cost eп¬Җect favors increasing
the subsidy. In our model, these two eп¬Җects cancel out, which can be seen by observing that the
donorвҖҷs subsidy is unchanged at low and high levels of awareness. While these eп¬Җects are relatively
obvious, the contribution of Proposition 4 is to identify a third force at work, the market-targeting
eп¬Җect, which reп¬Ӯects the implications of the intermediaryвҖҷs self-interested market-targeting decision
for the donorвҖҷs subsidy. As Proposition 4 reveals, this eп¬Җect is more subtle than the previous eп¬Җects
in that it compels the donor to either increase or decrease the subsidy, depending on the awareness
level. When awareness is moderately low пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), such that the donor would like to persuade
the price-setting intermediary to target the broad market, the donor should increase the subsidy.
When awareness is moderately high пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ), such that the donor would like the price-setting
intermediary to abandon the uninformed segment, the donor should decrease the subsidy.
3.4
Impact of Awareness on Donor Utility
This section examines how the presence of a price-setting intermediary changes the impact of
awareness on the donorвҖҷs utility. As awareness increases, a set of previously uninformed consumers
become informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts and thus are more prone to purchasing, resulting in
a higher sales quantity. We refer to this as the quantity eп¬Җect. The quantity eп¬Җect beneп¬Ғts the
donor because the increased sales quantity occurs without increasing the per-unit subsidy. Based
on the quantity eп¬Җect, one might conjecture that the donor should always beneп¬Ғt from an increase
in awareness. Proposition 5 shows that this conjecture holds when the donor controls the price;
the result is depicted graphically in the left panel of Figure 2. However, under a price-setting
intermediary, the donor beneп¬Ғts from increased awareness when awareness is either low or high,
12

awareness a
donorвҖҷs utility 
under price-
setting 
intermediary
awareness a
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
donorвҖҷs utility 
under donor 
price control
Figure 2: DonorвҖҷs Utility as Function of Awareness. Parameters are пҒЈ= 1пҖә0, пҒ¶= 1пҖә2, пҒұпҒү= 2пҖә0 and
пҒұпҒ•= 0пҖә8. Proposition 5вҖҷs thresholds are ЛҮпҒЎ= 0пҖә32 and пҒЎ= 0пҖә51пҖә
but is hurt by increased awareness when awareness is moderate; the result is depicted in the right
panel of Figure 2.
Proposition 5. With donor price control, the donorвҖҷs utility strictly increases in awareness пҒЎ.
With a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs utility strictly decreases in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ(ЛҮпҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ)
and strictly increases for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»ЛҮпҒЎ) вҲӘ(пҒЎпҖ»1], where ЛҮпҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ].
As discussed in В§3.3, when awareness пҒЎincreases through the range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), persuading the
price-setting intermediary to continue to target the broad market requires that the donor increase
the subsidy. We refer to this as the subsidy eп¬Җect. The subsidy eп¬Җect hurts the donor because of
the higher subsidy payment. Consequently, whether the donor beneп¬Ғts from increased awareness
depends on the trade-oп¬Җbetween the beneп¬Ғcial quantity eп¬Җect and the harmful subsidy eп¬Җect. To
understand which eп¬Җect dominates it is critical to understand how the magnitude of each eп¬Җect
depends on the awareness level пҒЎ.
To understand how the magnitude of the quantity eп¬Җect depends on the awareness level, it is
п¬Ғrst useful to understand how the magnitude of the quantity eп¬Җect depends on the price пҒ°пҖәTo do
so, it is useful to classify the consumers into three categories, for any given price пҒ°. Purchasers are
consumers with valuation intensities that are suп¬ғciently high пӮөвҲҲ(пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒ•пҖ»1] that they will purchase
the product even if they are uninformed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. Non-purchasers are consumers
with valuation intensities that are suп¬ғciently low пӮөвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒү) that they will not purchase the
product even if they are informed. Information-dependents are consumers with moderate valuation
intensities пӮөвҲҲ(пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒүпҖ»пҒ°пҖҪпҒұпҒ•) such that they will purchase if and only if they are informed.
Because the quantity eп¬Җect is the increase in sales quantity resulting from uninformed consumers
13

becoming informed, the magnitude of the eп¬Җect is driven by the size of the information-dependents
consumer category. How does the price impact the size of the information-dependents? When the
price increases, the information-dependents category grows at the high end of the valuation inten-
sity range because a subset of purchasers (those with the lowest valuations) become information-
dependents. When the price increases, the information-dependents category shrinks at the low end
of the valuation intensity range because a subset of information-dependents (those with the lowest
valuations) become non-purchasers. Because uninformed purchasers are more price sensitive than
informed non-purchasers, the growth from purchasers becoming information-dependents exceeds
the shrinkage from information-dependents becoming non-purchasers.
This implies that as the
price increases, the size of the information-dependents categoryвҖ”and hence the magnitude of the
quantity eп¬ҖectвҖ”increases.
Having established that the quantity eп¬Җect grows as the price increases, we now turn to the
impact of awareness on the magnitude of the quantity eп¬Җect. As the awareness пҒЎincreases through
the range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy increases, resulting in a lower price and thus a
smaller quantity eп¬Җect.
Next we turn to the subsidy eп¬Җect. As the awareness пҒЎincreases through the range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ),
the magnitude of the subsidy eп¬Җect grows because it becomes increasingly costly for the donor to
persuade the intermediary not to abandon the shrinking uninformed segment.
In sum, under a price-setting intermediary, as the awareness пҒЎincreases over the range пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ),
the beneп¬Ғcial-to-the-donor quantity eп¬Җect shrinks while the harmful-to-the-donor subsidy eп¬Җect
grows. Consequently there exists a threshold awareness level ЛҮпҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ] such that the quantity
eп¬Җect outweighs the subsidy eп¬Җect so that the donor beneп¬Ғts from an increase in awareness when
пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»ЛҮпҒЎ), and is hurt by an increase in awareness when пҒЎвҲҲ(ЛҮпҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ).
The implication of Proposition 5 is that a donor should be wary in encouraging entities (e.g.,
government ministries of health, non-governmental organizations) to institute public health media
campaigns aimed at communicating the beneп¬Ғts of the donorвҖҷs product. Although such campaigns
beneп¬Ғt the donor when she distributes the product through a non-commercial channel, they can
hurt the donor when she distributes through the commercial channel.
A donor need only be
concerned about this negative impact when she perceives that the awareness campaign will tempt
the commercial channel to raise the price of the product and abandon the shrinking uninformed
segment. Proposition 5 reveals that this will not be a concern when the awareness level prior to the
campaign is high пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎпҖ»or when the awareness level after the media campaign will be low пҒЎпҖјЛҮпҒЎ.
To what extent should a donor encourage others to increase consumersвҖҷ awareness of the beneп¬Ғts
14

of the product the donor is subsidizing? To provide a more complete answer to this question,
Proposition 6 complements Proposition 5 by focusing on how the magnitude of the donorвҖҷs marginal
value of awareness changes in the awareness level, and how this depends on whether the donor
controls the price.
Proposition 6. With donor price control, the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness increases in
awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»bпҒЎ), and jumps up to a constant and stays at the constant for пҒЎвҲҲ[bпҒЎпҖ»1].
With a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness increases in awareness
for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ), decreases in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), and jumps up to a constant and stays at the
constant for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»1].
Recall that under donor price control, the donor serves the broad market for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»bпҒЎ), and
reduces the subsidy as the awareness пҒЎincreases. The reduced subsidy leads to a higher price,
implying that the beneп¬Ғcial-to-the donor quantity eп¬Җect strengthens as пҒЎincreases over пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»bпҒЎ).
Consequently, the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness increases as the awareness increases over
the range пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»bпҒЎ). When the awareness пҒЎreaches to the threshold bпҒЎ, the donor serves only the
informed segment and the subsidy is independent of the awareness, implying that the price stays
at the constant level. At this awareness threshold, the quantity eп¬Җect reaches its largest level and
remains intact as awareness further increases. Therefore, the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness
reaches the highest level at пҒЎ= bпҒЎand stays constant as пҒЎincreases.
The same insights can be applied to explain the result that with a price-setting intermediary,
the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness increases in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ) and jumps up to a
constant and stays at the constant for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»1]. The result that the donorвҖҷs marginal value of
awareness decreases in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ) can be explained by recalling that as пҒЎincreases
over the range [пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), the beneп¬Ғcial quantity eп¬Җect shrinks and the harmful subsidy eп¬Җect grows.
An implication of Proposition 6 is that donors should be most encouraging of eп¬Җorts to mar-
ginally increase the fraction of the consumer population aware of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts when that
fraction is already high. In contrast, donors have relatively little to gain by such eп¬Җorts when this
fraction is small.
Although we have focused on the donorвҖҷs subsidy decision, taking awareness as being exogenous,
in some settings a donorвҖҷs eп¬Җorts to increase the purchase and use of particular products include
both a subsidy and an eп¬Җort to increase consumersвҖҷ awareness of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts. Propositions
5 and 6 shed some light on the donorвҖҷs awareness-eп¬Җort decision. The п¬Ғrst insight is that even if
increasing awareness is costless, the donor distributing through a price-setting intermediary should
avoid embarking on small eп¬Җorts to increase awareness, if the initial awareness level is moderate
15

пҒЎвҲҲ(ЛҮпҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ). This contrasts for the prescription for the price-setting donor, who should always embark
on eп¬Җorts to increase awareness, if they are suп¬ғciently inexpensive (Proposition 5). The second
insight is related, but is driven by the marginal value of awareness (Proposition 6). When the donor
distributes through a non-commercial channel, the marginal value of awareness is increasing. This
favors large awareness campaigns. In contrast, when the donor distributes through a commercial
channel, the marginal value of awareness is decreasing if and only if the awareness is moderate. This
favors the donor pursuing either relatively small or relatively large awareness eп¬Җorts, but avoiding
intermediate eп¬Җorts, when the initial level of awareness is small. Both of these insights are driven
by the п¬Ғnding that moderate levels of awareness are unattractive to the donor distributing through
a price-setting intermediary because of the high subsidy required to persuade the intermediary to
target the broad market.
4
Discussion
As noted in В§1, increasingly, donors interested in encouraging the purchase and use of socially-
beneп¬Ғcial products are shifting their attention from distributing through non-commercial channels
in which they control the price to commercial channels wherein the price is delegated to a for-proп¬Ғt
intermediary. This paper provides guidance to donors in how they should approach this transition.
The main change in distributing through a price-setting intermediary is the need to account for the
intermediaryвҖҷs market-targeting decision.
Accounting for this decision leads to three main implications. First, in shifting to the commercial
channel, the donor should increase the subsidy when consumer awareness of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts
is low, and decrease the subsidy when awareness is high. Second, with the commercial channel,
the donor should be prepared to increase the subsidy as awareness increases, which is contrary to
her actions when she distributes through a non-commercial channel. Third, contrary to the lesson
obtained with non-commercial distribution, with commercial distribution the donor can be hurt by
increased awareness. The implication is that the donor should be wary in encouraging entities (e.g.,
government ministries of health, non-governmental organizations) to institute awareness campaigns
aimed at communicating the beneп¬Ғts of the donorвҖҷs product.
The donor should be especially
concerned when the initial level awareness is moderate, and the campaign has a relatively small
impact.
Then the eп¬Җect of the campaign is to encourage the intermediary to raise the price,
excluding consumers that are not informed of the productвҖҷs beneп¬Ғts, to the donorвҖҷs detriment.
Although donors are interested in increasing the purchase and use of speciп¬Ғc products, our
model has only captured the purchase decision.
The extent to which the product achieves its
16

positive intended social beneп¬Ғt depends on the degree to which the product is used properly. The
empirical evidence for the impact of ICS is mixed. For example, Smith-Sivertsen et al. (2009) п¬Ғnd
that usage by recipients of ICS is suп¬ғcient to obtain beneп¬Ғts in reduced carbon dioxide exposure and
respiratory irritation. In contrast, Hanna et al. (2012) п¬Ғnd usage and health beneп¬Ғts are limited.
A concern in shifting from the non-commercial to the commercial channel in the distribution of
recommended malaria drugs is that the for-proп¬Ғt intermediaries may lack the capabilities and
incentives to encourage proper use of the drugs (Arrow et al. 2004, Morris et al. 2014). In general,
the extent to which a product is properly used depends on the information provided by the supplier
at the point of sale, and any eп¬Җorts by the supplier to follow up with the user (e.g., to make sure
that ICS are properly maintained and used). To the extent that the non-commercial channel is
more capable and motivated to provide this guidance, the value to the donor of a sale through the
non-commercial channel would be higher than a sale through the commercial channel. This would
alter our results by pushing down the optimal subsidy for the commercial channel.
As donors shift their eп¬Җorts from non-commercial to commercial channels, they have more
options than transferring the subsidized-product approach to this new channel. For example, in
the context of ICS, there is active debate around whether donors should subsidize products directly
or indirectly, through, for example, research and development work to design eп¬Җective ICS and then
training to building capabilities of local stove producers (Simon et al. 2014). Additional research
is required to inform how donors ought to pursue indirect subsidy eп¬Җorts, and to compare their
performance with direct subsidies.
References
Adida, E., D. Dey, H. Mamani. 2013. Operational issues and network eп¬Җects in vaccine markets.
European Journal of Operational Research 231 414-427.
Adeyi, O., R. Atun. 2010. Universal access to malaria medicines: Innovation in п¬Ғnancing and
delivery. Lancet 376 1869-1871.
Amin, A. A., D. Zurovac, B. B. Kangwana, J. Greenп¬Ғeld, D. N. Otieno, W. S. Akhwale, R. W. Snow.
2007. The challenges of changing national malaria drug policy to artemisinin-based combinations
in Kenya. Malaria Journal 6(72).
ArifoЛҳglu, K., S. Deo, S. M. R. Iravani. 2012. Consumption externality and yield uncertainty in the
inп¬Ӯuenza vaccine supply chain: Interventions in demand and supply sides. Management Science
58(6) 1072-1091.
Arrow, K. J., C. Panosian, H. Gelband. 2004. Saving Lives, Buying Time: Economics of Malaria
Drugs in an Age of Resistance. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
17

Ashraf, N., B. K. Jack, E. Kamenica. 2013. Information and subsidies: Complements or substi-
tutes? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 88 133-139.
Broder, J. M. 2010. Developing nations to get clean-burning stoves. New York Times (Sept. 20)
A8.
Chemama, J., M. C. Cohen, R. Lobel, G. Perakis. 2014. Consumer subsidies with a strategic
supplier: Commitment vs. п¬Ӯexibility. Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Chick, S. E., H. Mamani, D. Simchi-Levi. 2008. Supply chain coordination and inп¬Ӯuenza vaccina-
tion. Operations Research 56(6), 1493-1506.
Choudhary, V., A. Ghose, T. Mukhopadhyay, U. Rajan. 2005. Personalized pricing and quality
diп¬Җerentiation. Management Science 51(7), 1120-1130.
Cohen, J. M., O. Sabot, K. Sabot, M. Gordon, I. Gross, D. Bishop, M. Odhiambo, Y. Ipuge, L.
Ward, A. Mwita, C. Goodman. 2010. A pharmacy too far? Equity and spatial distribution of
outcomes in the delivery of subsidized artemisinin-based combination therapies through private
drug shops. BMC Health Services Research 10(1) 1-12.
Cohen, M., R. Lobel, G. Perakis. 2013. The impact of demand uncertainty on consumer subsidies
for green technology adoption. Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Dranove, D., G. Z. Jin. 2010. Quality disclosure and certiп¬Ғcation: Theory and practice. Journal
of Economic Literature 48(4) 935-963.
Dupas, P., 2009. What matters (and what does not) in householdsвҖҷ decision to invest in malaria
prevention. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99(2) 224-230.
Gaul, M. 2009. Subsidy schemes for the dissemination of improved stoves. Gesellschaft fГјr Tech-
nische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Eschborn, Germany.
Hanna, R., E. Duп¬Ӯo, M. Greenstone. 2012. Up in smoke: The inп¬Ӯuence of household behavior on
the long-run impact of improved cooking stoves. Working Paper, Harvard University.
Kuksov, D., Y. Lin. 2010. Information provision in a vertically diп¬Җerentiated competitive market-
place. Marketing Science. 29(1) 122-138.
Mamani, H., S. E. Chick, D. Simchi-Levi. 2013. A game-theoretic model of international inп¬Ӯuenza
vaccination coordination. Management Science 59(7) 1650-1670.
Mobarak, A. M., P. Dwivedi, R. Bailis, L. Hildemann, G. Miller. 2012. Low demand for nontradi-
tional cookstove technologies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 109(27) 10815-10820.
Moorthy, K. 1988. Product and price competition in a duopoly. Marketing Science 7(2) 141-168.
Morris, A., A. Ward, B. Moonen, O. Sabot, J. M. Cohen. 2014. Price subsidies increase the use
18

of private sector ACTs: Evidence from a systematic review. Forthcoming in Health Policy and
Planning.
Ovchinnikov, A., G. Raz. 2014. Coordinating pricing and supply of public interest goods using
government rebates and subsidies. Working Paper, University of Virginia.
Rehfuess E. A., E. Puzzolo, D. Stanistreet, D. Pope, N. G. Bruce. 2014. Enablers and barriers
to large-scale uptake of improved solid fuel stoves: A systematic review. Environmental Health
Perspectives. 122(2) 120вҖ”130.
Simon, G. L., R. Bailis, J. Baumgartner, J. Hyman, A. Laurent. 2014. Current debates and future
research needs in the clean cookstove sector. Energy for Sustainable Development 20 49-57.
Smith-Sivertsen, T., E. DГӯaz, D. Pope, R. T. Lie, A. DГӯaz, J. McCracken, P. Bakke, B. Arana,
K. R. Smith, N. Bruce.
2009.
Eп¬Җect of reducing indoor air pollution on womenвҖҷs respiratory
symptoms and lung function: The RESPIRE randomized trial, Guatemala. American Journal of
Epidemiology. 170(2) 211-220.
Taylor, T. A., W. Xiao. 2014. Subsidizing the distribution channel: Donor funding to improve the
availability of malaria drugs. Forthcoming in Management Science.
World Bank. 2010. Improved cookstoves and better health in Bangladesh: Lessons from household
energy and sanitation programs.
World Health Organization. 2013. World Malaria Report: 2013.
Appendix
Lemma A1 is useful in the proofs of Propositions 1 and 2. Lemma A2 is useful in the proof of
Proposition 1.
Lemma A1. (пҒ¶+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒЈ)2 вүҘ4(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖә
Proof of Lemma A1: Because
(пҒ¶+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒЈ)2 вҲ’4(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
= (пҒ¶+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒЈ)2 вҲ’4(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒү+ пҒұпҒ•)(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
= (пҒ¶+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒЈ)2 вҲ’4(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•) + 4(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)2
= (пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒү+ 2пҒұпҒ•)2
вүҘ0пҖ»
the result holds. ВҘ
19

For use in Lemma A2 and the proofs of Lemma 1 and Propositions 1 and 2, let
пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ)
=
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү)
пӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ)
=
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ))
bпҒЈ(пҒЎ)
=
пҒұпҒ•вҲ’(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
p
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖә
Lemma A2. пӮјпҒү(bпҒЎ) = пӮјпҒӮ(bпҒЎ), where bпҒЎ= {пҒЎ|пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶= bпҒЈ(пҒЎ)}пҖә
Proof of Lemma A2: By deп¬Ғnition of пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) and пӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ),
пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) вҲ’пӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ)
=
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҒЎ[1 вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҖҪпҒұпҒү]
вҲ’[пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)][1 вҲ’[пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)][пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖҪ(пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү)]
=
пҒЎ(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү)
вҲ’{(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ)[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү] + пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү}2пҖҪ[4пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү)]
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)
4пҒұпҒ•
вҲҷ
вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ)2 вҲ’2(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ)пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү((1 + пҒЎ)пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒЎпҒұпҒү)
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү
Вё
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)
4пҒұпҒ•
вҲҷ
вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)2 + пҒЎпҒұ3
пҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұ2
пҒ•пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү((1 + пҒЎ)пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒЎпҒұпҒү)
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү
Вё
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)
4пҒұпҒ•
вҲҷ
вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)2 + (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)2
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү
Вё
пҖ»
which implies the result. ВҘ
Note, by Lemma A2, that the deп¬Ғnition of bпҒЎin Lemma A2 is equivalent to the deп¬Ғnition in
Proposition 1. Lemma A3 is useful in the proof of Proposition 2.
Lemma A3.
пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) вүӨпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) for пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎпҖ»
where the п¬Ғrst inequality is strict if and only if the second is strict.
Proof of Lemma A3 and Proposition 1: The proof is structured as follows. We deп¬Ғne a
threshold eпҒЎпҖ»where eпҒЎвүҘbпҒЎпҖәWe then examine a Case 1, which corresponds to пҒЎвүҘeпҒЎand show
пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүпҖәNext we examine Case 2, which corresponds to пҒЎпҖјeпҒЎ, and show пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) if пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎпҖ»
and пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүif bпҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖјeпҒЎпҖә
Case 1. пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, which by the deп¬Ғnition of пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ), can be rewritten as пҒЎвүҘeпҒЎ, where
eпҒЎ= {пҒЎ|пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶= eпҒЈ(пҒЎ)}
and
eпҒЈ(пҒЎ) = пҒұпҒ•вҲ’(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖә
20

It follows from the condition пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•that supпҒіпҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•), which together
with О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•) = О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•), implies supпҒіпҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) вүӨsupпҒівүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі). This, together
with the result пҒіпҒүвүӨпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, implies that пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒү.
Case 2. пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, i.e., пҒЎпҖјeпҒЎ. Note that the condition пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•can be rewritten as
пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү) пҖјпҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ 2пҒұпҒ•пҖә
(6)
Note
пӮј0
пҒү(пҒЎ) вҲ’пӮј0
пҒӮ(пҒЎ)
=
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒү)[1 вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҖҪпҒұпҒү] вҲ’[пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)][пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)](1пҖҪпҒұпҒ•вҲ’1пҖҪпҒұпҒү)
=
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү) вҲ’[пҒұ2
пҒ•пҒұ2
пҒүпҖҪ(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү)2 вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ)2](пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү)
пҖҫ
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү) вҲ’[(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ 2пҒұпҒ•)2 вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ)2](пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү)
=
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү) вҲ’4(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү)
вүҘ
0пҖ»
(7)
where the п¬Ғrst inequality follows from (6) and the second inequality is due to Lemma A1. From
Lemma A2, пӮјпҒү(bпҒЎ) = пӮјпҒӮ(bпҒЎ). It follows from the deп¬Ғnitions of eпҒЎand bпҒЎthat bпҒЎвүӨeпҒЎ. This implies that
Lemma A3 holds and that
пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) пҖҫпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) for bпҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖјeпҒЎпҖә
If пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ, then пҒЎпҖјeпҒЎ, i.e., пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•, implying that supпҒіпҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) вүҘ
supпҒівүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі). Thus, пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ). Suppose bпҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖјeпҒЎ. Then
0
=
пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶вҲ’bпҒЈ(bпҒЎ)
=
пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶вҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
p
bпҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[bпҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’bпҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]
пҖј
пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶вҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
p
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]
вүӨ
пҒЈвҲ’пҒ¶вҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•
=
2(пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҖ»
(8)
where the п¬Ғrst equality follows from the deп¬Ғnition of bпҒЎin Lemma A2, and the strict inequality
holds because bпҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖәBy inequality (8), пҒіпҒүвүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•. Hence, supпҒівүӨпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) пҖҫпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘ
supпҒіпҖҫпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі), implying that пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒү. ВҘ
21

Lemma A4 is useful in the proof of Lemma 1. For use in Lemma A4 and the proof of Lemma 1, let
пӮёпҒү(пҒі)
=
ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҒү(пҒі)пҖ»пҒі)
пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі)
=
ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі)пҖ»пҒі)
пҒі(пҒЎ)
=
пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)
p
пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖә
Lemma A4. пӮёпҒү(пҒі(пҒЎ)) = пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі(пҒЎ)).
Proof of Lemma A4: By deп¬Ғnition of пӮёпҒү(пҒі) and пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі),
пӮёпҒү(пҒі) вҲ’пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі)
=
[пҒ°пҒү(пҒі) вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі]пҒЎ[1 вҲ’пҒ°пҒү(пҒі)пҖҪпҒұпҒү]
вҲ’[пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі][1 вҲ’пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі)[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖҪ(пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү)]
=
пҒЎ(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү)
вҲ’{пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒүпҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү] вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі}{1 вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖҪ(пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү)}пҖҪ4
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ){2(пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)пҒұпҒ•вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒі)2 вҲ’пҒұпҒ•пҒұпҒү[(1 + пҒЎ)пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒЎпҒұпҒү]пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]}пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒ•)
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ){(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)2пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү] вҲ’(пҒұпҒ•вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒі)2}пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒ•)пҖ»
implying that пӮёпҒү(пҒі(пҒЎ)) вҲ’пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі(пҒЎ)) = 0. ВҘ
Proof of Lemma 1.
The proof is structured as follows.
We deп¬Ғne a threshold eпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖ»where
eпҒі(пҒЎ) вүӨпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖәWe then examine a Case 1, which corresponds to пҒівүӨeпҒі(пҒЎ) and show the optimal price
пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пҒ°пҒү(пҒі)пҖәNext we examine Case 2, which corresponds to пҒіпҖҫeпҒі(пҒЎ), and show пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) =
пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) if пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖ»and пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пҒ°пҒү(пҒі) if eпҒі(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖә
Case 1. пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) вүҘпҒұпҒ•, which by the deп¬Ғnition of пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі), can be rewritten as пҒівүӨeпҒі(пҒЎ), where
eпҒі(пҒЎ) = пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•+ (пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҒЎпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]пҖә
It follows from the condition пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) вүҘпҒұпҒ•that supпҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) = ОӣпҒӮ(пҒұпҒ•пҖ»пҒі), which together with
ОӣпҒӮ(пҒұпҒ•пҖ»пҒі) = ОӣпҒү(пҒұпҒ•пҖ»пҒі), implies supпҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) вүӨsupпҒ°пҖҫпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі). This, together with the result
пҒ°пҒү(пҒі) вүҘпҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) вүҘпҒұпҒ•, implies that пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пҒ°пҒү(пҒі).
Case 2. пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) пҖјпҒұпҒ•, i.e., пҒіпҖҫeпҒі(пҒЎ). Note that the condition пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) пҖјпҒұпҒ•implies that
пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҖјпҒұпҒ•пҖә
(9)
Note
пӮё0
пҒү(пҒі) вҲ’пӮё0
пҒӮ(пҒі)
=
пҒЎ[1 вҲ’пҒ°пҒү(пҒі)пҖҪпҒұпҒү] вҲ’пҒЎ[1 вҲ’пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі)пҖҪпҒұпҒү] вҲ’(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)[1 вҲ’пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі)пҖҪпҒұпҒ•]
=
(1 вҲ’пҒЎ)(пҒЈвҲ’пҒівҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(2пҒұпҒ•)
пҖј
0пҖ»
22

where the inequality follows from (9). From Lemma A4, пӮёпҒү(пҒі(пҒЎ)) = пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі(пҒЎ)). It follows from the
deп¬Ғnitions of eпҒі(пҒЎ) and пҒі(пҒЎ) that пҒі(пҒЎ) вүҘeпҒі(пҒЎ). Therefore,
пӮёпҒү(пҒі) вүӨпӮёпҒӮ(пҒі) for пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)
and
пӮёпҒү(пҒі) пҖҫпӮёпҒӮ(пҒі) for eпҒі(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖә
If пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ), then пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі) вүӨпҒұпҒ•, implying that supпҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) = пӮёпҒӮ(пҒі) вүҘпӮёпҒү(пҒі) вүҘsupпҒ°пҖҫпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі).
Thus, пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пҒ°пҒӮ(пҒі). Suppose eпҒі(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ). The second inequality implies пҒ°пҒү(пҒі) пҖҫпҒұпҒ•. Hence,
supпҒ°пҖҫпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒү(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі) = пӮёпҒү(пҒі) пҖҫпӮёпҒӮ(пҒі) вүҘsupпҒ°вүӨпҒұпҒ•ОӣпҒӮ(пҒ°пҖ»пҒі), implying that пҒ°вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = пҒ°пҒү(пҒі). ВҘ
Lemma A5 is useful in the proof of Proposition 2, where, recall, пҒЎ= {пҒЎ|пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ)}пҖә
Lemma A5. пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ.
Proof of Lemma A5: By deп¬Ғnition of пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ), we have [пҒ¶+ пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү)]пҖҪ2 = пҒі(пҒЎ),
which implies that
2пҒі(пҒЎ)
=
пҒ¶+ пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]
=
пҒі(bпҒЎ) + пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•пҖҪ[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]
вүӨ
пҒі(bпҒЎ) + пҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•
вүӨ
2пҒі(bпҒЎ)пҖ»
where the second equality follows from the deп¬Ғnition of bпҒЎin Lemma A2. This, together with the
fact that пҒі(пҒЎ) increases in пҒЎ, implies пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ. ВҘ
Proof of Proposition 2.
The proof is structured as follows.
We examine a Case 1, which
corresponds to пҒЎвүӨпҒЎand show пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)пҖәNext we examine Case 2, which corresponds to
пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎ, and show there exists пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ] such that пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ) if пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ]пҖ»and пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүif пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎпҖә
Case 1. пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпҒі(пҒЎ), which, because пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ) is strictly decreasing in пҒЎпҖ»can be rewritten
as пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ, where пҒЎ= {пҒЎ|пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ)}. It follows from the condition пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпҒі(пҒЎ) that
sup
пҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ)
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)
=
пӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ)
вүҘ
пӮјпҒү(пҒЎ)
вүҘ
sup
пҒіпҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖ»
where the п¬Ғrst inequality follows from Lemma A3 and the fact that пҒЎвүӨпҒЎimplies пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ(by Lemma
A5). Therefore, пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) for пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ.
Case 2. пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒі(пҒЎ), i.e., пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎ. Because пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) is the maximizer of the concave function
23

О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі), supпҒівүҘпҒі(пҒЎ) О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі) = О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ)). Let ВҜпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) = О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ)). Then
ВҜпӮј0
пҒӮ(пҒЎ)
=
пҒҖО пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪпҒҖпҒЎ|пҒі=пҒі(пҒЎ) + пҒҖО пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪпҒҖпҒі|пҒі=пҒі(пҒЎ)пҒӨпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎ
(10)
вүӨ
пҒҖО пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪпҒҖпҒЎ|пҒі=пҒі(пҒЎ)
=
[пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)][пҒЈвҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)](пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•)
вүӨ
[пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)][пҒЈвҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)](пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•)пҖ»
where the п¬Ғrst inequality follows from the result that пҒҖО пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі)пҖҪпҒҖпҒі|пҒі=пҒі(пҒЎ) вүӨ0 (because of the
condition пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒі(пҒЎ)) and пҒӨпҒі(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎвүҘ0, and the last inequality is due to пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎand пҒі(пҒЎ) being
increasing in пҒЎ. Further пӮј0
пҒү(пҒЎ) = (пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү). This together with (10) implies
пӮј0
пҒү(пҒЎ) вҲ’ВҜпӮј0
пҒӮ(пҒЎ)
вүҘ
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү) вҲ’[пҒ¶вҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)][пҒЈвҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ)](пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•)
вүҘ
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒү)2пҖҪ(4пҒұпҒү) вҲ’(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)пҒұпҒ•(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)пҖҪ(пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•)
вүҘ
0пҖ»
where the second inequality is due to пҒі(пҒЎ) вүҘпҒЈвҲ’пҒұпҒ•and the third inequality follows from Lemma
A1. This, together with the results that ВҜпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) and пӮјпҒү(bпҒЎ) = пӮјпҒӮ(bпҒЎ) вүҘВҜпӮјпҒӮ(bпҒЎ), implies that
there exists пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ] such that ВҜпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпӮјпҒү(пҒЎ) for пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ], i.e., пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ), and ВҜпӮјпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүӨпӮјпҒү(пҒЎ)
for пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎ, i.e., пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүbecause пҒіпҒүвүӨпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒі(пҒЎ). ВҘ
Proof of Proposition 3: The result that the donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy under donor price control
пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) decreases in пҒЎfollows from (4) and the observations that пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) decreases in пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒүis independent
of пҒЎ, and пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вүҘпҒіпҒүfor пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»1]пҖәThe donorвҖҷs optimal subsidy under a price-setting intermediary
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) is given by (5). This, together with the result that пҒі(пҒЎ) strictly increases in пҒЎ, implies that
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) strictly increases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), and weakly decreases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ) вҲӘ(пҒЎпҖ»1]пҖәВҘ
Proof of Proposition 4: We have shown in the proof of Proposition 2 that пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»bпҒЎ]. If пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ,
then пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ).
If пҒЎпҖјпҒЎвүӨпҒЎ, then пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒі(пҒЎ) and пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ).
Because
пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) вҲ’пҒі(пҒЎ) is strictly decreasing in пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) for пҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖ»implying that пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) пҖҫпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ). If
пҒЎпҖјпҒЎпҖјbпҒЎ, then пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒүand пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ). Because пҒіпҒүпҖјпҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ), пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) пҖјпҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ). If пҒЎвүҘbпҒЎ, then
пҒівҲ—(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒҜ(пҒЎ) = пҒіпҒү. ВҘ
Proof of Propositions 5 and 6: Under donor price control, the donorвҖҷs optimal utility is
О пҒҜ(пҒЎ) =
(
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ))
if пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү)
if пҒЎпҖҫbпҒЎпҖ»
which implies that пҒӨО пҒҜ(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎ= [пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)][пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ)](1пҖҪпҒұпҒ•вҲ’1пҖҪпҒұпҒү) пҖҫ0 for пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎand пҒӨО пҒҜ(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎ=
(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒү)[1 вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҖҪпҒұпҒү] пҖҫ0 for пҒЎпҖҫbпҒЎ. Hence, under donor price control, the donorвҖҷs optimal
utility strictly increases in awareness пҒЎ. Because пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) пҖј(пҒ¶+ пҒЈ)пҖҪ2 and пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ) strictly decreases in
24

пҒЎпҖ»пҒӨО пҒҜ(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎstrictly increases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ; пҒӨО пҒҜ(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎis constant for пҒЎпҖҫbпҒЎ. Further, it follows
from the proof of Lemma A3 and Proposition 1 that пҒӨО пҒҜ(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎпҖј(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒіпҒү)[1 вҲ’(пҒЈвҲ’пҒіпҒү)пҖҪпҒұпҒү] for all
пҒЎвүӨbпҒЎ(see inequality (7)). Hence, the donorвҖҷs marginal value of awareness strictly increases in
awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»bпҒЎ), and jumps up to a constant and stays at the constant for пҒЎвҲҲ[bпҒЎпҖ»1].
Under a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs optimal utility is
О вҲ—(пҒЎ) =
вҺ§
вҺӘ
вҺЁ
вҺӘ
вҺ©
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ))пҖҪ2
if пҒЎвүӨпҒЎ
О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ))пҖҪ2
if пҒЎпҖјпҒЎвүӨпҒЎ
О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү)пҖҪ2
if пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎпҖ»
which strictly increases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвүӨпҒЎand for пҒЎпҖҫпҒЎ. Consider the regime пҒЎпҖјпҒЎвүӨпҒЎ. With some
eп¬Җort one can show that
пҒӨ2О вҲ—(пҒЎпҖ»пҒі(пҒЎ))
пҒӨпҒЎ2
= вҲ’пҒұпҒүпҒұпҒ•(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•){(пҒ¶вҲ’пҒЈ+ пҒұпҒ•)[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү] + 3пҒЎпҒұпҒ•(пҒұпҒүвҲ’пҒұпҒ•)}
8(пҒЎпҒұпҒ•)3пҖҪ2[пҒЎпҒұпҒ•+ (1 вҲ’пҒЎ)пҒұпҒү]5пҖҪ2
пҖј0пҖ»
implying that there exists ЛҮпҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ] such that О вҲ—(пҒЎ) strictly increases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвҲҲ(пҒЎпҖ»ЛҮпҒЎ] and strictly
decreases in пҒЎfor пҒЎвҲҲ(ЛҮпҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ]пҖәFurther, the above inequality, together with the result that О пҒӮ(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒӮ(пҒЎ))
is convex in пҒЎand О пҒү(пҒЎпҖ»пҒіпҒү) is linear in пҒЎ, implies that with a price-setting intermediary, the donorвҖҷs
marginal value of awareness, пҒӨО вҲ—(пҒЎ)пҖҪпҒӨпҒЎ, increases in awareness for пҒЎвҲҲ[0пҖ»пҒЎ), decreases in awareness
for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»пҒЎ), and jumps up to a constant and stays at the constant for пҒЎвҲҲ[пҒЎпҖ»1]. ВҘ
25