TITLE: Operations (management) warp speed: Rapid deployment of hospital‐focused predictive/prescriptive analytics for the COVID‐19 pandemic
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13648
---

Accepted Article
Operations (Management) Warp Speed: Rapid Deployment of
Hospital-Focused Predictive/Prescriptive Analytics for the COVID-19
Pandemic
Pengyi Shi∗1, Jonathan E. Helm2, Christopher Chen2, JeﬀLim2, Rodney P. Parker2, Troy
Tinsley3, and Jacob Cecil3
1Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 shi178@purdue.edu
2Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405
{helmj, cch3, tenglim, rodp}@indiana.edu
3Indiana University Health, Indianapolis, IN 46202 {ttinsley, jcecil2}@iuhealth.org
December 13, 2021
Abstract
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, hospitals were in dire need of data-driven analytics to provide support for
critical, expensive, and complex decisions. Yet, the majority of analytics being developed were targeted at state- and
national-level policy decisions, with little availability of actionable information to support tactical and operational de-
cision making and execution at the hospital level. To ﬁll this gap, we developed a multi-method framework leveraging
a parsimonious design philosophy that allows for rapid deployment of high-impact predictive and prescriptive analyt-
ics in a time-sensitive, dynamic, data-limited environment, such as a novel pandemic. The product of this research
is a workload prediction and decision support tool to provide mission-critical, actionable information for individual
hospitals. Our framework forecasts time-varying patient workload and demand for critical resources by integrating
disease progression models, tailored to data availability during diﬀerent stages of the pandemic, with a stochastic
network model of patient movements among units within individual hospitals. Both components employ adaptive
tuning to account for hospital-dependent, time-varying parameters that provide consistently accurate predictions by
dynamically learning the impact of latent changes in system dynamics. Our decision support system is designed
to be portable and easily implementable across hospital data systems for expeditious expansion and deployment.
This work was contextually grounded in close collaboration with IU Health, the largest health system in Indiana,
which has 18 hospitals serving over one million residents. Our initial prototype was implemented in April 2020 and
has supported managerial decisions, from the operational to the strategic, across multiple functionalities at IU Health.
Key Words: Queueing Network Workload Prediction, Synthetic Control, Epidemiological Forecasting, Hospital De-
cision Support Implementation, Nurse Transshipment.
History: Initially submitted on September 21, 2020; revised on February 28, 2021, May 27, 2021, July 20, 2021, and
August 23, 2021; accepted by Martin Starr on October 22, 2021 after four revisions.
∗Corresponding author
_______________________________________________
This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as:
Shi, P., Helm, J. E., Chen, C., Lim, J., Parker, R. P., Tinsley, T., & Cecil, J. (2022). Operations (Management) warp speed: Rapid deployment of hospital-focused predictive/
prescriptive analytics for the COVID-19 pandemic. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13648

Accepted Article
1
Introduction
Pandemics place tremendous stress on hospital resources. According to the Oﬃce of the Inspector
General (Grimm 2020), hospitals treating COVID-19 (hereafter, COVID) patients in outbreak
zones reported severe shortages of specialized hospital beds, nurses, ventilators, PPE, and testing
supplies, among others. Eﬀective pandemic response for hospitals relies heavily on the ability to
determine (1) the amount of resources needed for COVID patients; (2) how to eﬀectively allocate
those resources; and (3) how, when, and how much surge capacity to create. However, the analytics
most widely developed and deployed during the COVID pandemic were designed primarily to
support large-scale public health agendas. Early in the pandemic, multiple healthcare executives in
the Indiana Pandemic Information Collaborative expressed concern that the explosion of analytics
provided little valuable information to support their own operational planning. Widely publicized
analytics platforms tended to focus on county- or state-level predictions of time-averaged (steady
state) bed usage, which was insuﬃcient to support the day-to-day and week-to-week tactical and
operational plans being executed by hospitals and hospital systems. This bridges this gap between
predictive information and hospital-level execution. Through a close hospital-academia partnership,
we developed a suite of analytics to support the rapidly innovated strategic, tactical, and operational
actions deployed by hospitals to combat the COVID-19 pandemic.
1.1
Motivation: The Gap between Predictions and Operational Decisions
Many hospitals faced challenges in identifying an analytics-driven solution that met their informa-
tion and decision support needs. The explosion of analytics produced a myriad of widely varying
predictions, making it diﬃcult to know which model to use.
Further, widely publicized model
models failed to provide suﬃcient detail for operational decision making at the hospital level.
(a) Ensemblea prediction for Indiana
aCOVID Forecast Hub: Univ. of Mass
(b) Steady state parameters for CHIMEa model
aCHIME: Univ. of Pennsylvania
Figure 1: Publicly available COVID prediction models
Figure 1a highlights the large variation and generally poor accuracy among popular, publicly avail-
2

Accepted Article
able prediction models. Predictions for Indiana for February 1 ranged from 9,000 to 75,000 cases,
with very few models predicting close to the actual 15,000 (grey line).
Figure 1b presents the
parameter set used by the well-known CHIME model. CHIME employs a widely used method
for translating COVID disease-spread models into hospital resource requirements. This approach
predicts COVID demand for hospital resources based on a simple proportional calculation from
a prediction of conﬁrmed cases to produce a state-level (county-level at best) average prediction
of hospital resource needs. To illustrate CHIME’s limitations, consider the Intensive Care Units
(ICU) capacity calculation:
ICU usage = daily conﬁrmed cases × fraction that need ICU × average time in ICU,
(1)
which is based on Little’s Law and is most appropriate for time-homogeneous, steady-state systems.
During a pandemic, these assumptions of Little’s Law are violated.
The drawbacks of policy-targeted models for operational decision making include: (1) failing to ac-
count for current state and (transient) time-varying dynamics; (2) failing to capture detailed patient
ﬂows in hospitals or distributional information needed for decision support; (3) requiring hospitals
to input their own parameters with little guidance on how these inputs should be estimated; and
(4) providing state level predictions that are of little help for individual hospitals.
In contrast to extant models, rather than appending an operational component to a primarily
disease-focused model, we develop a multi-stage approach that feeds a disease prediction into a
detailed model of hospital operations. This approach required the development of new theory to
overcome the unique challenges of forecasting in the highly dynamic pandemic environment.
Challenges in Addressing the Gaps in COVID Modeling Approaches. While there is a
substantial body of literature in patient ﬂow modeling and optimization, most of the research oper-
ates under two fundamental assumptions: there is suﬃcient historical data to accurately estimate
patient ﬂows; and patient ﬂow characteristics, such as length-of-stay distributions, are not chang-
ing. In contrast, a pandemic environment has very limited data and exhibits major, time-varying
disruptions of patient ﬂow primitives. We separate these challenges into four broad categories.
(1) Limited and censored patient ﬂow data. At the beginning of the pandemic, March and April
2020 for Indiana, many COVID patients at IU Health had not yet ﬁnished their hospital stay,
leading to right-censoring of the length-of-stay, transitions between units, and mortality statistics.
Most patients that were discharged from the hospital early on were those with milder conditions,
which causes standard estimation methods to be signiﬁcantly biased (underestimated).
(2) Noisy mapping of conﬁrmed cases to individual hospital admissions. A key feature missing from
most COVID analytics models is an estimate of how the number of conﬁrmed cases in a region
will translate into an admission at an IU Health hospital and what level of care will be required.
The state model in Indiana suggested using market share as a proxy for determining this fraction;
however, we found this to be a poor predictor of IU Health admissions. National estimates used
3

Accepted Article
in most COVID models for the fraction patients requiring ICU versus Medical/Surgical (M/S)
beds were also inaccurate for IU Health hospitals – the fraction even varied between hospitals. As
the pandemic progressed, we also found that bed requirements changed over time with changing
demographics of COVID hospitalizations and changes in admission and treatment protocols.
(3) Evolving patient characteristics. Our data shows that COVID patient characteristics and treat-
ment procedures vary by region of the state and by time. Contributing factors include more elderly
patients being admitted in March to April, whereas younger patients constituted the majority of
admissions after June, medical professionals becoming more familiar with COVID, and new treat-
ment approaches to streamline the treatment and recovery process. As a result, admissions, unit
assignment (e.g., assigning to M/S versus ICU), length-of-stay, and mortality rates were dynami-
cally evolving. Interestingly, we even found that non-COVID patient characteristics changed during
the pandemic, e.g., emergency department visits dropped signiﬁcantly.
(4) Evolving disease transmission dynamics. At the onset of the pandemic, testing was extremely
limited, and using conﬁrmed cases as the total number of cases led to signiﬁcant underestimation
of actual cases. Further, disease transmission dynamics are driven by complex interactions between
public policies (e.g., shelter in place, mask ordinance), human behavior (e.g., policy compliance,
COVID fatigue), and re-opening of restaurants and schools, among other factors. These factors are
not only diﬃcult to quantify, but are also highly speciﬁc to geographical region and culture. This
may be a contributing factor to the poor performance of many of the national prediction models
when applied to Indiana.
1.2
Integrated Framework and Implementation in IU Health
Our integrated modeling framework was developed and implemented in close collaboration with the
largest health system in the state of Indiana, IU Health; also referred to as IUH (e.g., in Figure 2).
When we formed our initial collaboration, most hospitals were using a state-wide prediction tool
that failed to provide consistently accurate predictions and actionable information. In response,
we jointly developed a suite of analytics based on a data-driven framework designed to bridge the
gap between higher-level public health predictions and hospital-level pandemic response. Figure 2
illustrates the conceptual model of this framework.
Figure 2: Overview of the integrated workload and planning framework and its functionality.
Approach. Our multi-method approach combines a disease prediction model (Susceptible-Infectious-
4

Accepted Article
Recovered) with a stochastic network model of patient ﬂow to predict hospital census in both M/S
and ICU units. These two models are joined by a mapping of county-level COVID cases to hospi-
talizations (workload) at each individual hospital. Novel adaptive tuning methods are employed to
determine key parameters in the disease prediction and patient ﬂow models, as well as the mapping
of the fraction of COVID cases arriving to a particular hospital.
In creating our framework, we adopt a parsimonious philosophy to capture ﬁrst-order eﬀects with
a minimally complex model that meets a high-priority hospital need. Two driving principles of this
philosophy are: eliminate unnecessary model complexity, and deliver only actionable information
for a need identiﬁed by the hospital. Parsimonious design facilitates ﬂexibility, adaptability, ease of
implementation. These features facilitate rapid deployment of high-impact predictive and prescrip-
tive analytics in a time-sensitive, dynamic, data-limited environment such as a pandemic.
Our framework was implemented in mid-April 2020 as a web-based application on IU Health’s
intranet that was dispatched to their ﬁve major service regions, including 18 hospitals serving
over one million residents. The tool has the capability of forecasting nurse staﬃng requirements,
ventilator usage, and PPE needs among other resource needs.
The tab displayed in Figure 3
shows forecasted demand for ICU and ventilator usage for potential future scenarios of COVID
progression. All numbers in the paper are modiﬁed to protect sensitive data.
Utilization
Capacity
Capacity
Figure 3: Screenshot of one tab of the web-based application for resource forecasting
The workload predictions and decision support from our tools have been used by the executives at
IU Health and played a critical role in their preparedness for the multiple surges of COVID cases
in Indiana. The choice of patient census in the M/S and ICU units as the primary output metric
was the result of a joint design eﬀort between IU Health and the academic team; in the design
phase, patient census was determined by IU Health leadership as the fundamental input to their
critical operational decisions. Though the research and development was contextually grounded by
IU Health’s domain knowledge, the product is easily portable to other hospitals and health systems,
5

Accepted Article
as evidenced by interest and ongoing conversations with the Indiana Hospital Association as well
as other hospital systems in Indiana.
(a) ICU census
(b) M/S census
Figure 4: Comparison between our model, the state model, and the actual census from COVID
patients in March. The last ﬁve days are used as testing data and the rest as training data. The
actual census numbers on the y-axis are masked due to non-disclosure requirements. The black
solid lines are forecasts from our integrated model; the grey lines are the low, medium, and high
forecast scenarios for the state model.
Performance. Prior to implementation, we were asked for a comparative study of our model versus
the state model currently being used, shown for Indianapolis in Figure 4. The black solid lines are
forecasts from our integrated model. The dark grey lines are the low, medium, and high forecast
scenarios for the state model. The light grey bars represent the actual census. The Mean Absolute
Percent Error (MAPE) for our model was 9.4% and 8.2% for ICU and M/S units. The state model
had a MAPE more than four times larger (42.7% and 33.8%) and exhibited an increasingly negative
bias, i.e., the MAPE for April was > 50%. The predicted census numbers shown here are from
our integrated model that takes the disease forecast as an input and uses the patient ﬂow model to
calculate the census. We implemented a multi-step calibration procedure with adaptive tuning in
this integrated model; see details of the calibration in Section 3.5.
1.3
Contributions
This research contributes to the literature by developing a parsimonious, adaptable, and easily
implementable workload tool that is tailored to individual hospitals. Our tool integrates a epidemi-
ology modeling, empirical methods, stochastic network theory, and transshipment optimization,
and was implemented in collaboration with IU Health.
• Disease prediction. To address severely limited data during the initial phase of the pan-
demic, we developed an adaptive synthetic control (aSC) method using a weighted portfolio
of comparable counties in the U.S. to predict disease progression in heterogeneous regions.
As more data became available, we pivoted to a novel, adaptive Susceptible, Infected, and
Recovered (SIR) compartmental model, enabling short, medium, and long term predictions
6

Accepted Article
with consistently high accuracy. Through new adaptive learning methods, this SIR model
explicitly accounts for unreported infections and partially observable changes in underlying
transmission rates.
• Workload prediction. Using a stochastic network model that explicitly incorporates time-
varying dynamics, we translate county-level infection predictions into patient census and
resource usage at individual hospitals, accounting for movements of COVID patients and
non-COVID patients among diﬀerent units (ICU and M/S). We leverage an oﬀered-load
approximation to provide distributional information on the workload process, deriving an
appealing analytical form for the workload variance across the network based on prior results
for single-station queues. These features bridge the gaps discussed in Section 1.1.
The academic and practical contributions are as follows.
Academic contribution. We develop a multi-method, multi-layer adaptive method to integrate
the disease and workload models with an adaptively tuned mapping of infections to hospitaliza-
tions. This diﬀerentiates our work from the patient ﬂow literature in the following ways: (1) we
integrate fully developed workload and disease forecasting, (2) we learn model parameters rather
than estimating them directly from incomplete or unrepresentative data-sources, and (3) we employ
adaptive learning as new information becomes available.
Practical contribution.
These novel elements combine to create a model that: (1) is easily
implemented and maintained; (2) produces consistently accurate predictions in environments with
severely limited data and changing dynamics that are too complex to directly quantify; (3) can be
customized to each individual hospital for actionable information; (4) integrates seamlessly with a
suite of decision support optimizations; and (5) is easily portable to other hospitals.
In the rest of the paper, we ﬁrst discuss the relevant literature in Section 2. We present the patient
ﬂow model in Section 3 ahead of the disease prediction model because a hospital-speciﬁc workload
model ﬁlled the largest gap between public health models and models that provided actionable
information to individual hospitals. We then present the disease prediction model that feeds the
arrival process of the hospital ﬂow model in Section 4. Finally, we illustrate applications, as well
as extensions, of our model in Section 5, and we conclude in Section 6.
2
Literature Review
The COVID pandemic triggered vast quantities of research within the scientiﬁc community. The
most relevant are works involve disease progression and hospital workload prediction.
2.1
Disease Progression Prediction Models
COVID spread models can be classiﬁed broadly as agent-based and compartmental models. Agent-
based models describe a set of rules governing individual behavior and use simulation to examine
global trends that emerge from individual movements and interactions with the environment. While
agent-based models that build upon compartment models, like Cuevas (2020), Kerr et al. (2021),
and Silva et al. (2020), oﬀer tremendous ﬂexibility, they require complex speciﬁcations and are
7

Accepted Article
computationally intensive. In contrast, our parsimonious approach limits complexity and compu-
tational burden by splitting our forecast into a simpler compartmental model for disease forecasting
and a stochastic network model for modeling transient patient trajectories. Compartmental mod-
els generally involve splitting the population into buckets of Susceptible, Infected, and Recovered
categories (SIR) but may often be expanded to include other compartments. There are also stochas-
tic compartmental models. References summarizing compartmental models for infectious diseases
include Brauer and Castillo-Chavez (2012) and Diekmann et al. (2013).
Most compartmental models for COVID modify the baseline SIR model by injecting more com-
partments (e.g., Bertsimas et al. 2021), a time element (e.g., Chen et al. 2020b), and limited testing
capacity (e.g., Chen et al. 2020a), among others. Mamon (2020) includes compartments for Suscep-
tible, Exposed, Infectious, Hospitalized, Critical, Other-recovered, Released, and Dead. Bertsimas
et al. (2021) develop DELPHI, a SEIR model extended to include varying states of patient recovery,
detection, and quarantine. While expanding the number of compartments may be appealing, it
requires tuning more model parameters with less data. What separates our work is that we use a
multi-method approach to employ a tool set designed speciﬁcally to capture the dynamics of in-
terest for each component of our forecast: adaptive disease spread models and stochastic queueing
networks for patient ﬂow. These simpliﬁcations allow greater ﬂexibility to adapt each individual
model to account for partially observable and scarce data with time-varying dynamics.
In the severely limited data environment of the early pandemic, we apply the adaptive synthetic
control (aSC) method (Chen 2020), which leverages data from counties elsewhere in the U.S. that
have similar characteristics to the focal county to forecast the number of cases. The only other
paper using the synthetic controls methodology of Abadie et al. (2010) in a COVID context is
Malani et al. (2020), which examines the eﬀect of release from lockdowns. With limited data, we
develop an adaptive SIR model with tunable parameters. Other papers using adaptive SIR models
include Dos Santos et al. (2021), Shapiro et al. (2021), and Chen et al. (2020b). We extend these by
coupling the SIR to a patient ﬂow model to capture the complexities of additional compartments
(e.g. disease severity) while retaining the simplicity of single parameter tuning and simulation to
generate prediction intervals to capture forecast uncertainty.
2.2
Hospital Workload Models
A central element of our integrated model is the stochastic network model, which captures patient
ﬂow among diﬀerent units in the hospital and predicts unit-level workload (patient census) in
Section 3. In the context of workload modeling for COVID patients, several papers incorporate
compartments on hospitalization in diﬀerent units into their disease progression model, e.g., Garrido
et al. (2020), Hill et al. (2020), Veloz et al. (2020), Capistran et al. (2020). Bartz-Beielstein et al.
(2020) develop a detailed discrete-event simulation model for patient ﬂow and provide resource
requirement prediction under various worst-case and best-case scenarios. Compartment models
produce average patient demand that is more suitable for systems in the steady state. These models
often neglect the detailed patient ﬂow after admission that are key to capturing critical transient
8

Accepted Article
dynamics, such as current hospital census, future discharges, and transfers to/from M/S to ICU,
whereas higher-level models assume a single, static location for each patient. On the other hand,
complicated event-based simulation models require many input parameters to be estimated, creating
challenges in terms of computation time, parameter identiﬁcation, and data scarcity. These models
can be too cumbersome when there is need for regular updating and rapid implementation.
Structural queueing models for predicting COVID patient demand capture patient ﬂow but often
lack the disease spread component. They are also challenged by parameter estimation, which is not a
major concern in typical (non-pandemic) patient ﬂow settings. Kaplan (2020) uses a single-station,
Erlang loss model to evaluate the ICU capacity needed at Yale New Haven Hospital. Bekker et al.
(2021) consider a single-station inﬁnite server queue to predict patient census. They ﬁrst estimate
the day-dependent discharge probability from data and then ﬁt a log-normal distribution for LOS.
Zhang et al. (2020) consider unit transfers but assume deterministic length-of-stays. They do not
consider possible time-varying changes in patient mix or LOS distributions either. Importantly,
all these papers initially estimate the patient-ﬂow parameters from data that do not change over
time in contrast to the adaptive procedure employed in our methodology. Section 1.1 discusses the
importance of accounting for the rapidly changing data environment in estimating these parameters.
The most relevant paper is Betcheva et al. (2020).
The authors develop an integrated disease
forecast and resource planning tool for the East of England region. The paper adopts a similar idea
of using the mean-squared error to learn system parameters; however, the authors assume constant
system parameters, which diﬀers from our adaptive procedure to estimate time-varying system
parameters, which is critical to pandemic modeling and forecasting. It is also unclear from the
paper how patient-ﬂow dynamics are modeled and whether the model can produce distributional
workload information as we have done in Section 3.
3
Stochastic Network Model for Patient Flow
Patient ﬂow in each hospital is modeled as a two-station stochastic queueing network, where the
stations correspond to ICU units and Medical/Surgical (M/S) units in the hospital.
Figure 5
illustrates a model with COVID (denoted by c) and non-COVID (denoted by nc) patients. In
our implementation, we further separate non-COVID patients into elective and emergency. In the
ﬁgure, λ represents arrival rates, with λc(t) being either the predicted (Sec. 4) or observed conﬁrmed
COVID cases in the county, depending on whether t is before or after the last observed data point.
pc
j for j ∈{MS, ICU} is the adaptively tuned fraction of county-level conﬁrmed cases that enter
the target hospital through either the ICU or M/S units, respectively. pi
j,j′ is the probability that a
patient of type i ∈{c, nc} will transfer from unit j to j′ ∈{MS, ICU, H, D}, where H, D represent
discharge to home or death. Each patient type has distinct ﬂow parameters.
In Section 3.1, we describe the motivation behind the choice of the two-station network model.
In Section 3.2, we list our assumptions on the arrival, transfer, and service-time processes.
In
Section 3.3, we specify the oﬀered-load approximation for the workload process. In Section 3.4,
we present models for exogenous blocking.
In Section 3.5, we introduce our adaptive learning
9

Accepted Article
Figure 5: Queueing network model.
procedure to estimate the ﬂow parameters for the workload process.
3.1
Two-station Network
Patients arrive to either the ICU or M/S units of the hospital and stay for a random time before
transferring to another unit or leaving the hospital. This model is suﬃciently ﬂexible to capture
general networks with multiple stations and arbitrary transition structures. Details for general
networks are provided in Appendix B.2. Next, we provide justiﬁcation for our choice to implement
this simpler network structure at IU Health as part of our parsimonious design process.
During the development process, limited data rendered the parameterization of a network model
capturing a more detailed classiﬁcation of care units impractical / infeasible. Additionally, many of
the major decisions made by IU Health during the pandemic, such as nurse staﬃng and bed capacity
creation, were based on the “level of care” classiﬁcation, which divides the patient population into
two categories based on severity of condition: critical and non-critical. These two categories require
diﬀerent types of resources, whereas IU Health has signiﬁcant ﬂexibility to move resources within a
level of care class. As an example, a critical care nurse can generally work in any of the critical care
units, but an M/S nurse generally cannot work in critical care units. Early in the pandemic, IU
Health took advantage of this ﬂexibility by pooling resources within each level of care to improve
response to evolving and uncertain demand. Finally, this two-tier classiﬁcation facilitated rapid
implementation of operational changes by avoiding the challenges of managing the diverse and
complex organizational structures and operational procedures across individual units.
While ICU and M/S generally align with critical and non-critical care, there are some subtleties.
We combined ICU and Progressive Care Units (PCU), both of which provide critical care. Mixed-
acuity units serve some critical care and some non-critical care patients. We include the critical
care portion under the ICU category and the non-critical care portion within the M/S category.
These classiﬁcations were proposed by IU Health based on their operational structure.
3.2
Arrival, Transfer, and Service Time Processes
For exposition, we focus our presentation on COVID patients; the model architecture extends
trivially to non-COVID patients. As such, we omit the superscript i ∈{c, nc} for patient types.
Let λ(t) be the deterministic arrival rate function for the number of newly conﬁrmed COVID cases
on day t.
When instantiating the model on a given day, t′, λ(t) represents observed cases for
previous days, t′ < t, and predicted cases for future days, t′ ≥t. New COVID patient arrivals
10

Accepted Article
to unit j on day t are modeled by a random variable Λj(t) with mean λj(t) = λ(t)pj(t), where
pj(t) represents the time-dependent fraction of conﬁrmed cases that arrive to unit j of a hospital.
Arrivals need not follow a Poisson process; non-Poisson arrivals are addressed in Section 3.3.
After admission to a unit, j, a patient remains in the unit for a random amount of time modeled by
the random variable Sj ∼Geo(µj(t)), which follows a geometric distribution with time-dependent
success probability µj(t). This structure permits the derivation of a closed-form expression for the
workload mean and variance and plays an important role in our parsimonious design by facilitating
adaptive tuning methods. Tuning this simpler LOS distribution produced better accuracy than
attempting to estimate more complicated service-time distributions due to limited data and rapidly
evolving patient LOS dynamics over the course of the pandemic.
Upon discharge from unit j, a patient transitions to their next phase of care, j′ ∈{ICU, MS, H, D}
(transfer to ICU, transfer to M/S, discharge to home, death) with probability pj,j′(t). For com-
pactness, we deﬁne the set of tuning parameters for this network model as
Θ(t) = {µj(t), pj(t), pj,j′(t)}.
During the pandemic, regular tuning was required to capture the evolution of patient condition
and care protocols, as well as incorporate the growing volume of new data about COVID-19. This
tuning procedure is presented in Section 3.5.
3.3
An Oﬀered-load Approximation for Workload Distribution in a Network
In this section, we develop an oﬀered-load approximation for the stochastic workload process
{Xj(t), t = 0, 1, . . . } with parameters Θ(t), where Xj(t) represents the number of patients in unit
j on day t. This oﬀered load model is readily extended to more general networks (Appendix B.2)
and to capture demand for other critical hospital resources such as ventilators and staﬀ, both of
which (and others) were included in the model implementation at IU Health.
Let X1(t) and X2(t) denote the workloads in the ICU and M/S units respectively. We approx-
imate (X1(t), X2(t)) with a multivariate normal distribution, N(x(t), v(t)), with mean x(t) =
(x1(t), x2(t)) and the covariance matrix v(t). The mean for unit j, xj(t), is calculated from the
ﬂuid approximation by solving the dynamic equation
xj(t + 1)
=
xj(t)
 1 −µj(t)

+ λj(t) + pj′,j(t) · xj′(t)µj′(t),
(2)
where j′ = ICU for j = MS and j′ = MS for j = ICU.
Here, xj(t)µj(t) corresponds to
the expected number of patients leaving unit j on day t, which follows from the geometric LOS.
Patients arrive to unit j from two sources: new patient arrivals, with mean λj(t), and transfers
from unit j′ to unit j, with mean xj′(t)µj′(t)pj′,j(t), which is the expected discharges from unit j′
multiplied by the probability that a patient discharge from unit j′ will transfer to unit j.
To account for variability, we next approximate the hospital workload distribution.
We begin
by presenting a single station queueing model of hospital census. We then extend this classical
model to the two-station network model implemented at IUH. This analysis reveals an appealing
11

Accepted Article
structure for the network variance calculation, where the impact of the network transfer intensity
(e.g., µj′(t)pj′,j(t)) appears as an isolated variance term, ˜v2,j, added to the formula for the single
station variance, explicitly highlighting the impact of network transitions on workload variance.
Heavy-traﬃc variance for a single-station.
Following Whitt and Zhao (2017), we assume the
distribution of the arrival process for a single-station Gt/GI/∞queue is approximately Gaussian
any given t, by which we mean that the number of arrivals on interval [t, t + 1] is
A(t, t + 1) ≈N(λ(t), c2
aλ(t)),
where c2
a is the variability parameter for the index of dispersion of the arrival process (c2
a = 1 in case
of the Poisson arrival process). Assuming the system starts empty in the distant past, Theorem
2.2 of Whitt and Zhao (2017) states that the workload X(t) follows a normal distribution with the
same mean as the Mt/GI/∞queue with arrival rate {λ(t)}, but with variance given by
v(t) =
Z t
0
λ(t −s)V (s)ds,
(3)
where V (s) = ¯G(s)+(c2
a −1) ¯G(s)2 and ¯G(s) is the complementary cumulative distribution function
(CCDF) of the service time random variable. In our discrete-time model with geometric service
times and time-dependent success probabilities, the CCDF of the service time for unit j is given
by ¯Gj(s) = Qs
d=1
 1 −µj(d)

for s ≥1 and ¯Gj(0) = 1. Without transfers, the workload at unit j
at time t + 1 can be calculated by excluding the last term from (2), with variance being
vj(t + 1)
=
t
X
s=0
λ(t −s)Vj(s),
(4)
where Vj(s) = ¯Gj(s)+(c2
a −1) ¯Gj(s)2 and Vj(0) = c2
aj is the variability of the arrival process.
Network variance and covariance.
We develop a recursive method for calculating the variance
and covariance for the workload process at time t + 1. The workloads on day t + 1 follow:
X1(t + 1)
=
V11(t) + A1(t, t + 1) + V21(t),
(5)
X2(t + 1)
=
V12(t) + A2(t, t + 1) + V22(t),
(6)
where Aj(t, t + 1) is the random variable for the arrivals in the interval [t, t + 1), with mean λj(t)
and variance c2
ajλ(t). Vjj(t) represents patients not discharged from unit j at time t, and Vj′,j(t)
represents patients transferred to unit j from another unit j′, for j = 1, 2 and j′ = 2, 1. Finally,
let Xj(t) −Vjj(t) −Vj,j′(t) represent patients discharged home or expired from unit j in [t, t + 1).
Using these three compartments, not discharged, transferred, left the system, we can write
Xj(t) = Vjj(t) + Vj,j′(t) + (Xj(t) −Vjj(t) −Vj,j′(t)).
These compartments form a triplet,
 Vjj(t), Vj,j′(t), Xj(t)−Vjj(t)−Vj,j′(t)

, that follows a multino-
mial random variable (r.v.) with the number of trials being the number of patients currently in the
unit, Xj(t), and the probability vector being
 1−µj(t), pj,j′µj(t), (1−pj,j′)µj(t)

. The expectations
of the ﬁrst two compartments of the triplet are
E[Vjj(t)|Xj(t)] = (1 −µj(t))Xj(t),
E[Vj,j′(t)|Xj(t)] = pj,j′µj(t)Xj(t),
12

Accepted Article
the variances are
V ar[Vjj(t)|Xj(t)] = µj(t)(1 −µj(t))Xj(t), V ar[Vj,j′(t)|Xj(t)] = pj,j′µj(t)(1 −pj,j′µj(t))Xj(t),
and the covariance between them is
Cov[Vjj(t), Vj,j′(t)|Xj(t)] = −Xj(t)(1 −µj(t)) · pj,j′µj(t).
Recursive variance calculation. Leveraging the above analysis, we now present our recursive
approach to calculate the variance of Xj(t+1). We proceed by analyzing the variance and covariance
of each component in (5) and (6) individually. Take (5) as an example. Let ˜v11 = V ar(V11(t)).
The law of total variance implies that
˜v11
=
E[V ar(V11(t)|X1(t), X2(t))] + V ar[E(V11(t)|X1(t), X2(t))]
=
E[X1(t)µ1(t)(1 −µ1(t))] + V ar[X1(t)(1 −µ1(t))]
=
x1(t)µ1(t)(1 −µ1(t)) + (1 −µ1(t))2v1(t),
where v1(t) = V ar[X1(t)] is the variance of the workload at time t. Similarly, the variance of V21(t),
denoted as ˜v21, is
˜v21
=
E[V ar(V21(t)|X1(t), X2(t))] + V ar[E(V21(t)|X1(t), X2(t))]
=
E[X2(t)p21µ2(t)(1 −p21µ2(t))] + V ar[X2(t)p21µ2(t)]
=
x2(t)p21µ2(t)(1 −p21µ2(t)) + (p21µ2(t))2v2(t),
where v2(t) = V ar[X2(t)].
Let ˜cv12 be the covariance between Vjj and Vj′,j. The law of total covariance implies that
˜cv12
=
Cov(V11(t), V21(t))
=
E[Cov(V11(t), V21(t)|X1(t), X2(t))]
(7)
+ Cov[E(V11(t)|X1(t), X2(t)), E(V21(t)|X1(t), X2(t))],
(8)
where (8) equals
Cov[X1(t)(1 −µ1(t)), X2(t)p21µ2(t)]
=
(1 −µ1(t))p21µ2(t) · cv(t),
and cv(t) = Cov(X1(t), X2(t)).
The ﬁrst term, (7), equals 0.
To see this, conditioning on
X1(t) = x1, V11(t) = Px1
k=1 B1k is the sum of outcomes from x1 independent trials with (marginal)
success probability (1 −µ1(t)). Similarly, conditioning on X2(t) = x2, V21(t) is the sum of out-
comes from x2 independent trials.
Given (x1, x2), all these trials are independent of one an-
other since the trials are drawn from two diﬀerent pools of patients in the two units.
Hence,
Cov(V11(t), V21(t)|X1(t), X2(t)) = 0. Assuming the arrival random variable, A1(t, t + 1) is indepen-
dent of V11 and V21, the variance is given by
v1(t + 1)
=
V ar[X1(t + 1)] = ˜v11 + c2
a1λ1(t) + ˜v21 + ˜cv12.
(9)
The variance for unit 2, v2(t + 1) = V ar[X2(t + 1)], can be calculated similarly.
13

Accepted Article
The recursive calculations above require initial values for v1(0), v2(0). One method for initializing
this recursion is to use the steady-state values of the workload variance from the single-station
model by letting t →∞in (4).
Covariance calculation.
The covariance of the two queue lengths is given by
cv(t + 1)
=
Cov
 X1(t + 1), X2(t + 1)

=
−x1(t)(1 −µ1(t))p12µ1(t) −x2(t)(1 −µ2(t))p21µ2(t)
+

(1 −µ1(t))(1 −µ2(t)) + p21µ2(t)p12µ1(t)

cv(t)
+ (1 −µ1(t))p12µ1(t)v1(t) + (1 −µ2(t))p21µ2(t)v2(t).
The details of the derivation are speciﬁed in Appendix B.2.
Connection between the single-station and network variances.
Equation (9) has an ele-
gant structure that explicitly highlights the marginal impact of the network transition matrix on
the workload variance through (i) the additional term, ˜v21, which can be interpreted as additional
variance generated by transfers, and (ii) the covariance term, ˜cv12, that explicitly characterizes
the correlation between the queue lengths in the two stations.
We specify this connection in
Appendix B.3 by writing the single station workload variance as a recursive function for direct
comparison with the network variance calculation.
Remark 1. The oﬀered-load approximation for the network model is for a given t, i.e., approxi-
mating the distribution of (X1(t), X2(t)), not for the joint distribution across diﬀerent time points
or for process-level approximation. When calculating the mean and variance for the workload at t,
we leverage the recursive calculation that conditions on starting the approximation at some time
s = 0, which does not account for the realization for s < t. This type of point approximation is
suﬃcient for the workload prediction and associated decision making in this paper. Developing pro-
cess approximation involves many-server heavy-traﬃc analysis such as the one in Whitt and Zhao
(2017) and is beyond the scope of this paper.
3.4
Additional Model Features
In this section, we discuss how to calculate the total workload by combining the workload generated
by diﬀerent types of patients (e.g., COVID and non-COVID) that have diﬀerent ﬂow parameters
and how to include exogenous blocking within our framework.
Estimating workload for diﬀerent types of patients. The oﬀered-load approach introduced
in Section 3.3 applies to any set of patient types. Due to the additivity of the oﬀered-load model,
the full hospital workload, including an arbitrary number of patient types, can be decomposed into
individual and independent oﬀered-load models for each type of patient, where each model has a
unique set of ﬂow parameters. The ﬁnal workload can be obtained by adding the workloads from
each individual oﬀered-load model (e.g., the models for diﬀerent types of patients).
In this paper, we separate the workload for COVID and non-COVID patients, which allows us to
14

Accepted Article
tailor the parameter estimation to these disparate patient classes. This is particularly important
in a pandemic because ﬂow parameters for COVID patients change rapidly over time, whereas the
parameters for non-COVID patients are more stable. For implementation, we further decompose the
non-COVID patients into emergency versus elective admissions. This provides ﬂexibility to model
elective admissions as a modiﬁable parameter, which allows hospital managers to explore the eﬀect
of canceling/resuming elective surgeries. One could further decompose the workload calculation by
medical specialty, though this was not implemented due to the need for model simplicity and rapid
implementation.
One practical feature of this decomposition approach is the ability to visualize the forecast at
diﬀerent levels of granularity in terms of types of patients and types of resources. Leveraging this
feature, we were able to create tools for management that can display either total ICU and M/S
workloads or splice the prediction along patient types, groups of patient types, or even resources
required (e.g., ventilators, nurse staﬀ) depending on the decisions to be made. For example, drilling
down to focus solely on COVID patient workloads allows hospitals to plan for scarce resources that
are commonly utilized by COVID patients but not as highly demanded by non-COVID patients.
On the other hand, planning for total bed capacity or nurse staﬃng requires knowledge of the
workload for all patients in ICU and M/S units. Our additive method also allows workloads to be
displayed at diﬀerent levels of granularity for physical resources, e.g., individual hospital, a group
of ﬂagship hospitals, all the hospitals within a given region, or all the hospitals in the system. Each
of these perspectives is important for supporting diﬀerent types of health system decisions.
Time-varying system with ﬁnite capacity.
One drawback of the oﬀered-load approach is
that the results are based on an inﬁnite-server queueing model, which assumes away blocking and
waiting. This underlying assumption can be appropriate when the primary objective is to estimate
the demand for diﬀerent services within the hospital. The data obtained from IU Health is also
consistent with this demand-driven perspective. In the data, “unit” is determined by level of care
(critical vs non-critical), which captures true demand for service within the hospital since the level
of care is determined strictly by patient condition and not by other factors that can obfuscate the
true demand such as physical location. Finally, the primary use cases for our model at IU Health
are also consistent with our demand-centered model.
Speciﬁcally, many of the decisions being
supported involved redistributing ﬂexible resources that do not have hard capacity constraints and
can be ﬂexed and moved to satisfy surges in demand (e.g., nurse staﬀand ventilators; see Section 5).
Since the key concern during a pandemic is the ability to adjust capacity to match surge demand,
the oﬀered load model is conceptually a good ﬁt for these types of decision processes.
In contrast to more ﬂexible resources, hospital bed capacity represents a more restrictive constraint.
Beds cannot be moved between locations; hence, bed capacity cannot be stretched as easily as mod-
ifying nurse to patient ratios in response to demand surges. During standard hospital operations,
blocking in hospitals occurs both for exogenous arrivals and internal bed assignments/transfers,
the latter being diﬃcult to evaluate analytically. In contrast, during a pandemic, mass pooling of
15

Accepted Article
resources and the ﬂexing of physical space in response to a surge in patients serves to minimize the
otherwise common occurrence of internal bed-blocking. For example, M/S patients can use critical
care beds, critical care patients can be ﬂexed to mixed acuity M/S units, and certain units can be
repurposed to be more ﬂexible in the types of patients they can care for. In this environment, the
primary blocking mechanism is the blocking of external arrivals to the hospital itself.
Due to these simpliﬁed blocking dynamics, our oﬀered-load approach can be used to approximate
exogenous arrival blocking probabilities and other congestion-related performance metrics.
We
begin by considering the entire hospital as a Gt/GI/n queue after pooling, with n being the total
bed capacity and the service time being a mixture of the service time random variables for the
diﬀerent types of patients. Following Green et al. (2007), we approximate the time-varying system
by a stationary ﬁnite-server GI/GI/n queue at any given time t, with the arrival rate to the
stationary queues being adjusted using the modiﬁed oﬀered-load (MOL) approach. That is, the
“modiﬁed” arrival rate at time t follows
λMOL(t) = E[X(t)]
E[S] .
Here, E[X(t)] is the expected workload on day t, which is calculated by adding all the workloads
(COVID and non-COVID patients) from the oﬀered-load model in Section 3.3. E[S] is the expected
service time averaged over all patient types. We analyze the corresponding stationary ﬁnite-server
queue with arrival rate λMOL(t). If the service time is exponential or a mixture of exponentials, we
can either use numerical methods or heavy-traﬃc approximations to analyze system performance
measures. For example, for an M/M/n queue, when the number of beds is large (e.g., hundreds of
beds) and the system runs in the many-server Halﬁn-Whitt regime, the blocking (delay) probability
can be eﬃciently approximated by
P(X(t) ≥n) ≈[1 + (βΦ(β)/φ(β))]−1,
where Φ and φ are the cumulative distribution function and probability density function of the
standard normal distribution, respectively, and β is the “square-root staﬃng” coeﬃcient such that
n = E[X(t)] + β
p
E[X(t)]. Green et al. (2007) also provides formulas for blocking probabilities in
other systems such as those with abandonment. In the context of discrete-time queues with geo-
metric service times, Dai and Shi (2017) and Feng and Shi (2018) provide diﬀusion approximations
that allow for eﬃcient calculation of various performance metrics such as the expected queue length
and waiting time. We leave to future research the development of algorithms for approximating
internal blocking within the hospital’s network of units, e.g., solving a multi-dimensional diﬀusion
process to compute blocking and delay performance metrics in these systems.
3.5
Adaptive Learning for COVID Patient Flow Parameters with Data Scarcity
To address challenges (1)-(3) in Section 1.1, we develop an automated learning procedure for tuning
uncertain or censored patient-ﬂow parameters, Θ = {pc
j, µc
j, pc
j,j′}, to achieve the best ﬁt with the
16

Accepted Article
workload process for COVID patients. These parameters are learned from historical data (training
data), and the accuracy is veriﬁed on testing data. Let Θ∗be the parameter set that minimizes the
mean-square loss between the observed census and the predicted (mean) census from (2). Letting
ˆxj(t) and xj(t)|Θ be the observed and predicted census in unit j on day t, respectively, Θ∗is
calculated by
Θ∗= arg min
Θ
T
X
t=1
X
j
 ˆxj(t) −xj(t)|Θ
2,
(10)
where T is the number of days included in the training data.
Time-dependent parameters.
We use non-parametric estimation to model Θ(t) as a piece-
wise discrete function, partitioning training data into I time intervals deﬁned by the ordered set
I = (t0, t1, . . . , tI), where Θ(t) = Θi for t ∈[ti, ti+1). We perform cross-validation using the training
data to ﬁnd the best interval set, I, to avoid overﬁtting while allowing enough ﬂexibility to capture
the underlying changes in the parameters over time.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Days
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of patients
predict COVID census in ICU
actual COVID census in ICU
(a) ICU census
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Days
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Number of patients
predict COVID census in MS wards
actual COVID census in MS wards
(b) M/S census
Figure 6: Patient census for the largest hospital in our partner healthcare network: March 12, 2020
- May 6, 2020. In the plots, census data from the ﬁrst 41 days (left of the vertical dashed line)
is used as the training data, and the remaining 14 days (right of the vertical dashed line) as the
testing data.
Adaptive learning procedure.
During the pandemic, particularly in the early stage when data
was scarce and system dynamics were changing rapidly, we re-parameterized Θ(t) on a weekly basis,
using incremental daily data dumps automatically generated from IU Health’s census database and
loaded as a ﬂat ﬁle onto a secure virtual machine behind IU Health’s ﬁrewall. The dataset used
for training and testing is updated as new data become available. Parameters are estimated using
all historical data up to the current time point. We elected to incorporate all the data rather than
a rolling horizon because patient LOS was long relative to the data window. Using an expanding
window prioritized stable estimates over change detection and yielded more conservative workload
predictions. After each parameter update, we generated the workload prediction for the next 14
days for operational use. We also generated longer-term census projections to support strategic
decision making.
Figure 6 shows one snapshot from this process comparing the observed and
17

Accepted Article
predicted COVID inpatient census at one of IU Health’s hospitals from March 12 to May 6, 2020.
For this instance, the training set included data up to April 22 (41 days).
Using the learned
parameters, we generated a prediction over the next 14 days (April 23 to May 6) – the right side of
the vertical dashed line in Figure 6. Prediction accuracy is calculated as the MAPE over the testing
set. This mid-April prediction can be compared with the ﬁrst set of predictions generated at the
beginning of the pandemic in March (Figure 4) to observe the beneﬁts of adaptive learning. The
tuned model is able to capture time-varying ﬂuctuations and adjust LOS and transfer estimates as
more patients are discharged from the hospital. In Appendix B, we show another set of plots for
the prediction generated using ﬂow parameters learned from data up to May 19 and tested on data
from May 20 to June 2, 2020.
Prediction performance.
The MAPE for the ICU and M/S predictions from our integrated
framework was 9.4% and 8.2% respectively, on the testing data for the Indianapolis region during
the ﬁrst month of the pandemic (Figure 4). From April to early May (Figure 6), the MAPE is
6.0% for ICU census and 10.6% for M/S census. The MAPE from our later monitoring/updating
process never exceeded 20%.
The predicted census numbers reported here come from the integrated model, which takes the
disease forecast as an input and uses the calibrated patient ﬂow equations to calculate census. We
implement a multi-step calibration procedure with adaptive tuning in this integrated model. First,
we use the realized (actual) arrivals to hospitals to tune the length-of-stay and transfer parameters,
i.e., µj(t)s and pj,j′(t)s. Second, we calibrate the disease forecast model using the adaptive tuning
method speciﬁed in Section 4.2. Third, we connect the two components and tune the parameters
that represent the fraction of COVID cases that arrive to an IU Health hospital, pj(t), with respect
to the overall prediction performance for ICU and M/S census.
Implications for implementation and sustained use.
In the healthcare industry, analyt-
ics tools that produce inconsistent quality of output over time can quickly lead to mistrust and
abandonment. While the initial accuracy of our model was suﬃcient to merit undertaking an im-
plementation, it is our model’s consistently accurate predictions, driven by adaptive learning, which
has been key for its continued use in practice.
To emphasize the importance of adaptive learning, we contrast our approach with the static, non-
adaptive state model originally employed by hospitals at the outset of the pandemic. The state
model performed reasonably well at IU Health until around March 19, 2020 (see Figure 4). How-
ever, the pandemic evolved over time in three ways that contributed to inconsistencies in the state
model prediction: (1) disease progression of COVID in Indiana ceased resembling the ﬂu-like spread
that formed the basis of the state model; (2) as more IU Health speciﬁc data on COVID patients
became available, it became clear that COVID ﬂow parameters at IU Health were not similar to
national estimates upon which the state model was built; and (3) as the pandemic progressed,
demographics of hospitalized patients along with admission and treatment protocols changed, sig-
niﬁcantly impacting the patient-ﬂow parameters. Further, the lack of an adaptive component in
18

Accepted Article
the state model appeared to have a compounding eﬀect over time causing the prediction error to
grow steadily as the model began exhibiting clear prediction bias. The MAPE of the state mode
was 42.7% (ICU) and 33.8% (M/S) in March and grew to >50% for both units during April. This
is in stark contrast with our adaptive learning methods designed to address problems (1)-(3) in
both the patient ﬂow and disease progression models (see Section 4.2.2) to maintain the consistent
prediction accuracy highlighted above.
Remark 2. Non-COVID patients’ arrival rates and ﬂows are generally more stable than COVID
patients. Thus, we follow the existing patient-ﬂow literature to predict non-COVID workloads using
admission, discharge, and transfer timestamps to estimate ﬂow parameters. We estimate parame-
ters for emergency and elective patients separately using historical data from the same time period
in the last two years, accounting for seasonality and day-of-week eﬀects. We model elective ad-
missions as a modiﬁable parameter to allow IU Health to explore scenarios involving increasing or
decreasing the volume of elective admissions.
4
Disease Prediction
A critical component of modeling hospital resource needs during a pandemic lies in capturing ar-
rivals of infected patients accurately. In contrast with retrospective epidemiological models that
can be ﬁt with suﬃcient historical data, “real-time” disease prediction in response to a burgeoning
pandemic requires methods that can eﬀectively utilize sparse and incomplete data. Further diﬀer-
entiating from other disease forecasting research, our disease forecast acts as one crucial component
in the framework for modeling workloads at speciﬁc hospitals. That is, prediction of the COVID
cases provides the input λc(t) for the queueing network model presented in Section 3. As such,
the metric by which we measure the value of the forecast model must diﬀer from models that are
designed to forecast longer-term disease trends and/or impacts of public policy decisions. Speciﬁ-
cally, our forecasting methods must be suﬃciently accurate at predicting the number of new cases
on a daily/weekly scale in a small geographic region (county-level in our case).
While there are many models capable of forecasting how a disease might spread in a population
with limited historical data by leveraging measures such as mobility data, demographics, and
policy levers, we found these models time consuming to design, diﬃcult to parameterize, and not
as accurate in the short-term horizon targeted for operational-level decision making. While there
are many use cases for these types of models, they are not a good ﬁt for our rapid deployment
approach. Instead, we adopted a parsimonious design for quick turnaround and incorporated an
adaptive learning component to handle sparse data and time-varying dynamics. In our approach,
we utilize a blend of epidemiology and data-driven models to develop operational-level forecasts
during the initial outbreak while allowing for longer-term updating. Long term forecasts of COVID
progression allow for strategic planning and structural changes in healthcare systems. Short term
forecasts support operational interventions that can be delivered immediately to improve response
to surges in demand.
To position the structure of our forecasting methods within a conceptual framework, we split the
19

Accepted Article
phases of the pandemic into two regimes: (1) the restricted data, and (2) the limited data
regimes. We make this distinction speciﬁcally because we develop diﬀerent models for each regime.
The data regimes are deﬁned for a target geographical region; e.g., the region(s) that the target
hospital serves. In the restricted regime, there is little to no data in the target region, such as
when the pandemic ﬁrst presents in a region. We use Indiana in early March as an illustrative
example. Indiana’s ﬁrst conﬁrmed case was detected on March 6, 2020. Over the next several
weeks, COVID- initially spread slowly and testing was limited, providing scarce additional data
points for estimating disease spread. For our purposes, we demarcate the boundary separating the
restricted and limited data regimes by a threshold (lower-bound) on the number of conﬁrmed cases
in the target region, above (below) which the number of data points is suﬃcient (insuﬃcient) to
adequately parameterize a region-speciﬁc disease transmission model (e.g., SIR). When the ﬁrst
infection presents in a region, the region enters the restricted data regime.
In this regime, we
employ our forecasting model that leverages patterns from similar regions that have more data
points at the current time period. When the number of conﬁrmed cases surpasses the threshold
and the region enters the limited data regime, we switch to our adaptive SIR model.
Restricted data regime: adapted synthetic control. At the onset of the pandemic, data on
disease characteristics was limited both because of the novelty as well as bottlenecks in the ﬂow
of information. This limited the applicability of traditional epidemiology models, which depend
upon calibrating parameters tailored to the particular disease and population of interest. In this
timeframe, we implement the adapted synthetic control (aSC) methodology (Chen 2020) using
counties with earlier outbreaks and similar characteristics to estimate how the disease may spread
in the target region.
Limited data regime: adaptive SIR. As more data became available, we transitioned to an
adaptive SIR model based on calibrated disease characteristics. The SIR model has the capability
of producing longer term forecasts base on structural models of disease transmission dynamics.
The integrated learning component of our SIR model reacts to system changes detected from the
data using statistical methods rather than trying to anticipate these changes from secondary data
sources. This approach has the beneﬁt of being able to infer the true impact of mobility, policy,
and human behavior changes (among others) rather than relying on assumptions about the eﬀect of
these complex factors on disease spread. The drawback of this approach is a prediction lag between
when a system change occurs and when it can be detected. For forecasting COVID cases, we found
the prediction lag to be suﬃciently short to maintain good accuracy both in predicting cases by
region and as an input to our operational workload model.
4.1
Short-term Adaptive Disease Transmission Model: Restricted Data Regime
For short-term (24–48 hour) forecasts of the number of COVID cases, we adopt the aSC method-
ology of Chen (2020). The method extends the comparative case study approach based on the
Synthetic Controls methodology (SC) (Abadie et al. 2010, Xu 2017) to estimate the trajectory of
COVID spread at the county level. Our aSC method implements a data-driven process for selecting
20

Accepted Article
comparable counties across the U.S. from the subset of counties that had earlier outbreaks of COVID
than the county of interest. The disease spread trajectory of the selected comparable counties is
then used to generate a forecast. Our method has the advantages of i) explicitly accounting for
observed heterogeneity and implicitly allowing for time-varying unobserved heterogeneity; ii) gen-
erating forecasts at an actionable level for frontline managers; iii) being interpretable and subject
to veriﬁcation; and iv) being extendable to forecasting relaxations of policy interventions.
4.1.1
Adapted Synthetic Control (aSC) Overview
SC formulates a credible counterfactual to the treated unit by taking a weighted combination
among the pool of untreated (non-focal) units that minimizes the diﬀerences between the treated
and synthetic with respect to both the outcome variable and observed covariates during the pre-
treatment period. This methodology was ﬁrst introduced in Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and
formalized in Abadie et al. (2010). It is often implemented when there is no intuitive method for
identifying a single suitable counterfactual within the pool or when simpler methodologies, such as
averaging across all non-focal units, do not generate credible counterfactual paths from which to
estimate the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences eﬀect.
aSC uses the pool of U.S. counties that reported COVID cases before a focal county in order to
construct a synthetic county that is comparable to the focal county along observable dimensions,
but exceeded the minimum case threshold at an earlier date. The threshold is chosen ex-ante to
capture community spread of the disease as opposed disease being brought in by visitors. The
focal and control counties are synchronized based on the respective dates of this threshold. The
methodology minimizes the diﬀerence between the actual and synthetic county with regards to the
number of COVID cases since the synchronizing event, as well as a vector of county characteristics
that include population demographics, urban characteristics, and policy interventions, speciﬁcally
the issuance of a shelter-in-place order.
4.1.2
Implementation and Results
We generate synthetic controls for ﬁve hospital regions deﬁned by IU Health at the start of the
pandemic. The hospital regions are composed of between one and twelve counties and represent
the catchment areas of individual hospitals within the system. We aggregate county data to form
the regions and implement aSC at the regional level. County demographics and characteristics
are drawn from the Health Resources & Services Administration’s Area Health Resource Files1
and include total population, population of males, median age, population that is 65 or older, the
percentage in poverty, number of 16+ year-old workers that take public transportation, the number
of 16+ workers, and population density per square mile. Additionally, we incorporate the institution
of shelter-in-place orders. We set the minimum case threshold to 10 conﬁrmed cases.
Across four of the ﬁve regions, our forecasts resulted in an average percentage error of 2.2% for
forecasts up to 48 hours out. However, one region had an error of 72%. In that health region, aSC
failed to ﬁnd a comparable synthetic counterpart as evidenced by the large error in the in-sample
1https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download
21

Accepted Article
ﬁt. This may be due to batch reporting of cases in this region that led to jumps of greater than 50%
in a single day. Excluding this abnormal region, this method outperforms benchmarks using simple
and exponential moving averages as well as regression approaches that account for heterogeneity
and seasonality.
4.2
Longer-term adaptive disease transmission model: limited data regime
While short-term forecasts are valuable for managing day-to-day operations, longer term forecasts
allow for structural changes that can drive much larger eﬃciency gains.
Changes that modify
capacity, such as unit conversions, transshipment of equipment, and redeployment of medical per-
sonnel require a longer range forecast (e.g., 1-2 weeks). Given the lack of long-term data due to
the novelty of the pandemic, we leverage the epidemiology literature and adapt the SIR modeling
framework in making forward forecasts.
The SIR model separates the population into susceptible (S), infected (I), and recovered (R)
compartments. Many COVID workload models further divide I into severity buckets; however,
such mapping is unnecessary for us as our workload model (Section 3) already accounts for resource
demand in a more detailed manner.
While the number of individuals in each compartment is
continuously evolving, we discretize it at a daily level. This is consistent not only with case data,
which is updated daily, but also with operational decisions (e.g., workforce allocation) that are also
most commonly made daily. Individuals move from S to I and then to R, where R captures both
recoveries and death. Consistent with other models, we assume recovery removes the individual
from the susceptible population.
4.2.1
Adaptive parameter selection
After initial model selection, the next step involves selecting a set of parameters to include in our
adaptive learning method. The choice of parameters is particularly important because (1) all the
parameters are continuous, which can present computational challenges in the learning step, and (2)
attempting to learn too many parameters may compound any identiﬁcation issues and cause poor
prediction performance. Using a combination of intuition and experimentation, we selected two
unknown parameters for adaptive learning: the reproductive number, R0, that determines the rate
of disease transmission in a population and the testing fraction r that estimates what proportion
of infected individuals are conﬁrmed by a COVID test.
R0 was selected as a means of summarizing the myriad of complex factors that aﬀect disease
transmission within a population. While there are a number of known external factors that inﬂuence
disease transmission, such as public policy, mobility, and human behavior, our aim is to predict new
cases, and thus we are agnostic to the cause of a change in disease transmission. For parsimonious
model development, R0 provides an attractive alternative to modeling the complexities of human
society by focusing on learning the equilibrium outcome of all the factors, summarized with a
single learning primitive. As mentioned previously, the concession of this simpler model is that
changes in the underlying disease dynamics will be captured with some lag. We compensate for
this by developing an adaptive algorithm that estimates R0 as a piece-wise discrete function with
22

Accepted Article
increasing weights on newer data to rapidly incorporate underlying changes.
Additionally, we
perturb the estimates in simulations to formulate conﬁdence intervals.
This serves to support
operational decision-making through point forecasts with quantiﬁable prediction error.
4.2.2
Algorithm Speciﬁcation
At a high level, our algorithm calculates the mean percentage error of the predicted number of
cases using the SIR model over a set of potential R0 values. We estimate a distribution for the
underlying R0 for a time interval by taking a weighted mean and standard deviation across the set
of R0 values, where the weights are the inverse of the prediction errors. We then sample from the
estimated distribution and simulate disease progression for future dates to yield forecasted point
estimates and conﬁdence intervals.
The evolution of COVID transmission under the SIR model is deﬁned by the following set of
ordinary diﬀerential equations:
dS(t)
dt
=
−βS(t)I(t)
N
(11)
dI(t)
dt
=
βS(t)I(t)
N
−γI(t)
(12)
dR(t)
dt
=
γI(t),
(13)
where N = S(t) + I(t) + R(t) is the total population, and the parameters β and γ capture the
transmission and recovery rates respectively. R0 is a function of these two parameters, i.e. R0 =
β/γ. Next, we specify the adaptive algorithm to learn the R0 values from historical data and then
present the forecasting algorithm to generate point estimates and conﬁdence intervals based on the
learned R0 values.
Adaptively learning R0.
Let
Y (t) = (S(t), I(t), R(t))
be the state of the SIR model at time t. We consider a rolling time interval of length k-days that
starts at each t ∈{t0, . . . , T} in our training data, where t0 is the ﬁrst day that the number of
conﬁrmed cases exceeds some threshold (e.g., 100 cases) to allow for suﬃcient data to ﬁt the SIR
model, and T is the last day in the training data. Denote I as the set of intervals contained in the
training data. Within time interval i ∈I that consists of days {ti, . . . , ti + k}, we solve the system
of equations (11)-(13) for a ﬁxed γ and for each R0 ∈[Rmin
0
, Rmax
0
]. We then set the R(i)
0
that gives
the minimum relative mean squared error over interval i as the best-ﬁt R0 for this interval. Since
each day t will be covered by k overlapping intervals (since we use the rolling intervals with 1 day
increments), we take an average of the k best R0 values from the k intervals to determine the ﬁnal
R0(t) for day t. We denote the set of these k intervals covering t as It. Algorithm 1 details this
algorithm.
The number of infected individuals is captured by I(t). Note that not all infected individuals are
23

Accepted Article
tested and conﬁrmed due to limitations in testing capacity as well as false negative results, so I(t)
is not the same as the number of reported (conﬁrmed) cases. To account for this, we map the
number of infected individuals to the number of predicted reported cases using
ˆλ(t) = r · ∆I(t),
(14)
where ∆I(t) = S(t −1) −S(t) is the change in the non-infected compartment, i.e., the number
of newly infected individuals at t, and r is the testing fraction. The testing fraction is the joint
probability of an individual receiving a test and testing positive when infected.
Let ˆΛj = {ˆλj(ti), . . . , ˆλj(ti + k)} be the predicted cumulative conﬁrmed cases over interval i under
reproductive number Rj
0, and let Λ = {λ(ti), . . . , λ(ti + k)} be the reported observed cases. We
deﬁne the relative mean squared error over the interval i for Rj
0 as
RMSEj
i =
ti+k
X
t=ti
 ˆλj(t) −λ(t))
λ(t)
!2
.
(15)
We elect to use the square of the relative errors rather than the absolute diﬀerence in order to
emphasize limiting the variance of our estimates, which should improve the usefulness of the pre-
dictions. We update the parameters and generate forecasts using Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Adaptive SIR algorithm
Result: Fitted R0 for each day t ∈{t0, . . . , T}
Deﬁne P0 = {R1
0, . . . , RJ
0 }, a set of R0’s from the range [Rmin
0
, Rmax
0
];
Set initial condition Y (0);
for segment i ∈I do
for Rj
0 ∈P0 do
for t ∈{ti, . . . , ti + k} do
Solve (11)-(13);
Calculate ˆλ(t) from (14);
end
Calculate RMSEj
i from (15);
end
Set R(i)
0
= arg minRj
0 RMSEj
i ;
Update Y (ti+1) by solving (11)-(13) with R(i)
0 ;
end
Output: R0(t) = 1
k
P
i∈It R(i)
0
for each t ∈{t0, . . . , T}
Forecasting new cases.
We leverage the {R0(t) : t = 1, . . . , T} learned from Algorithm 1
to forecast future disease progression for t ∈[T + 1, T + k]. There are diﬀerent alternatives to
generating the point estimates. One method is to use ˆR0 = R0(T), i.e. the R0 from the most recent
segment, to solve equations (11)-(13) to generate the predicted ˆλ(t) for t ∈[T + 1, T + k]. An
alternative is to take an average of R0(t) for t ∈[T −ℓ, T] for some ℓdays to generate the predicted
cases. In our implementation, we use the ﬁrst method for its simplicity and interpretability.
To generate the conﬁdence intervals, we adopt a Monte-Carlo approach. We ﬁrst estimate the
24

Accepted Article
sample standard deviation ˆσ in R0 based on the learned values {R0(t)}. Then we run M replications
using Monte-Carlo simulation for future cases. In each replication, we draw a sample R0 from
the N( ˆR0, ˆσ2) distribution.
We then simulate COVID spread for the sampled R0 for the t ∈
[T + 1, T + k]. Finally, we use the M simulated paths to generate conﬁdence intervals for the
predicted new COVID cases.
4.2.3
Forecasting Performance
We implement our SIR prediction algorithm using data from March through June on a 14-day
rolling horizon (k = 14) with a ﬁxed γ of 0.1 (i.e. 10 day recovery) and a range of R0 ∈[0.5, 6.0]
in increments of 0.05. The window size was chosen based on ranges from epidemiology studies on
recovery days and other forecasts (Deasy et al. 2020, Fantazzini 2020). We ﬁxed γ according to the
midpoint of CDC guidelines on post-symptom quarantine (Centers for Disease Control 2020) and
selected a wide range of R0 that covers the minimum and maximum estimates found in literature.
After some experimentation tuning both R0 and the testing fraction, r, we found that a ﬁxed
testing fraction of 15% yielded stable and accurate performance, allowing us to further pare down
our learning parameters to include only R0. Note that 15% implies that true infections are six
times the number of reported infections, which falls within estimated ranges (typically 4-10 times),
though the literature is sparse (McCulloh et al. 2020, Aizenman et al. 2021). We test our predictions
across the same ﬁve hospital regions deﬁned by IU Health with updating; i.e., we update the SIR
compartments as new data becomes available in the rolling horizon.
Using the adaptive SIR model, we ﬁnd the R0 that minimizes our in-sample error (shown in
Figures 7a and 7b), and we use it to generate our forecasts. When evaluating our predictions of
total cases, we ﬁnd an out-of-sample MAPE of 3.5% on average with a range of 1.3% to 5.7%
across the regions for all periods. Errors range from 0.4% when forecasting one day ahead to 9.0%
when looking fourteen days out. The breakdown by region is shown in Figure 8, which suggests
strong performance across all regions but with notable heterogeneity. By comparison, a static SIR
model where R0 is ﬁxed at the value that minimizes the average error across all data before the ﬁrst
adaptive segment has an average percentage error of 18.8% with a range of 2% to 38% looking one
to fourteen days out. Examining speciﬁc time frames, the ﬁrst adaptive segment had an average
forecast error of 8.2% while the static forecast error over the same period was 11.8%. The relative
outperformance of adaptive SIR increases over the remaining segments.
5
Use Cases for the Workload Prediction Model
The primary product of our multi-method framework is the prediction of the workload distribu-
tion for target hospitals. To provide hospitals with additional information about critical resources
needed for responding to the pandemic, we generate secondary outputs, including resource uti-
lization, staﬃng requirements, ventilators, and personal protective equipment.
These resource
utilization predictions can be derived directly from the detailed patient demand prediction by esti-
mating a resource usage parameter, αi
j, for each type of patient (i) and location (j) either directly
25

Accepted Article
(a) SIR forecast of cumulative cases:
Indianapolis
(b) SIR forecast of cumulative cases:
Indianapolis Suburbs
Figure 7: Prediction of census from our application.
Figure 8: SIR forecast Mean Percentage Error by number of predicted days.
from the data or using our adaptive tuning methods. As one example from our data (for one hos-
pital during one period of time), 52% of ICU COVID patients (αc
ICU = 0.52) and 2.5% of non-ICU
COVID patients (αc
MS = 0.25) required a ventilator. Hence, a point estimate of COVID ventilator
needs could be calculated as xc
v(t) = αc
ICU · xc
ICU(t) + αc
MS · xc
MS(t), where x(·) is the mean of the
workload process X(·) as discussed in Section 3. The distributional estimate of ventilator usage
would be the convolution of binomial random variables representing the number of patients of each
type/unit pair requiring a ventilator. Let Xc
v,j(t) ∼Bin

Xc
j(t), αc
j

be the random variable for
the number of COVID patients requiring a ventilator in unit j ∈{ICU, MS} at time t. Then
Xc
v(t) = Xc
v,ICU(t) + Xc
v,MS(t). A similar calculation can be done for ventilators for non-COVID
patients, for PPE, etc.
These predictions have been used by IU Health to inform both tactical and operational decisions.
To provide additional support for these decisions, we are able to build decision models on top of our
prediction, which is facilitated by the parsimonious design. Examples include: timing and volume
of advanced purchases of nasal canula, PPE, pharmaceuticals, additional diagnostic equipment,
CPAP; proactive hiring of temporary agency nurses; optimized staﬀplanning; and ﬂexible resource
re/allocation (the rightmost panel in Figure 2); among others. The resource utilization forecast
has also been used to support what-if analysis for intervention strategies, surge capacity plans,
26

Accepted Article
and logistics planning decisions among others. In this section, we provide details of the decision
support systems developed for two main use cases that were requested by IU Health. These use
cases demonstrate that our ﬁnal forecast model is capable of achieving the overarching goal of
this research: to provide actionable information to support hospital decision making during a
pandemic.
5.1
Leveraging Health System Scale for Resource Transshipment
One of the innovations IU Health implemented during COVID was initiating a program to transfer
nurses between between hospitals and even between regions, the expansion of which has become a
strategic goal for 2021. Implementing such a signiﬁcant change necessitated data-driven support to
justify both the direct cost and change management eﬀorts. We worked closely with IU Health’s
nursing organization to provide this support by building a nurse transshipment model that delivers
both tactical and operational plans. All design speciﬁcations were chosen or vetted by IU Health,
considering feasibility of implementation and value to the organization, staﬀ, and patients. The
complexity of the decision process and careful consideration given by IU Health leadership is re-
ﬂected in the diverse output metrics present subsequently. Each of the metrics was used during
the decision making process and taken together, the metrics reﬂect the diﬀerent perspectives of
individual hospitals (source or destination), the overall hospital network, and the nurses.
Structure of nurse transshipment program.
The following features provide a high-level
overview of the nurse transshipment program. We specify the model formulation in Appendix A.2.
This optimization takes the (stochastic) workload forecast as an input to generate a two-week
transshipment schedule one week in advance. The schedule represents a tentative relocation plan
so nurses can have some advance warning if they may need to travel. Nurses receive additional pay
plus a relocation bonus when asked to travel. Depending on the distance a nurse travels, there is
a minimum number of days they must work at the alternate location, which we call secondment,
to avoid an excessive (and possibly dangerous) commute in addition to a typical 12 hour shift.
When the demand in each hospital/region is realized, IU Health has the option to either cancel a
transshipment (call-back), or enact an additional “emergency” transshipment at a premium cost.
Both practices are currently being used on a smaller scale within the Indianapolis region, so there
is precedent for these types of actions. For comparison, in Appendix A.7 we describe a similar
ventilator transshipment model. There are two key diﬀerences between these transshipment mod-
els: (1) when a nurse is transferred, a transfer cost and a salary premium (for the duration of
secondment) is paid, whereas only a transfer cost is incurred when a ventilator is borrowed; and (2)
a nurse can be transferred only from her “home” location, whereas a ventilator can be borrowed
from any location. In this sense, there is no expectation that the ventilators must be returned to
their original location.
Transshipment model products. Next, we present some products of the decision model that
are used in support of IU Health’s data-driven transshipment program. Additional products are
described in Appendix A.5. The results below are generated by solving the transshipment model
27

Accepted Article
using our workload forecast for three diﬀerent scenarios that are based on diﬀerent demand patterns
observed during the pandemic: unbalanced (e.g., March/April), ﬂat (e.g., May), and increasing
(e.g., September). The actual numbers are modiﬁed to protect IU Health data, but the underlying
results are similar in nature.
The model inputs, secondment, additional pay, transfer bonuses,
emergency premiums, understaﬃng costs, and capacities were provided by IU Health based on
surveys soliciting nurse input combined with nurse management strategy sessions. The call-back
penalty is set to 0.05 to avoid excessive ex-ante transshipments while also capturing the reality
that it is desirable to keep a nurse in their “home” region. Two hundred stochastic scenarios are
generated from the distributional workload prediction model. All input parameters are summarized
in Appendix A.4.
Figure 9: Percentage of transfers versus understaﬃng in the unbalanced and ﬂat census scenarios
Tactical plan. To support IU Health’s tactical decision regarding how many transfers they are
willing to accept for subsequent improvements in system-wide understaﬃng, we generate a Pareto
curve showing percentage of transfers (number of transfer shifts divided by total shifts over the
14-day horizon) versus the understaﬃng percentage (in terms of shifts required vs shifts worked)
across all ﬁve regions; see Figure 9. These products allow IU Health to choose a particular point
on the curve based on nursing management goals.
This tactical selection implies a set of cost
parameters that are subsequently used to generate daily operational decisions.
Operational Plan. To frame the operational plan based on the chosen tactical plan, we begin
with our “bird’s eye view” of the impact of the transshipment plan on the ﬁve regions in Figure 10
for the unbalanced scenario. The dotted lines and solid lines are the utilization with and without
transshipment respectively, plotted on the left y-axis. For reference, we also plot the expected
census (over the 200 scenarios) below the utilization curves, scaled on the right y-axis.
These
ﬁgures provide an easily interpreted, informative visual for IU Health nursing management, who
are intimately familiar with the staﬃng situations in each region.
Even at a quick glance, it
is clear that Regions 1 and 3 – Indianapolis and Indianapolis Suburbs – experience signiﬁcant
capacity issues when no transshipments are executed (solid line), while Regions 2 and 4 – East
Central (Muncie) and South Central (Bloomington) – have some spare capacity. Region 5 – West
28

Accepted Article
Figure 10: System-wide impact of transshipment plan on regional staﬃng utilization.
Left y-axis: Capacity utilization. Right y-axis: Region census
Central (West Lafayette) – progresses from overloaded to underloaded back to overloaded. These
unbalanced scenarios are not uncommon given that these ﬁve regions serve diﬀerent communities
and span over 150 miles north to south and the entire width of the state. From this ﬁgure, the
impact of transshipment is clear and provides a strong argument when lobbying for expansion of
the transshipment plan, which has since been successfully accomplished. See Appendix A.5 for
results in other scenarios.
5.2
Preparation for Subsequent Waves of the Pandemic
Due to COVID, combined with the upcoming ﬂu season, IU Health planned to hire travel nurses to
supplement their existing workforce. To identify the maximum number of nurses to cover system-
wide need during the highest projected future surge, we designed a regional Newsvendor model
(formulated in Appendix A.8), in line with our rapid deployment approach favoring the simplest
valuable solution. The Newsvendor takes our forecast as demand and estimates the daily number
of nurses needed over the next several months in each region. This model was integrated into IU
Health’s staﬃng matrix to project gaps between available and desired staﬀduring diﬀerent points
in the upcoming ﬂu/COVID season from September to February.
As nasal canulas emerged as an eﬀective mechanism for treating COVID, a similar approach was
requested to analyze the timing and volume of an advanced purchase of this equipment to meet
anticipated need. This was also to avoid waiting and delayed shipments as COVID-relevant medical
equipment was in high demand while, at the same time, supply chains had been disrupted causing
signiﬁcant capacity and transportation issues.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we develop and implement a multi-method model that integrates disease progression
and operational workload models in collaboration with the largest healthcare network in Indiana
29

Accepted Article
for their COVID response and surge planning. We highlight our parsimonious design philosophy
in which we trade oﬀmodel complexity for adaptability, computational eﬃciency, and speed of
development, validation, and implementation. Our parsimonious approach allows us to address key
challenges in pandemic modeling: severely limited data, partially observable outcomes of interest,
and largely time-varying system dynamics that must be regularly re-learned.
Via multiple layers of adaptive learning, our tools can adapt to rapidly evolving information during
diﬀerent stages of a pandemic, providing a tailored, consistently accurate prediction for individual
hospitals, with a MAPE of less than 10%, while the model used by the state of Indiana exhibited
a MAPE of over 30% over the same time frame. Our workload prediction provides the basis for
forecasting demand for resources and is detailed enough to support operational decision optimiza-
tion at the hospital level, in contrast to other existing COVID forecasting models.
Facilitated
by the simplicity of our prediction model, we were subsequently able to build a suite of decision
support optimization tools that have been used to support nurse hiring and nurse transshipment
decisions.
In our ongoing collaboration, we are working to provide workload census prediction on an hourly ba-
sis for individual units in a hospital, which incorporates a personalized projection of time-dependent
resource usage for patients currently in the hospital and predicted elective patient arrivals based
on the surgical schedule for future days, among other details. This reﬁned census prediction will be
used to support the nurse staﬃng plan at IU Health, including proactive hiring of contract nurses
and allocation of ﬂoat nurses. According to IU Health, this directly impacts more than 400 nurses
in their ﬂoat pool and indirectly impacts all 9,000 nurses in the system.
References
Abadie A, Diamond A, Hainmueller J (2010) Synthetic control methods for comparative case studies: Esti-
mating the eﬀect of California’s tobacco control program. Journal of the American Statistical Associ-
ation 105(490):493–505.
Abadie A, Gardeazabal J (2003) The economic costs of conﬂict: A case study of the Basque Country.
American Economic Review 93(1):113–132.
Aizenman
N,
Carlsen
A,
Talbot
R
(2021)
Why
The
Pandemic
Is
10
Times
Worse
Than
You
Think.
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2021/02/06/964527835/
why-the-pandemic-is-10-times-worse-than-you-think, [Online; accessed 28-Feb-2021].
Bartz-Beielstein T, Rehbach F, Mersmann O, Bartz E (2020) Hospital capacity planning using discrete event
simulation under special consideration of the COVID-19 pandemic. arXiv:2012.07188 1–18.
Bekker R, Koole G, et al. (2021) Modeling COVID-19 hospital admissions and occupancy in the netherlands.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11021 .
Bertsimas D, Boussioux L, Cory-Wright R, Delarue A, Digalakis V, Jacquillat A, Kitane DL, Lukin G, Li
M, Mingardi L, et al. (2021) From predictions to prescriptions: A data-driven response to COVID-19.
Health Care Management Science 1–20.
30

Accepted Article
Betcheva L, Erhun F, FeylessouﬁA, Gon¸calves P, Jiang H, Kattuman P, Pape T, Pari A, Scholtes S, Tyrrell
C (2020) Rapid COVID-19 modeling support for regional health systems in england. Available at SSRN
3695258 .
Brauer F, Castillo-Chavez C (2012) Mathematical Models in Population Biology and Epidemiology (New
York, NY: Spring).
Capistran MA, Capella A, Christen JA (2020) Forecasting hospital demand during COVID-19 pandemic
outbreaks. arXiv:2006.01873 1–30.
Centers for Disease Control (2020) Options to reduce quarantine for contacts of persons with SARS-CoV-2 in-
fection using symptom monitoring and diagnostic testing. URL https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/more/scientific-brief-options-to-reduce-quarantine.
Chen CJ (2020) Forecasting infection progression: Adapting synthetic controls to predicting COVID-19
spread. Working Paper .
Chen N, Hu M, Zhang C (2020a) Capacitated sir model with an application to COVID-19. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3692751 1–34.
Chen YC, Lu PE, Chang CS (2020b) A time-dependent SIR model for COVID-19 with undetectable infected
persons. IEEE Transactions On Network Science and Engineering 7(4):3279—-3294.
Cuevas E (2020) An agent-based model to evaluate the COVID-19 transmission risks in facilities. Computers
in Biology and Medicine 121:103827.
Dai J, Shi P (2017) A two-time-scale approach to time-varying queues in hospital inpatient ﬂow management.
Operations Research 65(2):514–536.
Deasy J, Rocheteau E, Kohler K, Stubbs DJ, Barbiero P, Li`o P, Ercole A (2020) Forecasting ultra-early
intensive care strain from COVID-19 in England. MedRxiv .
Diekmann O, Heeserbeek H, Britton T (2013) Mathematical Tools for Understanding Infectious Disease
Dynamics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Dos Santos I, Almeida G, De Moura F, et al. (2021) Evolution of SARS-CoV-2 in the state of alagoas-brazil
via an adaptive sir model. International Journal of Modern Physics C (IJMPC) 32(03):1–6.
Fantazzini D (2020) Short-term forecasting of the COVID-19 pandemic using google trends data: Evidence
from 158 countries. Applied Econometrics 59:33–54.
Feng J, Shi P (2018) Steady-state diﬀusion approximations for discrete-time queue in hospital inpatient ﬂow
management. Naval Research Logistics (NRL) 65(1):26–65.
Garrido JM, Martinez-Rodriguez D, Rodriguez-Serrano F, Perez-Villares JM, Ferreiro-Marzal A, del Mar
Jimenez-Quintana M, Grupo de Estudio COVID-19 Granada, Villanueva RJ (2020) Mathematical
model optimized for prediction and health care planning for COVID-19. arXiv:2012.05804 1–23, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.medin.2021.02.014.
Green LV, Kolesar PJ, Whitt W (2007) Coping with time-varying demand when setting staﬃng requirements
for a service system. Production and Operations Management 16(1):13–39.
Grimm CA (2020) Hospital experiences responding to the COVID-19 pandemic: Results of a national pulse
survey March 23–27, 2020. US Department of Health and Human Services OoIG, 1–41.
Hill A, Levy M, Xie S, Sheen J, Shinnick J, Gheorghe A, Rehmann C (2020) Modeling COVID-19 spread vs
healthcare capacity. URL https://alhill.shinyapps.io/COVID19seir/.
Kaplan EH (2020) OM Forum — COVID-19 scratch models to support local decisions. Manufacturing &
Service Operations Management 22(4):645–655.
31

Accepted Article
Kerr CC, Stuart RM, Mistry D, Abeysuriya RG, Rosenfeld K, Hart GR, N´u˜nez RC, Cohen JA, Selvaraj P,
Hagedorn B, et al. (2021) Covasim: an agent-based model of COVID-19 dynamics and interventions.
PLOS Computational Biology 17(7):e1009149.
Malani A, Soman S, Asher S, Novosad PM, Imbert C, Tandel V, Agarwal A, Alomar A, Sarker A, Shah
D, Shen D, Gruber J, Sachdeva S, Kaiser D, Bettencourt L (2020) Adaptive control of COVID-19
outbreaks in india: Local, gradual, and trigger-based exit paths from lockdown. NBER Working Paper
No. w27532 1–30.
Mamon GA (2020) Regional analysis of COVID-19 in france from ﬁt of hospital data with diﬀerent evolu-
tionary models. arXiv:2005.06552 1–21.
McCulloh I, Kiernan K, Kent T (2020) Inferring true COVID-19 infection rates from deaths. Frontiers in
Big Data 3:37.
Shapiro M, Karim F, Muscioni G, Augustine A (2021) Are we there yet? adaptive sir model for continuous
estimation of COVID-19 infection rate and reproduction number in the united states. Journal of Medical
Internet Research 23(4).
Silva PC, Batista PV, Lima HS, Alves MA, Guimar˜aes FG, Silva RC (2020) COVID-ABS: An agent-based
model of COVID-19 epidemic to simulate health and economic eﬀects of social distancing interventions.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 139:110088.
Veloz T, Maldonado P, Ropert S, Ravello C, Mora S, Barrios A, Villaseca T, Valdenegro C, Perez-Acle T
(2020) On the interplay between mobility and hospitalization capacity during the COVID-19 pandemic:
The SEIRHUD model. arXiv:2006.05357 1–14.
Whitt W, Zhao J (2017) Many-server loss models with non-poisson time-varying arrivals. Naval Research
Logistics 64(3):177–202.
Xu Y (2017) Generalized synthetic control method: Causal inference with interactive ﬁxed eﬀects models.
Political Analysis 25(1):57–76.
Zhang T, McFarlane K, Vallon J, Yang L, Xie J, Blanchet J, Glynn P, Staudenmayer K, Schulman K,
Scheinker D (2020) A model to estimate bed demand for COVID-19 related hospitalization. medRxiv .
32