TITLE: Servitization and the Effect of Training on Service Delivery System Performance
JOURNAL: POM
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13165
---

1 
 
Servitization and the effect of training on service delivery 
system performance 
 
Abstract 
Manufacturers moving into services must design a service delivery system that can effectively and 
efficiently support their product-service offering. Commonly, such manufacturers outsource customer 
service and support to independent service suppliers, while maintaining the ownership and control of 
certain service units. Despite the increasing number of studies in service triads investigating ways that 
may improve service performance and customer satisfaction, the dynamics of mixed-ownership service 
delivery systems have remained understudied. By deploying the Motivation-Opportunity-Ability 
(MOA) framework and synthesizing insights from the literature on franchising and the transfer of 
training, we hypothesize that manufacturer-led formal training increases the service performance of the 
entire network, but that outsourced service units choose more suitable training courses and derive 
comparatively higher performance benefits than company-owned ones. We test our hypotheses within 
the UK service network of a major commercial vehicles manufacturer, using several panel data 
regression models and objective measures of training and performance. This study primarily contributes 
to the literature on servitization and service triads by showing the performance-enhancing capacity of 
manufacturer-led training. The results have practical implications for the development and 
implementation of the service operations strategy of servitized manufacturers that support customers 
through mixed-ownership service networks. 
 
Keywords: Servitization, service delivery system, service triads, employee training, panel data 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
‘Traditional’ manufacturers are increasingly adopting business models that entail the 
integration of products and services, a trend that is commonly referred to as servitization of 
manufacturing (see Vandermerwe and Rada 1988). Integrated Product-Service (PS) offerings can vary 
in sophistication, from an ‘add-on’ service aimed at ensuring a product’s proper functioning (e.g. 
maintenance contract), to a result- or use-oriented offering aimed at increasing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the customer’s processes (e.g. availability-based contract – see Oliva and Kallenberg 
2003). This makes at least a third of manufacturers worldwide involved in some sort of service 
operations (Neely 2008), classifying them as servitized. The increasing prevalence of servitization, and 
the multifaceted strategic, technological and organizational challenges that it poses, have spurred plenty 
of research in the Operations Management (OM) field (see Baines et al. 2017 for a synthesis). 
The rationale for this study originates from the observation that, despite the many references in 
the literature to the need for a fundamental cultural and attitudinal change of manufacturers’ employees 
when moving into services (Miller et al. 2002, Oliva and Kallenberg 2003), aspects relating to employee 
behaviors, policies and practices have largely remained unexamined (Baines et al. 2013, Johnstone et 
al. 2014). Following Boudreau et al.’s (2003) call for closer integration of insights from OM and Human 
Resource Management (HRM), this work is positioned on the interface of the two fields, examining the 
role of an HR practice (training) in the effective enactment of operations strategy for servitization. 
Successful PS provision and, ultimately, customer satisfaction, depend on an effective service 
delivery system (Cook et al. 1999), or simply, service network, which consists of the various entities 
and their facilities that deliver the services to the manufacturer’s customer-base. In certain industrial 
contexts, manufacturers follow a mixed-ownership (or mixed-mode) strategy, whereby they own a 
fraction of the network, but simultaneously rely on third-parties to deliver customer service (Li et al. 
2016, Windahl et al. 2004). Mixed-mode service networks are common, and arguably inevitable, in 
environments where nationwide or global presence is necessary. Since customer service is outsourced 
to independent service suppliers, the latter come into direct contact with the manufacturer’s customers. 
The three entities (manufacturer, customer and service supplier) form a structural arrangement that is 
often referred to as a service triad (Li and Choi 2009). In a service triad, the supplier’s conduct and 

 
3 
 
performance are determinative for customer satisfaction, and consequently, for the well-being of the 
manufacturer-customer relationship (Tate and van der Valk 2008, van der Valk and van Iwaarden 2011). 
As such, manufacturers need to ensure that first, they partner with the right service suppliers, and 
second, that the latter deliver the services at contractually agreed performance levels. This is easier said 
than done; manufacturers such as Dell and AT&T had to revoke their service outsourcing decisions and 
return customer support functions in-house, after a sharp decline in business customer satisfaction with 
the quality of service delivered by their partners (Li and Choi 2009). 
Front-end service processes involve high levels of customer interaction, thus, customer-facing 
employees must possess the technical, relationship-management, communication and negotiation skills 
(Foote et al. 2001, Johnstone et al. 2014) required to deal with the increasing sophistication of the 
offerings, and to support the variable needs of the customer (Kreye 2017). In a mixed-mode network, 
the manufacturer is in control of the recruitment, selection, training and development of employees of 
the service units that it owns (referred to here as ‘company-owned’), so it can introduce programs and 
policies aimed at improving their customer-facing capabilities (Baines et al. 2013). This is unlikely to 
be the case though for the units of the service partners; the latter, being independent entities, are free to 
adopt practices they deem suitable, which, however, may not be aligned with the manufacturer’s service 
operations strategy. The manufacturer can encourage the adoption of practices that could potentially 
improve the capabilities of the partners’ units, such as behavior-based reward systems and teamworking 
(Johnstone et al. 2014), but cannot formally impose them. In such situations, offering them the 
opportunity to undertake technical or management skills training to better support the PS offering, is 
emerging as a promising practice (Forkmann et al. 2017, Raja and Frandsen 2017). 
The role of training in servitization and service triads has not been systematically investigated, 
and we suggest that manufacturer-led training in particular, can mitigate the risk of poor service quality 
and performance of the partners. In a service triad, training of the employees of a party (the service 
partner), by another entity (the manufacturer), to support the latter’s offering toward a third actor (the 
manufacturer’s customer) on behalf of the manufacturer, effectively comprises ‘outside’ training. This 
means that the finding of systematic reviews from the HRM field that training can increase various 
aspects of firm-level operational performance, is not directly and necessarily applicable (see Combs et 

 
4 
 
al. 2006, de Menezes et al. 2010, Jiang et al. 2012, Tharenou et al. 2007). But despite our primary 
interest being in the performance-enhancing potential of manufacturer-led training for the outsourced 
service units, training is also expected to improve the performance of the manufacturer’s company-
owned units. Indeed, the HRM literature on the effectiveness of training points in this direction. Overall, 
the first objective of this work is to quantify the relationship between manufacturer-led training and the 
service performance of the entire mixed-mode service network. 
 
Our second objective stems from the fact that there are two consequential differences between 
company-owned and outsourced service units. Drawing from the well-established Motivation–
Opportunity–Ability (MOA) model and the two distinct research streams of franchising and the transfer 
of training, we argue that these differences can be captured by the components of Motivation and 
Opportunity, which can enhance or inhibit the effect of Ability. Comparatively speaking, independent 
units are freer to choose the courses that best fit their local needs, which implies that they also get the 
chance to apply their learned skills more regularly. In addition, they are relatively more motivated to 
make training pay dividends, since it is an investment in money and time that could have been spent 
elsewhere. As such, we aim to identify whether the effect of manufacturer-led training on service 
performance differs between outsourced and company-owned service units. In the context of 
franchising, where the intricacies of mixed-ownership networks have started to be studied, research 
suggests that franchisees may exploit their relatively larger degree of autonomy and choose HR 
practices that ‘best fit’ their local environment (Croonen et al. 2016a). They have also been found to 
reap larger performance benefits compared to company-owned units, even though they adopt HR 
practices at a lower intensity (Brand and Croonen 2010). These (still nascent) ideas have not been 
examined in the context of servitization, but are relevant since service outsourcing is often manifested 
in the form of franchising (Parmigiani and Holloway 2011, Zhang et al. 2015). A comparison between 
outsourced and company-owned service units can provide theoretical insight on the differential effect 
of training on service performance, and practical insight to improve the effectiveness of mixed-mode 
service networks of firms meshing manufacturing and service ‘paradigms’ (Johnstone et al. 2014). 
 
To address the two objectives, our research takes place in the context of a UK network of a 
servitized European commercial vehicles manufacturer, consisting of both company-owned and 

 
5 
 
independent service units. The services rendered (e.g. planned maintenance, breakdown attendance, 
spare parts fitting) are common across units, while the performance of all units is consistently evaluated 
every quarter across four main Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that were set by the manufacturer 
after consultation with its major customers. In addition, the manufacturer offers various training courses 
that are available to both company-owned and independent units. Methodologically speaking, we follow 
the same units over 19 consecutive quarters and employ appropriate panel data regression models that 
intend to address endogeneity issues that are common in the HRM literature (see Tharenou et al. 2007, 
Wall and Wood 2005), allowing us to obtain reliable estimates of the effect of training on performance. 
Specifically, apart from controlling for observed confounding variables, we also control for unobserved 
unit-specific factors by using an approach that emulates a standard Fixed-Effects model, while also 
accounting for the possibility of reverse causality by controlling for past performance. 
 
The analysis suggests that increased manufacturer-led formal training improves the 
performance of both company-owned and independent service units, but the effect is stronger for the 
latter. The differential effect is robust across various model specifications and estimation strategies, 
irrespective of the training and performance measures used. We attribute this differential effect to the 
higher degree of: opportunity to choose training courses, opportunity to apply the trained skills, and 
motivation to reap the rewards of training of independent service units. 
 
2. Research background 
This section positions this study theoretically against the burgeoning research in servitization 
and service triads, while also making the case for investigating the performance-enhancing potential of 
manufacturer-led training. It then introduces the reader to the empirical context and some qualitative 
information that provides additional grounds for the development of the hypotheses. 
 
2.1 Structural considerations for the design of an effective service network 
For a servitized manufacturer, service system design will include structural decisions such as 
the number, size and ownership of the service facilities, and the degree of outsourcing (Baines et al. 
2009, Roth and Menor 2003). The manufacturer can: a) choose to deliver the services itself, b) assign 

 
6 
 
service delivery to a retailer, or c) allow a specialized third-party to deliver the services (Li et al. 2016). 
However, that does not preclude a mixed-mode design, whereby multiple entities of different ownership 
provide services to a common customer-base. As such, manufacturers have been observed to outsource 
part of their front-end service processes to independent, specialist service partners or franchisees, while 
also maintaining elements of service provision in-house (Baines et al. 2009; Raja and Frandsen 2017). 
In the franchising literature, mixed-mode networks are known as plural systems (or plural forms of 
governance – e.g. Bradach 1997). Examples of servitized manufacturers using mixed-mode networks 
include Volvo Trucks, Husqvarna and ITT Water & Wastewater (Kowalkowski et al. 2011), while they 
are also ubiquitous in pure service industries (Kellner 2017, Parmigiani and Holloway 2011). 
Front-end service processes involve high levels of direct customer contact (Balakrishnan et al. 
2008, Chase 1981). For front-end service components that the manufacturer delivers itself through its 
own service units (i.e., insourcing), it can maintain the control of customer contact and the responsibility 
for coordinating overall network performance (Perdikaki et al. 2015). However, when the manufacturer 
outsources customer service to another entity, by definition, the latter comes in direct contact with the 
manufacturer’s customers, resulting in the formation of service triads (Wynstra et al. 2015). In a service 
triad, because the manufacturer loses control of some customer touchpoints, the performance of the 
service supplier can affect customer satisfaction and the manufacturer’s relationships with customers 
(Perdikaki et al. 2015). Moreover, the introduction into the network of independent organizations and 
their multiple units makes it more difficult to achieve coordination and harmonization across units 
(Rudberg and Olhager 2003, Sorenson and Sørensen 2001). It also introduces the risk of free-riding, 
whereby independent service units may cut inputs to boost their own profits whilst damaging service 
quality and the reputation of the focal manufacturer (Lafontaine 1992, Michael 2000). 
 
2.2 Infrastructural considerations and the role of employee training 
A servitized manufacturer also needs to determine the infrastructural elements of its service 
network. These relate to programs, policies and the behaviors of employees (Baines et al. 2009, Roth 
and Menor 2003). Thus, appropriate HR practices need to be adopted to improve the service orientation 
of the customer-facing employees, and ensure superior operational performance (Johnstone et al. 2014). 

 
7 
 
In mixed-mode service networks (the context of this work), the manufacturer’s top management 
can resort to hierarchical authority and fiat to ensure compliance of the company-owned units with a 
codified set of corporate practices (Winter et al. 2012). These will include the recruitment of people 
with the right skillsets (Baines et al. 2013, Spohrer and Maglio 2008) and extensive personnel training. 
On the other hand, when it comes to its customer-facing service partners, the manufacturer cannot 
legally prescribe or mandate employment practices (Brand and Croonen 2010), since these companies 
are independent, autonomous agents with decision rights over their assets, including HR (Mumdžiev 
and Windsperger 2011, Yin and Zajac 2004). Hence, irrespective of whether it is one large outsourcing 
partner, or multiple small units (e.g. franchisees) responsible for service delivery, the manufacturer must 
rely on contracting, relational, and technical capabilities to manage them (Parmigiani and Holloway 
2011). Thus, scholars have started examining how incentive mechanisms, behavior- or performance-
based contracts, and relational norms, can ensure that these suppliers create value for customers 
(Broekhuis and Scholten 2018, Karatzas et al. 2017, Tate and van der Valk 2008, Wuyts et al. 2015). 
Against this background, institutionalized manufacturer-led training is an overlooked 
mechanism, which, we claim, has the potential to increase the ability of employees of independent (but 
also, company-owned) service units to support the servitized manufacturer’s PS offering. Only a few 
empirical works have tangentially (and qualitatively) examined the role of training in servitization 
(Section A of online Appendix), suggesting that ongoing and tailored training of the manufacturer’s 
customer-facing staff (e.g. engineers, sales and service people) is a necessity (Johnstone et al. 2014, 
Ulaga and Loveland 2014). Moreover, some works indicate that third-parties (e.g. distributors) 
responsible for service delivery to customers, can also benefit from manufacturer-led training 
(Forkmann et al. 2017, Paiola et al. 2012); in fact, in Raja and Frandsen (2017), the service partners 
were even found to actively request more extensive training to be able to deliver quality service. 
Hence, despite the indications that, within mixed-mode service networks, manufacturer-led 
formal training is potentially performance-enhancing, the lack of focused, nuanced and systematic 
investigation constitutes a gap in the extant knowledge-base. For instance, it is unclear whether training 
has lasting performance benefits for the entire network, whether employees of company-owned and 
independent service units respond to training in the same manner, and whether there are types of training 

 
8 
 
that are relatively more efficacious. Such questions are managerially relevant, since a manufacturer 
should aim to improve the effectiveness of its entire service network through targeted policy 
interventions. Additionally, examining and comparing the potential of training for both types of service 
units can develop theoretical insights at the interface of OM and HRM (Boudreau et al. 2003). 
 
2.3 Empirical background and anecdotal evidence 
We study the UK service network of a major European commercial vehicles manufacturer 
which is considered by practitioners to be a successful example of servitization in the industry; at the 
end of the data collection, 60% of the company’s revenues came from services. Instead of simply selling 
trucks and buses, the manufacturer provides its vehicles under fixed-price, fixed-term contractual 
arrangements, which means that customers pay for the ‘use’ of the equipment rather than its ownership. 
The services, varying from simple, scheduled maintenance, to on-demand, advanced telematics, are 
included in the customer contract, and are delivered by a service network comprising 48 independent, 
outsourced service units, and 18 company-owned ones. Thus, the manufacturer has adopted a mixed-
mode service system design, with the independent units maintaining the legal status of franchisees, a 
common arrangement in industries where geographical coverage is crucial. Unlike archetypical 
franchising though, whereby the franchisee provides the entire value proposition to the customer (i.e. 
including the vehicle) and can adjust labor hourly rates (Zhang et al. 2015), in this study context, the 
PS offering (including vehicle specification, types of add-on services, service levels) as well as labor 
hourly rates are contractually agreed between the manufacturer and the customer. Independent service 
units focus solely on service delivery. This means that within the entire mixed-mode service network, 
when a company-owned service unit encounters a customer, interaction remains dyadic; but when an 
independent unit interacts with a customer, the former acts as an outsourcing partner, and thus a front-
end service outsourcing triad is formed (see Perdikaki et al. 2015, Zhang et al. 2015). 
Early contact with the manufacturer (hereafter: TruckBus) through unstructured interviews, 
revealed various issues relevant to the delivery of services, the performance of service units, and the 
formal training offered by TruckBus. TruckBus measures unit-level service performance in an objective 
and consistent manner. Be they company-owned or independent, service units are treated equally: 

 
9 
 
“From our point of view a unit is a unit, be it owned by us or independent it does not matter to us; the 
systems, procedures, policies and standards are the same” (TruckBus regional manager). However, in 
TruckBus’s own admission, units of outsourcing partners are more motivated: “I think they are more 
incentivized; the fact that the guy who owns the dealership and the profit or loss comes out of his own 
pocket… They tend to be much better run and more reactive to problems” (TruckBus senior executive). 
When it comes to training, TruckBus organizes centralized, formal training for employees of 
company-owned and outsourced units. The latter are eligible to undertake the full spectrum of courses, 
but a crucial difference between them and company-owned units is that they must incur the costs of that 
training. This means that TruckBus cannot compel independent unit managers to send their employees 
for training. But, as is the case with other operational decisions (e.g. opening hours, staffing), they can 
certainly suggest it “…if we went to them and said: ‘Right, okay, the level of vehicles has gone up, we 
suggest that you should do this and this to cope’ in the main they would do it” (TruckBus regional 
manager). This means that outsourced units “cherry-pick” training courses: “They will look at those 
available and might go ‘Oh we don’t see any of them [TruckBus vehicle models], we won’t bother with 
that one’” (TruckBus regional manager). On the other hand, company-owned units have little room for 
choice, and there are training regimes that every unit has to follow in order to be ready to deal with any 
contingency. On the whole, it seems that the service partners see the benefits of training: “… you would 
not be able to do the job without it, and that is what makes it worthwhile” (Unit general manager). 
There is a strong preference for courses of a technical nature, that are focused on servicing vehicles 
(e.g. electrics, telematics, brakes and suspensions, exhausts), while certain administrative courses are 
regarded as “rubbish” and a “waste of time”. 
In summary, outsourced service units would appear relatively more motivated than company-
owned ones, and selective in terms of training; they invest in the development of skills that they perceive 
to directly affect their service performance. In the following section, we provide theoretical backing to 
these assertions, before formally testing them in the context of the manufacturer’s entire network. 
 
3. Hypotheses development 

 
10 
 
Toward developing our hypotheses, we adopt the Motivation-Opportunity-Ability (MOA) 
model (see Boxall and Purcell 2008, Jiang et al. 2012) as an overarching organizing framework. Within 
it, we integrate key theoretical insights from the franchising literature, as well as findings from the 
literature on training transfer, and in particular the conditions and factors that enable the translation of 
training into on-the-job performance improvements. Since Boudreau et al. (2003) demonstrated how 
MOA can inform OM research, the model has been adopted by OM scholars in various related areas of 
study, including knowledge sharing (Siemsen et al. 2008), servitization (Johnstone et al. 2014) and 
service triads (Wuyts et al. 2015). In short, MOA postulates that employee performance is a 
multiplicative function of his/her motivation (i.e. willingness to act and level of exerted effort), 
opportunity (i.e. situational and operational enablers and constraints) and ability (i.e. knowledge, skills 
and attitudes required for the job). These three elements interact with one another and can thus enhance 
or inhibit the effect of each other on an employee’s behavior and actions (Blumberg and Pringle 1982). 
Moreover, despite MOA being a theory explaining behavior at the individual level, it has been 
‘vertically borrowed’ (Whetten et al. 2009) and shown to have explanatory power at the organizational 
level of analysis (e.g. Kim et al. 2015, Raja and Frandsen 2017). Our work adds to this set of studies. 
 
3.1 Training and its effect on service performance 
 
Training is an ability-enhancing practice. It comprises the systematic acquisition and 
development of firm-specific Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) required by employees to 
adequately perform a task or job (Goldstein 1980). If the learning resulting from a training experience 
of an employee is applied in the job context and maintained over a period of time (i.e., it transfers – 
Baldwin and Ford 1988), his/her work performance will increase (Blume et al. 2010). This improvement 
in individual performance, and the aggregate increase in the quality of the human capital of the 
organization, will benefit organization-level outcomes such as productivity, and operational and service 
system performance (e.g. Combs et al. 2006, Conti 2005, de Menezes et al. 2010, Tharenou et al. 2007). 
Since there is ample empirical support for the link between employee training and firm-level 
performance across various contexts, one novelty of this work is that it tests for this relationship in an 
environment where it has not been systematically examined (Johnstone et al. 2014). As discussed, 

 
11 
 
servitization gives rise to structural arrangements that present the manufacturer with the reality that 
customer satisfaction is (partly) contingent upon the service delivery performance of independent third-
parties. Following previous servitization and service triads research, in this work service delivery 
performance (or simply, service performance) refers to the performance of the service units that is seen 
or felt by the customers. It is thus conceptualized to include operational aspects such as service time, 
waiting time, and responsiveness (Mackelprang et al. 2012). We thus submit our underlying contention 
for a positive association between manufacturer-led training and service performance in a mixed-mode 
service network as a base-line hypothesis. A contextualized intuition follows. 
As the products, services, and the service encounter become more complex, formal training of 
customer-facing employees may enable them to deal successfully with the inherent uncertainty and 
variability (Forkmann et al. 2017, Kreye 2017, Skaggs and Youndt 2004). Irrespective of whether they 
work for company-owned or independent service units, training will foster a deeper understanding of 
product features, service contracts, pricing, information systems and work processes that are specific to 
the manufacturer (Batt 2002). The development of firm-specific human capital will increase the service 
orientation of the service unit as a whole (Paiola et al. 2012), i.e. its “propensity for delivering service 
excellence” (Oliveira and Roth 2012, p.174) by enabling customer-facing employees to interact 
effectively with the manufacturer’s customers (Batt 2002). This development of unique KSAs will 
enhance the ability of employees to support the offering (Raja and Frandsen 2017), eventually 
improving the service performance of the entire network (Mackelprang et al. 2012). Hence: 
 
Hypothesis 1: In a mixed-mode service network, formal training led by the focal manufacturer will 
increase the service performance of both independent and company-owned service units. 
 
In line with standard MOA theory, we claim that the effect of enhanced ability (through 
training) on performance will depend on the levels of motivation and opportunity. In the remainder of 
this section we suggest that, on average, independent units will differ from company-owned ones in 
terms of those two factors. In our argumentation, we draw from the franchising literature on plural 
forms, where the differences between company-owned and independent (franchised) units have been 

 
12 
 
investigated. In particular, this stream of research stresses the balance (and tension) between the 
strategic imperatives of standardization (of company-owned units) and local adaptation (of franchisees), 
and the fact that owner-managers of franchisees bear the residual risk of their operations and are driven 
by incentives to maximize their unit’s profits, in contrast to employee-managers of company-owned 
units (e.g. Kaufmann and Eroglu 1998, Lafontaine 1992, Shane 1998, Yin and Zajac 2004). In MOA 
parlance, the first idea relates to the component of opportunity, and the second to motivation. In a 
nutshell, because of differences in the two (unobserved) factors between the two groups of service units, 
we expect a manifest difference in the effectiveness of training for them, i.e. that ownership status will 
moderate the effect of training on service performance. 
 
3.2 The differential choice of training by independent and company-owned service units 
Opportunity refers to the states of nature and actions of others that enhance or inhibit employee 
performance (Blumberg and Pringle 1982). We argue that in this study context, it will refer to the 
opportunity to choose which skills to train in, and the opportunity to apply those skills. Opportunity to 
choose reflects the degree of operational autonomy that the units have when it comes to choosing HR 
practices and policies, including training (Brand and Croonen 2010, Croonen et al. 2016a, Yin and 
Zajac 2004). Unlike company-owned units, outsourced units are independent organizations and the 
residual profit claimants from the services they provide, hence, the manufacturer has relatively limited 
influence on the type and extent of employee training (Mumdžiev and Windsperger 2011). This will 
have implications for the composition of the training regimes of the two groups of service units. 
Both groups of units can be considered to face a dynamic profit maximization problem subject 
to a potentially non-binding budget allocation constraint, but with a key difference that is crucial for the 
optimal allocation of resources. Outsourced units can choose not to spend their whole budget in a given 
period, so as to be able to spend it in the future, when, for example, more relevant training courses are 
given by the manufacturer. Assuming that profits increase monotonically with service performance, 
outsourced units will aim at maximizing the latter by optimizing the allocation of their budget to 
different activities, including manufacturer-led training. Since they are relatively ‘free’ from demands 
and constraints imposed by the manufacturer relating to their HR practices (Yin and Zajac 2004), 

 
13 
 
owner-managers can invest in training courses for their employees that are deemed appropriate, to the 
desired extent and at the preferred time. This operational autonomy allows them to adapt their choice 
of training courses to best fit their strategy and idiosyncratic local needs (Croonen et al. 2016a, 
Grünhagen et al. 2014, Kaufmann and Eroglu 1998). This entrepreneurial spirit contrasts with company-
owned service units, which are run by managers who are themselves company employees. Employee-
managers may be able to exercise some level of local control over day-to-day decisions, but their overall 
operational flexibility and decision rights are restricted by the firm’s centrally developed policies (Yin 
and Zajac 2004), which include training programs. Because they effectively are the manufacturer, 
employees of the company-owned units must be capable of dealing with every possible customer 
problem. They must be fully trained to efficiently service the vehicles, utilize the necessary inter-
organizational IT systems, and promote the manufacturer’s offering to attract more customers. For this 
reason, the manufacturer is likely to apply a uniform template, in the form of ‘best practices’ (including 
what training is to be undertaken and when), which will be insensitive to the idiosyncratic local needs 
of individual company-owned units (Croonen et al. 2016a). Furthermore, employee-managers will be 
inclined to stick closely to that template, out of risk-aversion or fear of sanctions in case their decisions 
conflict with the standardized operating routines of the firm (Bradach 1997, Michael 2000). 
All these suggest that company-owned units have less local control over the resources spent for 
training in each period, in the sense that the type and timing of training are determined in a centralized, 
bureaucratic manner. Standard optimization theory would predict that their final allocation of resources 
to training will usually be suboptimal relative to outsourced units (Kamien and Schwartz 2012, Simon 
and Blume 2010); they will take relatively more manufacturer-led training courses than outsourced 
units, but in proportional terms, more resources will be allocated to training skills that are less strongly 
linked to service performance. We thus posit that: 
 
Hypothesis 2a: On average, the composition of the training regimes of outsourced and company-owned 
units will be qualitatively different. Specifically, the regimes of outsourced units will be skewed towards 
types of training that are more strongly associated with service performance. 

 
14 
 
3.3 The differential effect of training for independent and company-owned service units 
Besides choosing differently, employees of independent units will have more opportunities to 
apply their learnings and will also be more motivated to do so. The concept of transfer of training 
becomes central for theoretically motivating this contention. Transfer of training is conceived as the 
effectiveness of the trainee in applying the acquired knowledge or trained skill (Blume et al. 2010). 
Research in this area has identified a multitude of factors that explain training effectiveness in 
various contexts (Blume et al. 2010). One of the core, high-level factors is the transfer climate (or work 
environment), i.e. the situations and consequences that either inhibit or enable the application of what 
has been learnt (Burke and Hutchins 2007, Rouiller and Goldstein 1993), which plays an important role 
in whether the newly acquired skills will translate into performance improvements. One important 
aspect of the transfer climate is the opportunity, or need, to apply what has been trained. Research has 
consistently found that if employees do not have the opportunity to use their learning in their work 
setting, performance improvements will be limited (Burke and Hutchins 2007, Ford et al. 1992, Lim 
and Morris 2006). In our context, if, compared to company-owned, independent service units choose 
their training courses more strategically and based on their idiosyncratic local needs, those trained skills 
should be the ones that will be needed more frequently in the field. This implies that employees will 
have the opportunity to apply what they learn more regularly, so the effectiveness of training will be 
further enhanced, when compared to the employees of company-owned units. 
Ownership type also implies differences in the motivation between the employees of the two 
groups of service units to derive benefits from training. At the management level, because owner-
managers have their own investment at risk, it is generally accepted that they will be more motivated 
than employee-managers of company-owned units to do whatever it takes to make their units successful 
(Shane 1998). For the former, training is relatively costlier, since it is an investment of scarce resources 
they could have dedicated elsewhere. Costs such as the price of the course, traveling expenses, and 
foregone revenues or overtime pay due to staff shortages, have higher weight for outsourced units, since 
the latter lack the financial backing of a large corporation (the manufacturer), in stark contrast to 
company-owned (Brand and Croonen 2010). The strong ownership incentives of owner-managers of 
outsourced units will make them want to see the benefits of their investment (Yin and Zajac 2004). As 

 
15 
 
such, they will encourage and motivate all employees, from administrators to technicians, to put more 
effort into developing the required skills and to act on their enhanced knowledge (Kidwell and Nygaard 
2011, Sorenson and Sørensen, 2001). It is likely then that trainees from outsourced units will exhibit 
high levels of pre-training motivation and motivation to learn, both significant predictors of training 
transfer (Facteau et al. 1995). Given also our earlier suggestion that owner-managers allocate resources 
to courses in skills that best fit their local needs, trainees are more likely to perceive that what they learn 
is relevant to their goal of improving their on-the-job performance (Yamnill and McLean 2001). The 
higher the trainee’s motivation to transfer, i.e. the desire to use the skills and knowledge acquired 
through training (Noe and Schmitt 1986), the higher their effectiveness in applying those skills and 
knowledge (see meta-analysis by Blume et al. 2010). As such, the desirability of the positive outcome 
of training (i.e., service performance) for outsourced service units will be comparatively higher. 
Moreover, independent service units are more likely to acknowledge the instrumental value of 
superior unit-level service performance, in the sense that they will see its close connection to further 
positive outcomes. For example, good reputation within the service network, customer satisfaction, a 
harmonious relationship with the manufacturer and, ultimately, high profit margins, are all likely 
outcomes of superior day-to-day service performance in a service triad (Li and Choi 2009). Thus, on 
average, outsourced units will be relatively more motivated to make training increase their day-to-day 
operational performance, as a means to achieve more distant outcomes. 
Hence, outsourced service units are expected to gain more benefit out of their training, ceteris 
paribus, due to higher motivation. We expect this to be the case at the aggregate level, as well as for 
the different types of training courses. Overall: 
 
Hypothesis 3: The positive effect of manufacturer-led formal training on unit-level service performance 
will be higher for outsourced service units than for company-owned ones. 
 
4. Methodology 
4.1 Data and descriptive statistics 

 
16 
 
Objective data on service performance and training have been obtained for every service unit 
in the mixed-mode network of TruckBus, from the 1st quarter of 2007 and for 19 consecutive quarters, 
alongside information on several other covariates. We note that the use of objective data for both 
training and performance is considered an advantage over much of the existing literature on the HR 
practices/performance relationship, which has largely relied upon self-reports of single company 
executives (see Guest 2011, Van Iddekinge et al. 2009 for discussions). Indeed, a meta-analysis on the 
effect of training specifically, found that studies employing perceptual measures inflate its relationship 
with outcomes (Tharenou et al. 2007). 
 
4.1.1 Outcome Variable 
The outcome variable is the service performance of each unit. TruckBus has been consistently 
measuring the performance of outsourced and company-owned units across four context-specific KPIs. 
They are briefly described in Table 1. 
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE] 
For each KPI, TruckBus sets targets that are common across all units and are known to them in 
advance. These targets determine which units ‘pass’ and which ‘fail’ a KPI. As shown in Table 1, the 
four KPIs can be linked to measures of service excellence, such as quality, waiting time, proactiveness 
and responsiveness. On aggregate, they indicate how good each unit is at keeping vehicles on the road, 
which is what matters for the customers of TruckBus. Based on this information, an index is constructed 
that takes values from 0 to 4, depending on how many KPIs the unit achieved in a quarter. This approach 
treats each KPI as equally important for TruckBus and its customer-base. Hence, it is not which KPIs 
have been achieved that matters, but only how many of them. Consequently, our performance measure 
can be treated as an ordinal variable, a characteristic that is incorporated in the estimation strategy. 
Nevertheless, a series of sensitivity checks is performed, which shows that the results are robust to 
alternative operationalizations of service performance. Table 2 presents the distribution of the chosen 
performance outcome by ownership status. Overall, about 41% of the time, service units achieve a score 
of 4, while only about 11% of the time they achieve a score of 0 or 1. On average, company-owned 
units perform slightly better. This small difference, as well as an upward trend for both groups, are also 

 
17 
 
illustrated in Figure 1, which presents the mean performance score by ownership status for each period. 
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE] 
 [FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE] 
 
4.2.2 Main explanatory variables 
Training: The explanatory variable of interest is manufacturer-led training undertaken by the 
service unit to support the manufacturer’s offering. As such, it includes courses on diagnosing, 
maintaining and repairing hardware and software on TruckBus vehicles, on using the several inter-
organizational, TruckBus-specific information systems, and on promoting the offering (e.g. marketing 
and sales). We measure overall training in three ways. The first measure is the total number of courses 
attended by the service unit’s employees during the quarter (i.e. training flow). This can be perceived 
as the number of skills added to the skill stock of the unit every quarter. Figure 2 presents the mean 
number of courses per period undertaken by the two groups. As expected, company-owned units have 
received more training. The spikes in the series correspond to the introduction of new equipment, 
software or servicing routines and procedures. The differences in the extent of training are also 
illustrated in Table 3. About 25% of the time, outsourced units receive no training, in contrast to only 
around 8% for company-owned. 
[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE] 
[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE] 
With the second measure, we attempt to account for the accumulation of skills within the 
service unit, but with a reasonable rate of human capital depreciation (Conti 2005), or for the possibility 
that some skills are used rarely so workers may lose proficiency in them (Goldstein 2002). Thus, for 
service unit 𝑖 at time 𝑡> 1: 
 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑡= 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑡+ (1 −𝐷)𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑡−1 , (1) 
where 𝐷 is the depreciation rate with 0 < 𝐷< 1. Since some courses are longer in terms of days, our 
third measure is the sum of days spent on training by the unit’s employees in each period. 
The quadratic term of the training measures is also included in the models to allow for the 
possibility that the positive effect of training on performance decreases with the extent of training. This 

 
18 
 
is because training is associated with some opportunity costs, so the more training undertaken by 
employees, the less time and resources are spent in servicing vehicles, which in turn may negatively 
influence performance. 
Our training data allow us to introduce two critical distinctions to operationalize and test 
Hypothesis 2a. First, we distinguish between technical skills training (e.g. repairing an engine, fitting 
vehicle parts), versus administrative and management skills (e.g. Microsoft office, sales and leadership 
courses, back-office administrative tasks). We expect that technical training will be relatively more 
effective. This is because such training will focus exclusively on closed skills, i.e. skills which are to 
be reproduced identically in the work environment as learnt within the training environment (Baldwin 
et al. 2009). For example, learning how to repair the brakes of a truck during a course will be identical 
to repairing them in the field. Given the operational nature of service performance in this context (which 
indicates how good a service unit is at keeping the vehicles on the road), one would expect that skills 
for front-end services would be more efficacious than skills for auxiliary activities. If, all else held 
equal, courses focused on technical skills are more effective than those focused on administrative or 
management skills, and independent service units choose relatively more of the former compared to 
company-owned ones, we will have found support for H2a. 
We also distinguish between ‘first-time’ and ‘repeated’ training. The former refers to courses 
taken for the first time by any employee of a service unit, hence they represent newly acquired skills 
both for the individual employee and for the unit. Conversely, the latter refers to repetitions of 
previously undertaken courses. These repetitions could be taken for three reasons. First, for newly 
appointed employees to become accustomed to the manufacturer’s PS offering; second, to update or 
refresh the knowledge of existing employees; and third, to equip additional employees with certain 
skills in response to an increase in workload or a change in local customer needs and preferences. As 
such, undertaking ‘repeated’ training is more likely to reflect entrepreneurial thinking by the managers, 
in response to the idiosyncratic needs of their service units. Repeated training should also exclusively 
relate to skills that are used regularly in the field (as opposed to possibly one-off, scarcely needed skills). 
The very fact that such courses are taken repeatedly suggests that possessing those skills in abundance 
at the unit level is essential. If, all else held equal, repeated training is more effective than new skills 

 
19 
 
training, and independent service units choose relatively more of the former compared to company-
owned units, then we will have found additional support for H2a. 
Ownership: A dummy variable which is equal to 1 for outsourced and 0 for company-owned 
units, mainly used to create interaction terms with the training measures. Our base-line models include 
these interaction terms, allowing us to investigate whether the effect of training depends on the 
ownership status of the unit (testing H2b). We also use the squared terms of these interactions, to allow 
for differences in the quadratic effect of training between outsourced and company-owned units. 
 
4.2.3 Covariates 
We consider additional variables that may be associated with both performance and training, 
as failing to control for these will result in unde/over-estimating the effect of training on performance. 
All variables’ summary statistics are presented in Table 4. 
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE] 
Size: Larger service units may perform better due to economies of scale and scope, higher 
market power aspirations and higher financial resources. At the same time, they may have more funds 
available to invest in training. Indicators, such as the number of employees or the unit’s turnover, would 
have been appropriate; however, it was impossible to attain their time series for most service units. 
Thus, we use two proxies that were readily available. The first is the total number of employees per unit 
who undertook training during the entire timeframe. This reflects the fact that larger service units tend 
to send more employees to be trained. The second is the scale of the TruckBus-related workload for 
each service unit, measured by the time series of the number of ‘service incidents’ reported to TruckBus 
every quarter. An alternative measure of workload is the number of hours that the unit spent on servicing 
TruckBus vehicles. Although this is very insignificant in our base-line models of service performance 
(hence, not included), its lagged values and their quadratic terms are strong predictors of the extent of 
training, which is exploited in one of our robustness checks. 
Bonus in previous period: If a unit achieves a certain number of KPIs, a monetary bonus is 
awarded proportionally to the number of KPIs achieved and the number of hours the unit spent working 
on customer vehicles that are under contract. With extra money at its disposal due to receiving the 

 
20 
 
performance-related bonus in period 𝑡−1, a service unit may be more likely to invest in other 
potentially performance-enhancing assets (e.g. new equipment) or training in period 𝑡. Thus, we use a 
dummy variable indicating whether the unit received the bonus in the previous quarter. 
Location: All units are in the UK, but some are located in relatively denser and busier areas 
(e.g. metropolitan areas, major ports). Such units may face higher competition by local rivals, thus strive 
harder for excellent performance compared to others within TruckBus’s network. Higher local 
competition may also lead them to invest more in training, so they can ‘sell’ their expertise to (potential) 
customers. For these reasons, the models include the logarithm of population density of the UK county 
in which the service unit is located. To capture further potential effects of location, we also include the 
distance (in miles) from the manufacturer’s headquarters, a dummy variable capturing whether the unit 
is located in an urban versus a rural area, regional dummies, and the percentage of jobless households 
in the respective unitary authority. However, the last three variables were found to be highly statistically 
insignificant in all models and were duly dropped. 
Time: The linear and quadratic terms of a time index were included in the models to control for 
the observed positive trend in both performance and training. A potential mechanism that generates the 
positive trend in performance is ‘learning-by-doing’ (Darr et al. 1995). 
Switch: Because at some point during the observed 19 periods, five units switched from 
outsourced to company-owned and four switched the other way, a dummy variable named switch, that 
takes the value of 1 for those which switched ownership, was also included. 
 
4.3 Study Design and Estimation Framework 
In a cross-sectional study, an observed positive relationship between training and performance 
could mean that either training increases performance, or that high performing units do more training 
due to those unobserved reasons (Wooldridge 2010). However, the longitudinal design employed here 
enables us to control for these unobserved unit-specific characteristics that affect both training and 
performance, such as managerial style and value of personal development (e.g. Birdi et al. 2008). 
In addition, the panel data structure allows us to correct for biases generated from a potentially 
reverse effect of service performance on the extent of training the units undertake in the next period, by 

 
21 
 
including the lagged dependent variable as an explanatory variable (Baltagi 2013). This dynamic 
framework also allows us to estimate what is known as true state dependence (Heckman and Borjas 
1980); the ‘true’ effect of past performance on the current one, which is often identified in longitudinal 
studies examining the effect of HR practices on performance (e.g. Van Iddekinge et al. 2009, Yin and 
Zajac 2004). The remainder of this section provides a detailed description of our estimation framework. 
 
Suppose that, for unit 𝑖 and time period 𝑡, service performance is given by the continuous latent 
measure 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗, which is linearly related to lagged performance, 𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
, a 𝐾× 1 vector of explanatory 
variables 𝐱𝑖𝑡 that consists of a training measure and covariates, unobserved time effects 𝜂𝑡, unobserved 
time invariant unit-specific heterogeneity 𝑢𝑖 and an idiosyncratic error 𝜖𝑖𝑡 which is assumed to be 
exogenous and standard normally distributed. That is: 
 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗= 𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
+ 𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡+ 𝜂𝑡+ 𝑢𝑖+ 𝜖𝑖𝑡, 
 
 
 (2) 
where 𝛼 and 𝛃 (a 1 × 𝐾 vector) are unknown parameters to be estimated. Instead of 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗, TruckBus 
observes the total number of KPIs achieved, according to the following threshold mechanism: 
 
where 𝜏0, 𝜏1, … , 𝜏5 are the threshold parameters, also to be estimated. Thus, TruckBus observes the 
ordinal indicator 𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝑗, if 𝜏𝑗< 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗≤𝜏𝑗+1, with 𝑗= 0,1, … ,4. Then: 
 
 Pr(𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝑗) = Pr(𝜏𝑗< 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗≤𝜏𝑗+1) = Pr(𝜏𝑗< 𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
+ 𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡+ 𝜂𝑡+ 𝑢𝑖+ 𝜖𝑖𝑡≤𝜏𝑗+1) 
 
 = Pr(𝜏𝑗−𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
−𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝜂𝑡−𝑢𝑖< 𝜖𝑖𝑡≤𝜏𝑗+1 −𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
−𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝜂𝑡−𝑢𝑖). 
Since 𝜖𝑖𝑡 is standard normally distributed, it follows that: 
Pr(𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝑗) = 𝛷(𝜏𝑗+1 −𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
−𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝜂𝑡−𝑢𝑖) −𝛷(𝜏𝑗−𝛼𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
−𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝜂𝑡−𝑢𝑖), (3) 
where 𝛷(⋅), is the cumulative standard normal distribution. 
Note that since 𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
 is unobserved, it is replaced by a 4 × 1 vector of the observed performance 
dummies at period 𝑡−1, 𝑷𝑖𝑡−1 = [𝑃1,𝑖𝑡−1, … , 𝑃4,𝑖𝑡−1], where the dummy for performance score equal 
to 0 is the base group. The unobserved time effects can be captured by introducing time dummies, but 
our results indicate that a linear trend, 𝑡, and a quadratic trend, 𝑡2, fit the data equally well. Importantly, 
we must deal with 𝑢𝑖, which is correlated with 𝑃𝑖𝑡−1
∗
 and probably with training and the other covariates. 

 
22 
 
Also, this dynamic framework gives rise to the so-called ‘initial conditions’ problem (Heckman 1981). 
We deal with both issues by combining Mundlak’s (1978) and Wooldridge’s (2005) approaches, setting: 
 
 
𝑢𝑖= 𝛅1𝐱̅𝑖+ 𝛅2𝑷𝑖1 + 𝑣𝑖, 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
where 𝐱̅𝑖 is a vector of the unit-specific means of all explanatory variables, 𝑷𝑖1 is the vector of 
performance dummies at the initial period 𝑡= 1 (capturing the ‘initial conditions’), and 𝑣𝑖 is assumed 
to be independent of all explanatory variables and normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 𝜎𝑣2 
(see also Contoyannis et al. 2004). As a result, equation (2) changes to, 𝑃𝑖𝑡
∗= 𝛂𝑷𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡+ 𝛾1𝑡+
𝛾2𝑡2 + 𝛅1𝐱̅𝑖+ 𝛅2𝑷𝑖1 + 𝑣𝑖+ 𝜖𝑖𝑡, and equation (3) becomes: 
 Pr(𝑃𝑖𝑡= 𝑗) = 𝛷(𝜏𝑗+1 −𝛂𝑷𝑖𝑡−1 −𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝛾1𝑡−𝛾2𝑡2 −𝛅1𝐱̅𝑖−𝛅2𝑷𝑖1 −𝑣𝑖) 
 
 
 
 
 − 𝛷(𝜏𝑗−𝛂𝑷𝑖𝑡−1 −𝛃𝐱𝑖𝑡−𝛾1𝑡−𝛾2𝑡2 −𝛅1𝐱̅𝑖−𝛅2𝑷𝑖1 −𝑣𝑖). (5) 
This is an Ordinal Probit model, where the linear index in 𝛷(⋅) has a Random Effects structure. 
The parameters of this model can be estimated by a conditional Maximum Likelihood Estimator. We 
estimate standard errors (SEs) robust to arbitrary intra-unit serial correlation in 𝜖𝑖𝑡, aka clustered SEs 
(Wooldridge 2010). As this model also allows for correlation between 𝑢𝑖 and the explanatory variables 
through equation 4, we refer to it as the Correlated Random Effects Ordinal Probit model, or CRE-OP. 
In this model, the estimated values of 𝛂 can be interpreted as estimates of the true state 
dependence and 𝛃 represents the partial effects of the explanatory variables on performance, as this 
model already controls for unit-specific unobserved heterogeneity and ‘initial conditions’ through the 
inclusion of 𝐱̅𝑖 and 𝑷𝑖1 respectively. The estimated 𝛅s provide some indication of the relationship 
between explanatory variables and unit-specific heterogeneity, 𝑢𝑖. 
 
Note that although in a linear panel data framework the Correlated Random Effects model is 
identical to the standard Fixed Effects model, in our non-linear setting, a standard Ordinal Probit Fixed 
Effects model is not available. However, the CRE-OP provides a close approximation to it. We believe 
that, together with the dynamic specification, our CRE-OP model allows us to eliminate most of the 
potential bias due to omitted variables, and due to the reverse effect of performance on training. 
 
5. Analysis and Results 

 
23 
 
5.1 Determinants of training 
To obtain an estimate of the causal effect of training on performance, one needs to control for 
all variables that are correlated with both the outcome and the explanatory variable of interest. We thus 
run a series of regressions using training flow as the dependent variable to determine which variables 
influence it, and therefore, which variables need to be ‘controlled for’ in our main regression models. 
The results presented in Section B of the online Appendix, indicate that high performing units 
in period 𝑡 tend to take more training in period 𝑡+ 1. This justifies the inclusion of the lagged 
performance score as a covariate in the models explaining service performance, since it is possible that 
lagged performance also impacts on current performance due to state dependence (see Section 4.3). In 
addition, as expected, company-owned service units take significantly more training courses, ceteris 
paribus. One can also see that most explanatory variables discussed in Section 4.2 affect the number of 
courses undertaken by a service unit, meaning that omitting them from the right-hand side of the 
performance regressions would compromise the reliability of the estimated coefficients of training, 
since the latter would be capturing part of those variables’ effect on service performance. 
 
5.2 The effect of training on service performance of company-owned and outsourced units 
Table 5 contains our base-line results, where the 5-level index of service performance is the 
dependent variable in all four model specifications. For ease of interpretation, instead of reporting the 
coefficients of the interaction terms, we report the training coefficients for company-owned and 
outsourced units separately, having also conducted Wald tests for the joint significance of the terms. 
Due to space limitations, only the coefficients of the most important variables are reported. Of the 
omitted results the following are worth noting. There is only a moderate size effect: busier units (in 
terms of service incidents) perform better, but the employee number proxy is insignificant. The 
coefficients of the two location variables are positive but insignificant (with p-values of around 0.2). 
Companies that received the bonus in the previous period are more likely to perform well, but the 
variable loses its significance if past performance is controlled for (since lagged bonus is proportional 
to lagged performance, lagged performance captures much of its effect). Using a Wald test of the joint 
null hypothesis, 𝛅𝟏= 𝟎, 𝛅𝟐= 𝟎, we find that the means of the time-varying regressors (and initial 

 
24 
 
conditions in the dynamic model) are jointly significant, providing evidence that unit-specific 
heterogeneity is important, and is also correlated with some of the explanatory variables. 
[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE] 
Model (1) captures the contemporaneous effect of the number of courses on performance 
without controlling for lagged performance and is only presented for comparative purposes. Model (2) 
presents the non-dynamic CRE-OP specification with training ‘stock’ and its quadratic term as the 
explanatory variables of interest. Here the quarter-by-quarter depreciation rate D is set to 20%, but the 
results are not sensitive to other realistic values of D between 10% and 50%. For outsourced units, the 
signs and statistical significance of the linear and quadratic terms indicate that service performance 
significantly increases with the accumulation of skills, but at a decreasing rate. For company-owned 
units there seems to be a weak linear effect (p-value=0.062). 
Model (3) is the dynamic specification of Model (1). It thus maintains number of courses as the 
training measure and adds lagged performance as a dummy variable for each performance level with 0 
being the base category. Again, for company-owned units, there is mild evidence of a training effect, 
since the linear and quadratic terms are jointly significant at the 5% level (Wald statistic of 8.23, p-
value=0.016). The effect is much larger and more significant for outsourced units (Wald statistic of 
14.35, p-value=0.001), and there is again evidence of an inverted U-shaped relationship. The turning 
point is at about 14 courses (but only around 1% of outsourced units have exceeded that number in a 
given period). Model (4) uses the aggregate number of training days per quarter, instead of the number 
of courses. Like Model (3), it suggests that training strongly affects the performance of outsourced 
service units in a non-linear way, while the effect is weaker (and linear) for company-owned. 
Past performance has a strong impact on present performance. The strongly significant and 
positive coefficients of the dummies indicating the achievement of 3 and 4 KPIs in period 𝑡−1, suggest 
that highly performing units are more likely to perform well again in period 𝑡. This can be interpreted 
as true state dependence; because service performance is immediately known by service units at the end 
of each quarter, it is a kind of visible feedback for their work. The still vivid ‘experience’ of superior 
performance in the current period, can boost employee morale and pride in one’s work, and shape 
employee behaviors that lead to similarly high levels of performance in the next period. This positive 

 
25 
 
experience may act as extra motivation for employees to try hard again toward excellent performance. 
Finally, the time trend and its quadratic are strongly significant, and their respective positive and 
negative signs indicate that performance increases due to ‘learning-by-doing’ but at a decreasing rate. 
An intuitive way to interpret the coefficients is by estimating and plotting the probabilities for 
any outcome 𝑗, allowing the explanatory variable of interest (training) to vary. To do this, we first plug 
in the estimated coefficients in the model, set 𝑣𝑖 to its mean value of 0 for each unit, and each variable 
(apart from training) to its actual value in the sample. This gives an estimated probability for outcome 
j, for each unit and value of training. We then take the mean of these probabilities allowing training to 
vary. In Figure 3, we present the predicted probabilities for outcome 4 only, the highest (and most 
frequent) level of performance, for Models (2), (3) and (4). All graphs indicate that with very little 
training, company-owned units are more likely to achieve a score of 4. As training increases, the 
probability of outsourced units to achieve all KPIs increases faster, quickly surpassing that of company-
owned ones. Figure 3b shows that, at around 14 courses per quarter, the probability of the highest level 
of performance for outsourced units has started to decrease but is still higher than for company-owned. 
Overall, this analysis provides support to Hypotheses 1 and 2b. However, by using the whole 
sample and including interaction terms between the training measures and ownership, we have assumed 
that the effects of all explanatory variables (apart from training) on performance are the same for both 
company-owned and outsourced units. Thus, as a robustness check, we split the sample into two groups, 
allowing for the possibility that company-owned and outsourced units are qualitatively different. The 
results, presented in the online Appendix (Section C), are in total agreement with the base-line results. 
[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE] 
 
5.3 Unit ownership and choice of training 
We have hypothesized that outsourced units are less constrained to choose courses, hence their 
training regimes will be qualitatively different, and skewed towards skills that have a relatively stronger 
impact on performance. To provide evidence on this, as a first step, we examine whether the proportions 
of technical (relative to non-technical) and of ‘first-time’ (relative to ‘repeated’) training courses differ 
between the two groups. We estimate separate Pooled OLS and Fixed Effects regression models with 

 
26 
 
the two proportions as outcome variables (Table 6). Controlling for the other explanatory variables (and 
unit-specific heterogeneity), the ownership dummy is significant in the technical skills regressions 
(Models 1a-c), but not in the ‘first-time’ skills regressions. This shows that, holding everything else 
constant, outsourced units take significantly more technical courses, in proportion, compared to 
company-owned ones, while the two groups do not differ in terms of ‘first-time’ versus ‘repeated’ 
training (even though outsourced units indeed choose proportionately more of the latter – Model 2c). 
In turn, the second step is to examine the differential effect of these types of training, for the two groups. 
[TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE] 
Table 7 presents the results of the dynamic CRE-OP specification after splitting the sample in 
company-owned versus outsourced and distinguishing between the different types of courses. The first 
set of models (Model 1) shows that non-technical training does not have a statistically significant impact 
on the performance of either group (even though the coefficient is larger in magnitude for outsourced). 
On the other hand, technical training has a strong and significant inverted U-shaped effect on the service 
performance of outsourced units, but a weaker and linear effect on the performance of company-owned. 
Model 2 suggests that ‘first-time’ courses have hardly any effect on the performance of company-owned 
units, in contrast to outsourced ones who seem to reap benefits from them. The effect of ‘repeated’ 
courses is positive and comparably large for both groups (and linear in nature). 
[TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE] 
There are two key observations from these results. First, outsourced units seemingly choose to 
spend a larger part of their training budget on technical courses relative to company-owned, as they 
recognize the strong and direct connection between being technically competent and achieving higher 
performance. Because their choice is unconstrained by the manufacturer, they can spend their resources 
in improving necessary and relevant technical abilities. For non-technical skills (which are found to be 
less impactful) they may resort to internal employee knowledge-sharing, or informal training (e.g. over 
the phone with the TruckBus service department). This provides support for H2a. 
Second, the two groups of service units do not differ significantly with respect to the choice of 
first-time versus repeated skills training, even though outsourced units choose proportionately more of 
the latter. However, the result reveals another aspect of the outsourced units’ strategic and 

 
27 
 
entrepreneurial thinking; they seem to understand the need to possess a wide variety of skills to keep 
up-to-date with new developments and be able to cope with the increased product sophistication and 
variability in the service encounter. Hence, in terms of skill variety they remain on a par with company-
owned units. The difference is that they make these skills pay dividends, in contrast to company-owned, 
whose ‘first-time’ courses are likely to be on one-off, unnecessary skills due to bureaucratic 
requirements. Therefore, even though the results do not lend further support for Hypothesis 2a, they 
provide an additional discussion point that is in line with our thesis. Namely, that independent units 
choose their training more strategically and reap more benefits from it. Finally, all four types of courses 
are more effective for outsourced service units, providing further support for H3. 
 
5.4 Robustness checks and further analysis 
To check whether our results are sensitive to alternative methodological choices and model 
specifications, we conducted a series of further robustness checks. They are detailed in Sections C-F of 
the online Appendix. Briefly, we repeat the base-line analysis but by using time dummies instead of a 
time trend to control for the effect of any possible period-specific events. We also experiment with 
different operationalizations of the performance outcome. In addition, we use two alternative 
approaches to deal with the endogeneity problem; a Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) approach and a 
dynamic linear panel data framework, treating the performance index as a continuous variable. In 
Section E, we use a matching estimator to match company-owned units with their most similar (in terms 
of training profiles) outsourced ones, and test for differences in performance. Section F is devoted to 
further probing of H2a specifically, by studying the changes in the choice of training of the nine service 
units that switched ownership status within the study timeframe. The results of all these checks are in 
line with those reported herein, adding credence to the main findings. 
 
6. Discussion and conclusions 
This work is positioned on the interface between OM and HRM. Following Boudreau et al. 
(2003), OM, and specifically the mixed-mode service delivery system of a servitized manufacturer, has 

 
28 
 
provided the context that explains or moderates the effect of training (a key HR practice). At the same 
time, behavioral insights stemming from the MOA framework and the literature on the transfer of 
training have been applied, in order to explain what could have potentially been treated as randomness 
or error variance under a purely OM lens, namely, the differences in the choice and effectiveness of 
training between company-owned and outsourced service units. As such, this work adds to the OM 
studies that have adopted MOA to illuminate phenomena such as knowledge exchange (e.g. Siemsen et 
al. 2008) and service outsourcing (Wuyts et al. 2015), by showing the model’s usefulness in elucidating 
the performance-enhancing potential of training in a mixed-mode service delivery system. Specifically, 
we contribute theoretically by drawing explicit connections between: a) The Motivation and 
Opportunity components of the model, b) salient findings from the research stream on the transfer of 
training, and c) emerging insights from the literature on plural forms of governance. This integration 
could be adopted, and possibly advanced theoretically and empirically, by interested scholars. In the 
reminder of this section we discuss the implications of the substantive findings for theory and practice. 
 
6.1 Discussion of the findings and managerial implications 
The findings derived from the analysis of panel data from the UK network of a major 
commercial vehicles manufacturer, can be summarized as follows: 
a. Training provided by the focal manufacturer has a positive effect on the service performance 
of the entire mixed-mode service network; 
b. Independent service units choose their training courses more wisely; 
c. As a result, and because of their higher motivation, independent units derive higher 
performance benefits from all types of training, i.e. they leverage training better. 
The positive association between training and the performance of company-owned units is 
hardly surprising, given the salient finding of the HRM literature that firms which provide training to 
their own employees will eventually see improvements in organization-level outcomes (Batt 2002, 
Mackelprang et al. 2012). On the other hand, the significant inverted U-shaped relationship between 
manufacturer-led (i.e., ‘outside’) training and the performance of outsourced service units has novel 
implications for service outsourcing theory and practice. Given the increasing attractiveness of this 

 
29 
 
strategy for manufacturers (Wuyts et al. 2015), manufacturer-led training presents itself as a non-
coercive mechanism that can improve the performance of independent service partners and ensure the 
effective provision of the PS offering. In such front-end service outsourcing triads (Zhang et al. 2015), 
effective service delivery by the partners means satisfied customers and a harmonious manufacturer-
customer relationship (Karatzas et al. 2017, Li and Choi 2009; Perdikaki et al. 2015). The manufacturer 
can thus institutionalize training to safeguard against the risks stemming from the self-interest of the 
customer-facing partners, such as cost-cutting and under-delivering in quality and customer value 
(Zhang et al. 2015). Motivating training with an appropriate compensation scheme conditional on 
service performance (that can partially offset the costs incurred by the partners) has worked well for the 
commercial vehicles manufacturer under study. This finding could be generalizable to similar contexts, 
wherein a manufacturer of complex industrial equipment assigns customer service and support to 
multiple independent parties. Firms in industries like commercial aviation, automotive, railway and 
defense also share the need for a broad geographical presence to effectively service their customer-
bases, which often happens through alliance partners (Baines et al. 2009, Kowalkowski et al. 2011). 
Second, our work suggests that the manufacturer should not directly control the choice of 
service partners when it comes to which skills to train. The operational autonomy afforded to outsourced 
units gives them the freedom to develop skills that ‘best fit’ their idiosyncratic local needs at any given 
time (Yin and Zajac 2004). These skills, which tend to be of a technical nature, are required on the job 
regularly (so, employees have the opportunity to apply them relatively more often) and are more closely 
linked to on-the-job performance improvements. On the other hand, the training undertaken by 
company-owned units is less optimal, since a) they are required to follow a uniform, ‘best-practices’ 
training policy that aims toward standardization and high system-level performance, while not catering 
for the idiosyncratic local needs of service units, and b) employee-managers have no incentive to deviate 
from the set template. Consequently, management might be sending employees to training that some 
may find pointless, or without a clear, strategic view as to exactly which types of skills will add value 
at the unit-level. Those less effective courses, in this context, seem to be the ones in non-technical 
subjects. It is worth noting that the results from our matching approach (part E of the online Appendix) 
suggest that not only do outsourced units differentiate between more and less effective categories of 

 
30 
 
courses, but they also seem to choose more optimally within those categories. This is because, when 
matched based on the number of technical, non-technical, first-time and repeated courses, company-
owned units significantly underperform compared to their peers. This means that in terms of the tension 
between standardization and local adaptation, a key theme in the literature on plural forms (Bradach 
1997, Sorenson and Sørensen 2001), this work provides support for local adaptation. Namely, it 
suggests that training is an HR practice over which decision rights had better reside with the third-
parties (Kaufmann and Eroglu 1998, Truss 2004). In tandem, because training is a costly investment 
with evident opportunity costs for them, their employees are relatively more motivated to learn and 
successfully apply their acquired skills. Ultimately, while dedicating comparatively fewer resources 
than company-owned units and achieving similarly consistent performance improvements, outsourced 
units have managed to leverage (all types of) training for human capital development more effectively. 
Third, our study contributes to the franchising literature, answering calls for the conduct of 
micro-level empirical studies that can improve our understanding of how HR practices (and their effects 
on unit-level performance) vary between company-owned and franchised units (Castrogiovanni and 
Kidwell 2010, Kellner 2017). Since mixed-ownership franchise systems are ubiquitous, and the 
tripartite franchisor – franchisee – customer relationship constitutes a service triad (Zhang et al. 2015), 
we see no reason why our findings cannot be generalized to that context. As such, this study validates 
and extends recent findings on the positive role of operational autonomy in unit-level performance 
within plural systems (Croonen et al. 2016a, Grünhagen et al. 2014). However, it has done so after: a) 
providing a solid theoretical foundation for the differential choice and effect of training, b) testing the 
hypotheses in a constrained empirical setting that eliminates industry and cultural influences, and c) 
investigating and singling out alternative explanations of the observed effects (e.g. reverse causality, 
unobserved unit-level heterogeneity) using robust econometric techniques. 
The findings have policy implications for servitized manufacturers facing the design of a 
mixed-mode service delivery system (Li et al. 2016). First, a centralized, ‘one size fits all’ approach to 
employee training of company-owned units that assumes homogeneity, may not be the optimal HR 
strategy. It may fail to recognize the context-specificity of the individual service unit (e.g. ‘typical’ 
customer, employee needs and preferences, skill shortages), leading to untargeted and less effective 

 
31 
 
training. Given the costs associated with running the courses, and the foregone revenues at the unit 
level, a more targeted approach may generate additional material benefits. For more appropriate choice 
of training, the manufacturer can empower the managers of its company-owned units to run their own, 
‘local’ needs assessments and emulate the entrepreneurial spirit of their outsourced counterparts. 
Therefore, firstly, it can delegate training choice at the unit-level, based on simple guiding principles or 
a loose framework with which training choice should be aligned; and secondly, since employee-
managers are prone to simply emulating ‘best practices’ and avoiding taking risks that would 
compromise their salary, it could link training to bonuses for unit- or employee-level performance 
improvements (Brand and Croonen 2010). More targeted training should make employees perceive the 
utility and value of the new knowledge and skills, as it is more likely to enhance relevant aspects of 
their work performance (Baldwin & Ford 1988, Burke and Hutchins 2007). Finally, to increase the 
chances of positive transfer, manufacturers can introduce additional interventions that increase the 
learner’s pre-training motivation and perceived self-efficacy, which are strong predictors of successful 
training transfer and, unlike cognitive ability, are malleable characteristics (Burke and Hutchins 2007). 
For outsourced service units, the estimated non-linear (positive but decreasing) effect of 
training suggests that there are diminishing returns from it. In this study context, after 10 courses on 
average, every additional one seems to produce negligible gains. This suggests that simply encouraging 
third-parties to do ‘more training’ is not the answer; rather, it is the ‘right’ trained skills (and possible 
combinations thereof) that considerably improve performance toward the manufacturer’s customer-
base. As such, manufacturers could even consider placing upper bounds in terms of how much training 
their partners can receive (which should depend on the context and the size of the service unit), to 
prevent over-excited or over-worried managers from spending excessive resources for only negligible 
gains. In front-end service outsourcing triads, high performance of the service partner is not just in its 
own interest, but also that of the manufacturer. This should also be the case then when it comes to the 
optimal allocation of resources for activities such as formal training. 
 
6.2. Limitations and further research 

 
32 
 
Despite the robustness of the main findings, this study is not exempt from limitations. Firstly, 
although the focus on a single manufacturer, industry and country has helped us eliminate several 
sources of heterogeneity that can confound the examined relationships, it may limit the generalizability 
of the results. Another barrier to generalizability is the fact that in this study context, service outsourcing 
is effectively manifested through franchising, where independent service units are small- and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) run by owner-managers. A question that arises is whether our findings hold 
in contexts where such units belong to large, specialized service firms, and are thus run by employee-
managers of the latter. These employee-managers may lack the incentives and motivation of single-unit 
owner-managers, and there is ongoing research in the franchising literature investigating this issue and 
its implications for unit-level performance (Croonen et al. 2016b). Relatedly, unlike TruckBus, some 
manufacturers may try to dictate the terms of training even for outsourced service units (Truss 2004). 
Although theory and practice suggest that the latter is a relatively less common setting, these contextual 
features suggest that to firmly establish the positive effect of manufacturer-led training on service 
performance, and the differential efficacy of training for company-owned and outsourced units, one 
should try to replicate this work in other manufacturers’ service networks. 
Secondly, we recognize that there may still be some unit-specific time-varying elements whose 
role has not been fully captured here due to data unavailability. For example, changes in other HR 
practices (e.g. job involvement, career planning), may be associated with both service performance and 
the extent of manufacturer-led training undertaken by the unit. Even though these are less likely to vary 
with time over our (relatively short) timeframe compared to the choice and extent of training, capturing 
their time-variant variation might produce more reliable estimates of the ‘true’ effect of training. This 
could also aid the identification of complementarities between training and those unit-level practices. 
Finally, although we have provided evidence that training increases the service performance of 
the supplier toward the manufacturer’s customer-base, hence it is beneficial for both customers and the 
manufacturer, it is not entirely clear if it has a net benefit for the suppliers. This is because we do not 
consider the price of the courses, or the foregone output costs of training during working hours. An 
obvious research direction is a cost-benefit analysis to determine whether the revenues associated with 
superior service performance outweigh total costs. 

 
33 
 
 
References 
Baines, T., A. Ziaee Bigdeli, O.F. Bustinza, V.G. Shi, J. Baldwin, K. Ridgway. 2017. Servitization: 
revisiting the state-of-the-art and research priorities. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 37 (2), 256–278. 
Baines, T., H. Lightfoot, P. Smart, S. Fletcher. 2013. Servitization of manufacture: Exploring the 
deployment and skills of people critical to the delivery of advanced services. Journal of 
Manufacturing Technology Management, 24 (4), 637–646. 
Baines, T., H. Lightfoot, J. Peppard, M. Johnson, A. Tiwari, E. Shehab, M. Swink. 2009. Towards an 
operations strategy for product-centric servitization. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 29 (5), 494–519. 
Balakrishnan, K., U. Mohan, S. Seshadri. 2008. Outsourcing of front-end business processes: Quality, 
information, and customer contact. Journal of Operations Management, 26 (2), 288–302. 
Baldwin, T.T., J.K. Ford. 1988. Transfer of training: A review and directions for future research. 
Personnel Psychology, 41, 63–105. 
Baldwin, T.T., J.K. Ford, B.D. Blume. 2009. Transfer of training 1988-2008: An updated review and 
new agenda for future research. In G.P. Hodgkinson & J.K. Ford (Eds.), International Review of 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology (24, 41-70). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Baltagi, B. 2013. Econometric analysis of panel data. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons. 
Batt, R. 2002. Managing customer services: Human resource practices, quit rates, and sales growth. 
Academy of Management Journal, 45 (3), 587–597. 
Birdi, K., C. Clegg, M. Patterson, A. Robinson, C. Stride, T. Wall, S. Wood. 2008. The impact of human 
resource and operational management practices on company productivity: a longitudinal study. 
Personnel Psychology, 61 (3), 467–501. 
Blumberg, M., C. Pringle. 1982. The missing opportunity in organizational research: Some implications 
for a theory of work performance. Academy of Management Review, 7 (4), 560–569. 
Blume, B.D., J.K. Ford, T.T. Baldwin, J.L. Huang. 2010. Transfer of training: A meta-analytic review. 
Journal of Management, 36 (4), 1065–1105. 
Boudreau, J., W. Hopp, J.O. McClain, L.J. Thomas. 2003. On the Interface Between Operations and 
Human Resources Management. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 5 (3), 179–202. 
Boxall, P., J. Purcell. 2008. Strategy and human resource management. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Bradach, J. 1997. Using the plural form in the management of restaurant chains. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 42, 276–303. 
Brand, M.J., E.P.M Croonen. 2010. Franchised and Small, the Most Beautiful of All; HRM and 
Performance in Plural Systems. Journal of Small Business Management, 48 (4), 605–626. 
Broekhuis, M., K. Scholten. 2018. Purchasing in service triads: the influence of contracting on contract 

 
34 
 
management. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38 (5), 1188–1204. 
Burke, L.A., H.M. Hutchins. 2007. Training transfer: An integrative literature review. Human Resource 
Development Review, 6 (3), 263–296. 
Castrogiovanni, G.J., R.E. Kidwell. 2010. Human Resource Management Practices Affecting Unit 
Managers in Franchise Networks. Human Resource Management, 49 (2), 225–239. 
Chase, R.B. 1981. The customer contact approach to services: theoretical bases and practical extensions. 
Operations Research, 21 (4), 698–705. 
Combs, C., Y. Liu, A. Hall, D. Ketchen. 2006. How much do high-performance work systems matter? 
A meta-analysis of their effects on organizational performance. Personnel Psychology, 59 (3), 501–
528. 
Conti, G. 2005. Training, productivity and wages in Italy. Labour Economics, 12 (4), 557–576. 
Cook, D., C. Goh, C. Chung. 1999. Service typologies: A state of the art survey. Production and 
Operations Management, 8 (3), 318–338. 
Contoyannis, P., A. M. Jones, N. Rice. 2004. The dynamics of health in the British Household Panel 
Survey. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19, 473–503. 
Croonen, E.P.M., M. Grünhagen, M.L. Wollan. 2016a. Best fit, best practice, or stuck in the middle? 
The impact of unit ownership on unit HR performance in franchise systems. International 
Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 12 (3), 697–711. 
Croonen, E.P.M., M.J. Brand, E.K.R.E. Huizingh. 2016b. To be entrepreneurial, or not to be 
entrepreneurial? Explaining differences in franchisee entrepreneurial behavior within a franchise 
system. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 12 (2), 531–553. 
Darr, E.D., L. Argote, D. Epple. 1995. The Acquisition, Transfer, and Depreciation of Knowledge in 
Service Organizations: Productivity in Franchises. Management Science, 41 (11), 1750–1762. 
De Menezes, L. M., S. Wood, G. Gelade. 2010. The integration of human resource and operation 
management practices and its link with performance: A longitudinal latent class study. Journal of 
Operations Management, 28 (6), 455–471. 
Facteau, J.D., G.H. Dobbins, J.E.A. Russell, R.T. Ladd, J.D. Kudisch. 1995. The influence of general 
perceptions of the training environment on pre-training motivation and perceived training transfer. 
Journal of Management, 21, 1–25. 
Foote N.W., J.R. Galbraith, Q. Hope, D. Miller. 2001. Making Solutions the Answer. McKinsey 
Quarterly, 3, 84–93. 
Ford, J.K., M.A. Quinones, D.J. Sego, J.S. Sorra. 1992. Factors affecting the opportunity to perform 
trained tasks on the job. Personnel Psychology, 45, 511–524. 
Forkmann, S., C. Ramos, S.C. Henneberg, P. Naudé. 2017. Understanding the service infusion process 
as a business model reconfiguration. Industrial Marketing Management, 60, 151–166. 
Goldstein, I. 1980. Training in work organizations. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 229−272. 
Goldstein, I. 2002. Training in Organizations: Needs Assessment, Development, and Evaluation. 

 
35 
 
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA. 
Grünhagen, M., M.L. Wollan, O. Dada, A. Watson. 2014. The moderating influence of HR operational 
autonomy on the entrepreneurial orientation–performance link in franchise systems. International 
Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 10 (4), 827–844. 
Guest, D. E. 2011. Human resource management and performance: still searching for some answers. 
Human Resource Management Journal, 21 (1), 3–13. 
Heckman, J. 1981. The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial conditions in 
estimating a time-discrete data stochastic process. In Manski, C., D. McFadden Eds. Structural 
Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Heckman, J., G. Borjas. 1980. Does Unemployment Cause Future Unemployment? Definitions, 
Questions and Answers from a Continuous Time Model of Heterogeneity and State Dependence. 
Economica, 47 (187), 247–283. 
Jiang, K., D. Lepak, J. Hu, J. Baer. 2012. How Does Human Resource Management Influence 
Organizational Outcomes? A Meta-analytic Investigation of Mediating Mechanisms. Academy of 
Management Journal, 55 (6), 1264–1294. 
Johnstone, S., A. Wilkinson, A. Dainty. 2014. Reconceptualizing the service paradox in engineering 
companies: Is HR a missing link? IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 61 (2), 275–284. 
Kamien, M., N. Schwartz. 2012. Dynamic optimization. Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. 
Karatzas, A., M. Johnson, M. Bastl. 2017. Manufacturer-supplier relationships and service performance 
in service triads. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 37 (7), 950–969. 
Kaufmann, P.J., S. Eroglu. 1998. Standardization and Adaptation in Business Format Franchising. 
Journal of Business Venturing, 14, 69–85. 
Kellner, A. 2017. Human resource management standardisation and adaptation in franchises. Service 
Industries Journal, 37 (9–10), 545–566. 
Kidwell, R.E., A. Nygaard. 2011. A Strategic Deviance Perspective on the Franchise Form of 
Organizing. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 35 (3), 467–482. 
Kim, H., D. Hur, T. Schoenherr. 2015. When Buyer-Driven Knowledge Transfer Activities Really 
Work: A Motivation–Opportunity–Ability Perspective. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 51 
(3), 33–60. 
Kowalkowski, C., D. Kindström, L. Witell. 2011. Internalisation or externalisation? Examining 
organisational arrangements of industrial services. Managing Service Quality: An International 
Journal, 21 (4), 373–391. 
Kreye, M.E. 2017. Can you put too much on your plate? Uncertainty exposure in servitized triads. 
International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 37 (12), 1722–1740. 
Lafontaine, F. 1992. Agency theory and franchising: Some empirical results. Rand Journal of 
Economics, 23, 263–283. 
Li, M., T. Choi. 2009. Triads In Services Outsourcing: Bridge, Bridge Decay And Bridge Transfer. 

 
36 
 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 45 (3), 27–39. 
Li, X., Y. Li, X. Cai, J.Shan. 2016. Service Channel Choice for Supply Chain: Who is Better off by 
Undertaking the Service? Production and Operations Management, 25 (3), 516–534. 
Lim, D.H., M.L. Morris. 2006. Influence of trainee characteristics, instructional satisfaction, and 
organizational climate on perceived learning and training transfer. Human Resource Development 
Quarterly, 17 (1), 85–115. 
Mackelprang, A.W., J. Jayaram, K. Xu. 2012. The influence of types of training on service system 
performance in mass service and service shop operations. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 138 (1), 183–194. 
Michael, S.C. 2000. The effect of organizational form on quality: The case of franchising. Journal of 
Economic Behavior and Organization, 43, 295–318. 
Miller, D., Q. Hope, R. Eisenstat, N. Foote, J. Galbraith. 2002. The problem of solutions: Balancing 
clients and capabilities. Business Horizons, 45 (2), 3–12. 
Mumdžiev, N., J. Windsperger. 2011. The Structure of Decision Rights in Franchising Networks: A 
Property Rights Perspective. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 35 (3), 449–465. 
Mundlak, Y. 1978. On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data. Econometrica, 46 (1), 69–
85. 
Neely, A. 2008. Exploring the Financial Consequences of the Servitization of Manufacturing. 
Operations Management Research, 1 (2), 103–118. 
Noe, R.A., N. Schmitt. 1986. The influence of trainee attitudes on training effectiveness: Test of a 
model. Personnel Psychology, 39, 497–523. 
Oliva, R., R. Kallenberg. 2003. Managing the transition from products to services. International Journal 
of Service Industry Management, 14 (2), 160–172. 
Oliveira, P., A.V. Roth. 2012. Service orientation: the derivation of underlying constructs and measures. 
International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 32 (2), 156–190. 
Paiola, M., H. Gebauer, B. Edvardsson. 2012. Service Business Development in Small- to Medium-
Sized Equipment Manufacturers. Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing, 19 (1), 33–66. 
Parmigiani, A., S.S. Holloway. 2011. Actions speak louder than modes: antecedents and implications 
of parent implementation capabilities on business unit performance. Strategic Management Journal, 
32 (5), 457–485. 
Perdikaki, O., D.X. Peng, G.R. Heim. 2015. Impact of Customer Traffic and Service Process 
Outsourcing Levels on e-Retailer Operational Performance. Production and Operations 
Management, 24 (11), 1794–1811. 
Raja, J.Z., T. Frandsen. 2017. Exploring servitization in China: Challenges of aligning motivation, 
opportunity and ability in coordinating an external service partner network. International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 37 (11), 1654–1682. 
Roth, A.V., L.J. Menor. 2003. Insights Into Service Operations Management: a Research Agenda. 

 
37 
 
Production and Operations Management, 12 (2), 145–164. 
Rouiller, J.Z., I.L. Goldstein. 1993. The relationship between organizational transfer climate and 
positive transfer of training. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 4 (4), 377–390. 
Rudberg, M., J. Olhager. 2003. Manufacturing networks and supply chains: an operations strategy 
perspective. Omega, 31 (1), 29–39. 
Shane, S.A. 1998. Explaining the distribution of franchised and company-owned outlets in franchise 
systems. Journal of Management, 24, 717–739. 
Siemsen, E., A.V. Roth, S. Balasubramanian. 2008. How motivation, opportunity, and ability drive 
knowledge sharing: The constraining-factor model. Journal of Operations Management, 26 (3), 426–
445. 
Simon, C., L. Blume. 2010. Mathematics for economists. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Skaggs, B., M. Youndt. 2004. Strategic Positioning, Human Capital, And Performance in Service 
Organizations: a customer interaction approach. Strategic Management Journal, 25 (1), 89–99. 
Sorenson, O., J.B. Sørensen. 2001. Finding the right mix: franchising, organizational learning, and chain 
performance. Strategic Management Journal, 22 (6–7), 713–724. 
Spohrer, J., P.P. Maglio. 2008. The emergence of service science: Toward systematic service 
innovations to accelerate co-creation of value. Production and Operations Management, 17 (3), 238–
246. 
Tate, W. L., W. van der Valk. 2008. Managing the performance of outsourced customer contact units. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 14 (3), 160–169. 
Tharenou, P., A.M. Saks, C. Moore. 2007. A review and critique of research on training and 
organizational-level outcomes. Human Resource Management Review, 17 (3), 251–273. 
Truss, C. 2004. Who’s in the driving seat? Managing human resources in a franchise firm. Human 
Resource Management Journal, 14 (4), 57–75. 
Ulaga, W., J.M. Loveland. 2014. Transitioning from product to service-led growth in manufacturing 
firms: Emergent challenges in selecting and managing the industrial sales force. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 43 (1), 113–125. 
Van der Valk, W., J. van Iwaarden. 2011. Monitoring in service triads consisting of buyers, 
subcontractors and end customers. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 17 (3), 198–206. 
Van Iddekinge, C., G. Ferris, P. Perrewé, A. Perryman, F. Blass, T. Heetderks. 2009. Effects of selection 
and training on unit-level performance over time: A latent growth modeling approach. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 94 (4), 829–843. 
Vandermerwe, S., J. Rada. 1988. Servitization of business: Adding value by adding services, European 
Management Journal, 6 (4), 314–324. 
Wall, T., S. Wood. 2005. The romance of human resource management and business performance, and 
the case for big science. Human Relations, 58 (4), 429–462. 
Whetten, D.A., T. Felin, B.J. King. 2009. The practice of theory borrowing in organizational studies: 

 
38 
 
current issues and future directions. Journal of Management, 35 (3), 537–63. 
Windahl, C., P. Andersson, C Berggren, C. Nehler. 2004. Manufacturing firms and integrated solutions: 
characteristics and implications. European Journal of Innovation Management, 7 (3), 218–228. 
Winter, S.G., G. Szulanski, D. Ringov, R.J. Jensen. 2012. Reproducing Knowledge: Inaccurate 
Replication and Failure in Franchise Organizations. Organization Science, 23 (3), 672–685. 
Wooldridge, J. 2005. Simple solutions to the initial conditions problem in dynamic, nonlinear panel 
data models with unobserved heterogeneity. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 20, 39–54. 
Wooldridge, J. 2010. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press. 
Wuyts, S., A. Rindfleisch, A. Citrin. 2015. Outsourcing customer support: The role of provider 
customer focus. Journal of Operations Management, 35, 40–55. 
Wynstra, F., M. Spring, T. Schoenherr. 2015. Service triads: A research agenda for buyer-supplier-
customer triads in business services. Journal of Operations Management, 35, 1–20. 
Yamnill, S., G.N. McLean. 2001. Theories Supporting Transfer of Training. Human Resource 
Development Quarterly, 12 (2), 195–208. 
Yin, X., E.J. Zajac. 2004. The strategy/governance structure fit relationship: theory and evidence in 
franchising arrangements. Strategic Management Journal, 25 (4), 365–383. 
Zhang, J.J., B. Lawrence, C.K. Anderson. 2015. An agency perspective on service triads: Linking 
operational and financial performance. Journal of Operations Management, 35, 56–66. 
 
Tables and Figures 
Table 1 – The four KPIs and their descriptions 
1. Ministry of 
Transport (MOT) 
pass rate (Quality) 
The % of vehicles passing the MOT test in the 1st attempt. A vehicle’s MOT history is 
linked to its 'Operator license' and affects the customer’s Operator Compliance Risk 
Score (OCRS). The target was adjusted upwards 3 times during the study timeframe. 
 
2. Breakdown 
attendance 
(Waiting time) 
Relates to the time it takes a service unit to attend a broken-down vehicle under contract 
in its area of remit. 95% of breakdowns should be attended within 60 minutes. 
 
3. Preventive 
maintenance 
inspection 
(Proactiveness) 
Relates to the obligatory 6-weekly inspection that all commercial vehicles in the UK 
must pass. For each unit, 90% of the vehicles under its responsibility must complete the 
test in the week in which they are due (minimizing ‘slippage’ due to neglect). 
 
4. Unscheduled 
repair or 
maintenance 
(Responsiveness) 
Relates to unplanned vehicle ‘downtime’ and involves the use of a TruckBus-specific 
system. If the repair is anticipated to take longer than 12 hours, or if required parts 
cannot be delivered by the next working day, the unit must register the incident on the 
system in no more than 0.5 days, with no exception. TruckBus can then provide 
technical help or missing parts as an emergency to speed up vehicle turnaround. 
 
Table 2 – Distribution of performance for company-owned and outsourced units (in %) 
Performance 
C-o. 
Out. 
Total 
0 
.91 
2.23 
1.86 
1 
5.47 
10.08 
8.80 
2 
18.84 
16.18 
16.92 
3 
31.91 
31.65 
31.73 
4 
42.86 
39.86 
40.69 
 
Table 3 – Distribution of № of courses for company-owned and outsourced units (in %) 
№ of Courses 
C-o. 
Out. 
Total 

 
39 
 
0 
8.21 
24.91 
20.27 
1 
8.81 
17.89 
15.37 
2 
10.64 
14.15 
13.18 
3 
7.6 
10.06 
9.38 
4 
8.51 
10.29 
9.8 
5 
7.29 
7.13 
7.18 
6 
8.51 
3.98 
5.24 
7 
6.38 
3.51 
4.31 
8 
6.38 
1.05 
2.53 
9 
5.78 
1.87 
2.96 
10+ 
21.88 
5.15 
9.80 
 
Table 4 – Descriptive statistics by company-owned and outsourced units 
Variables 
Mean 
Mean 
Differences 
Std. Deviation 
Min. – Max. 
 
C-o. 
Out. 
 
C-o. 
Out. 
C-o. 
Out. 
Performance from 0 (lowest) to 
4 (highest) 
3.10 
2.97 
.135 
.953 
1.08 
0 – 4 
0 – 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of courses (flow) 
6.66 
2.95 
3.71*** 
6.28 
3.40 
0 – 51 
0 – 26 
% of courses for technical skills 
72.16 
80.91 
-8.74*** 
30.54 
31.38 
0 – 100 
0 – 100 
% of courses for ‘first-time’ 
skills 
46.53 
55.36 
-8.83* 
33.35 
37.91 
0 – 100 
0 – 100 
Cumulative № of courses (stock) 
25.55 
10.91 
14.64*** 
19.95 
10.01 
0 – 81.09 
0 – 81.8 
№ of training days 
14.94 
7.01 
7.93*** 
12.91 
8.15 
0 – 81 
0 – 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of incidents (proxy for size) 
72.31 
49.23 
23.08*** 
65.22 
60.25 
0 – 304 
0 – 313 
№ of employees trained (proxy 
for size) 
23.84 
15.05 
8.78** 
13.45 
10 
7 – 51 
4 – 57 
Bonus achieved (=1 if yes, =0 if 
no) 
.687 
.642 
.045 
- 
- 
0 – 1 
0 – 1 
County density (in ppl/km2) 
1,235.37 
1,098.5 
136.78 
1,505.1 
1,391.2 
73.18 – 
5,223 
39 – 5,223 
Distance (from headquarters in 
miles) 
201 
155.18 
45.82 
127.89 
106.93 
0 – 498 
0 – 551 
№ of service hours sold to 
TruckBus 
2,538.16 
1,757.8 
780.31** 
1,403.7 
1893.5 
0 – 6,909.3 
31.8 – 
15,043.9 
For the mean differences column, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, based on clustered (by unit) standard errors 
 
Table 5 – Base-line results: The effect of training on service performance 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Variables 
№ of courses 
(static) 
Training stock 
(static) 
№ of courses 
(dynamic) 
№ of training days 
(dynamic) 
 
 
 
 
 
C-o. training 
.0333 
.0426* 
.0272 
.0175 
 
(0.0267) 
(0.0228) 
(0.0280) 
(0.0156) 
C-o. training squared 
-.00013 
-.00039 
-.00008 
-.00008 
 
(0.00069) 
(0.00037) 
(0.00074) 
(0.00026) 
Out. training 
.0914*** 
.0803*** 
.0851*** 
.0389*** 
 
(0.0234) 
(0.01602) 
(0.0240) 
(0.0091) 
Out. training squared 
-.00310** 
-.00082*** 
-.00301** 
-.00050** 
 
(0.00135) 
(0.00018) 
(0.00140) 
(0.00023) 
Performance at 𝑡−1 
(base dummy is Performance=0) 
 
 
 
 
Performance = 1 
 
 
-.0336 
-.0410 
 
 
 
(0.2269) 
(0.2315) 
Performance = 2 
 
 
.1075 
.0972 

 
40 
 
 
 
 
(0.1996) 
(0.2051) 
Performance = 3 
 
 
.5908*** 
.5840*** 
 
 
 
(0.2189) 
(0.2226) 
Performance = 4 
 
 
.9777*** 
.9704*** 
 
 
 
(0.2554) 
(0.2587) 
 
 
 
 
 
Time 
.1676*** 
.0816** 
.1304*** 
.1324*** 
 
(0.0329) 
(0.0331) 
(0.0295) 
(0.0294) 
Time squared 
-.00492*** 
-.00190 
-.00374*** 
-.00389*** 
 
(0.00147) 
(0.00141) 
(0.00130) 
(0.00130) 
№ of observations 
1,118 
1,118 
1,116 
1,116 
№ of clusters 
64 
64 
64 
64 
Log pseudolikelihood 
-1,186.7 
-1,179.5 
-1,163.5 
-1,161.7 
Wald stat c-o. 
11.88*** 
6.56** 
8.23** 
6.63** 
Wald stat out. 
17.64*** 
25.69*** 
14.35*** 
20.66*** 
Wald stat. (for 𝛅1 = 𝟎, 𝛅2 = 𝟎) 
96.42*** 
82.42*** 
133.54*** 
137.18*** 
Robust (clustered by unit) standard errors to account for serial correlation in the idiosyncratic error term within units are 
presented in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
Notes: All models include a constant, all explanatory variables, the unit-specific means of the time-varying variables and 
interaction terms between the training variables and the ownership dummy (=1 for outsourced units). The dynamic 
specifications also include performance in period 1 (initial period) as explanatory variables. 
‘Wald stat c-o.’ and ‘Wald stat out.’ are the Wald stats for the null hypothesis that training, and training squared have no 
joint effect on performance for company-owned and outsourced companies respectively. 
 
Table 6 – Proportion of technical training and proportion of ‘first-time’ training 
 
Variables 
(1) 
(2) 
Proportion of Technical training 
Proportion of First-time training 
(a) POLS 
(b) POLS 
(c) FE 
(a) POLS 
(b) POLS 
(c) FE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ownership dummy (=1 if outsourced) 
.0877*** 
.1117*** 
.0775* 
.0863* 
-.0242 
-.0352 
 
(0.0261) 
(0.0288) 
(0.0427) 
(0.0452) 
(0.0313) 
(0.0589) 
Explanatory variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time dummies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of observations 
907 
907 
907 
907 
907 
907 
№ of clusters 
64 
64 
64 
64 
64 
64 
R squared 
0.0169 
0.3952 
0.3754 
0.0126 
0.3744 
0.3072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Robust (clustered by unit) standard errors to account for serial correlation in the idiosyncratic error term within units and 
heteroskedasticity are presented in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
Notes: All models include a constant and all explanatory variables are included in the Training equations (see Table B in the 
Appendix). 
 
Table 7 – Technical vs. non-technical training and first-time vs. repeated training 
 
Variables 
(1) 
(2) 
Technical vs. Admin 
First-time vs. Repeated 
C-o. 
Out. 
C-o. 
Out. 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of Technical courses 
.0380** 
.0847*** 
 
 
 
(0.0175) 
(0.0277) 
 
 
№ of Technical courses squared 
 
-.0030* 
 
 
 
 
(0.0016) 
 
 
№ of Non-technical courses 
.0096 
.0340 
 
 
 
(0.0207) 
(0.0270) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of First-time courses 
 
 
.0441 
.1263** 

 
41 
 
 
 
 
(0.0591) 
(0.0563) 
№ of First-time courses squared 
 
 
-.0063* 
-.0196** 
 
 
 
(0.0038) 
(0.0091) 
№ of Repeated courses 
 
 
.0415** 
.0587*** 
 
 
 
(0.0178) 
(0.0210) 
 
 
 
 
 
№ of observations 
314 
804 
314 
804 
№ of clusters 
20 
53 
20 
53 
Log pseudolikelihood 
-320.29 
-829.73 
-319.41 
-829.32 
 
 
 
 
 
Wald stat for effect of technical training 
4.71** 
10.77*** 
 
 
Wald stat for effect of admin training 
0.21 
1.58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wald stat for effect of first-time training 
 
 
3.58 
5.30* 
Wald stat for effect of repeated training 
 
 
5.46** 
7.81*** 
Robust (clustered by unit) standard errors to account for serial correlation in the idiosyncratic error term within units 
are presented in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
Notes: All models include a constant, all explanatory variables, including past performance and initial conditions, and 
the unit-specific means of the time-varying variables. ‘№ of Technical courses squared’ is not included in Model (1) 
for company-owned, as it provides a very bad fit. The quadratic of ‘№ of Non-technical courses’ is also excluded, as 
it is very insignificant for both c-o. and out. units. 
 
Figure 1 – Average performance of company-owned 
versus outsourced units 
Figure 2 – Average training of company-owned 
versus outsourced units 
 
Figure 3 – Predicted probabilities of achieving a performance score of 4 for both groups by training