TITLE: Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition for the Time Window Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2024.0750
---

Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition for the Time Window
Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem
Citation for published version (APA):
Celik, S., Martin, L., Schrotenboer, A., & van Woensel, T. (2025). Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition for
the Time Window Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem. Transportation Science, 59(2), 210-228.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2024.0750
Document license:
TAVERNE
DOI:
10.1287/trsc.2024.0750
Document status and date:
Published: 01/03/2025
Document Version:
PublisherŌĆÖs PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
ŌĆó A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
ŌĆó The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
ŌĆó The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 ŌĆó Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 ŌĆó You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 ŌĆó You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the ŌĆ£TaverneŌĆØ license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

This article was downloaded by: [131.155.24.24] On: 01 April 2025, At: 23:04
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Transportation Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition for the Time
Window Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem
┼×ifa ├ćelik; , Layla Martin, Albert H. Schrotenboer, Tom Van Woensel
To cite this article:
┼×ifa ├ćelik; , Layla Martin, Albert H. Schrotenboer, Tom Van Woensel (2025) Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition
for the Time Window Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem. Transportation Science 59(2):210-228. https://
doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2024.0750
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-
Terms-and-Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use or
systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval,
unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the articleŌĆÖs accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or support
of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright ┬® 2025, INFORMS
Please scroll down for articleŌĆöit is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations
research (O.R.) and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning
opportunities for individual professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use
O.R. and analytics tools and methods to transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

Exact Two-Step Benders Decomposition for the Time 
Window Assignment Traveling Salesperson Problem
┼×ifa C┬Ėelik,a,* Layla Martin,a,b Albert H. Schrotenboer,a,b Tom Van Woensela,b 
aSchool of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands; bEindhoven Artificial Intelligence 
Systems Institute, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands 
*Corresponding author 
Contact: s.celik@tue.nl, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5744-082X (┼×C┬Ė); l.martin@tue.nl, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4580-9498 (LM); 
a.h.schrotenboer@tue.nl, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8365-2204 (AHS); t.v.woensel@tue.nl, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4766-2346
(TVW) 
Received: September 7, 2023 
Revised: June 11, 2024; December 2, 2024 
Accepted: January 21, 2025 
Published Online in Articles in Advance: 
February 12, 2025 
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2024.0750 
Copyright: ┬® 2025 INFORMS
Abstract. Next-day delivery logistics services are redefining the industry by increasingly 
focusing on customer service. Each logistics service providerŌĆÖs challenge is jointly optimiz┬Ł
ing time window assignment and vehicle routing for such next-day delivery services. To 
do so in a cost-efficient and customer-centric fashion, real-life uncertainty, such as stochas┬Ł
tic travel times, needs to be incorporated into the optimization process. This paper focuses 
on the canonical optimization problem within this context: the time window assignment 
traveling salesperson problem with stochastic travel times (TWATSP-ST). It belongs to 
two-stage, stochastic, mixed-integer programming problems with continuous recourse. We 
introduce two-step Benders decomposition with scenario clustering (TBDS) as an exact 
solution methodology for solving such stochastic programs. The method utilizes a new 
two-step decomposition along the binary and continuous first stage decisions and intro┬Ł
duces a new scenario-retention strategy that combines and generalizes state-of-the-art 
Benders approaches and scenario-clustering techniques. Extensive experiments show that 
TBDS is superior to state-of-the-art approaches in the literature. It solves TWATSP-ST 
instances with up to 25 customers to optimality. It provides better lower and upper bounds 
that lead to faster convergence than existing state-of-the-art methods. We use TBDS to 
analyze the structure of the optimal solutions. By increasing routing costs only slightly, 
customer service can be improved tremendously driven by smartly alternating between 
high- and low-variance travel arcs to reduce the impact of delay propagation throughout 
the executed vehicle route.
Funding: A. H. Schrotenboer has received support from the Dutch Science Foundation [Grant 
VI.Veni.211E.043]. 
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2024.0750. 
Keywords:
time window assignment ŌĆó vehicle routing ŌĆó partial Benders decomposition ŌĆó Benders dual decomposition ŌĆó
stochastic programming
1. Introduction
Logistics service providers (LSPs) face the daily chal┬Ł
lenge of delivering goods to customers cost-effectively. 
For years, their emphasis has been on minimizing oper┬Ł
ational costs. However, competition and globalization 
require shifting from a purely cost-minimizing mindset 
to balancing cost and service quality. One approach to 
increase customer service is to assign and communicate 
a delivery time window well in advance, for example, 
the evening before delivery in the case of next-day par┬Ł
cel delivery. For LSPs, this implies that vehicle routes 
and time windows must be decided upon simulta┬Ł
neously. Providing a reliable time window for custo┬Ł
mers is essential as they will organize their dependent 
planning processes based upon these in-advance com┬Ł
municated time windows (Jabali et al. 2015, Spliet and 
Gabor 2015). For instance, the workforce may be sched┬Ł
uled in the case of retail replenishment, or production 
plans may need to be altered in case of repairs by 
technicians.
In practice, providing reliable time window assign┬Ł
ment and vehicle routing decisions is complex as travel 
times are inherently stochastic. Consequently, the vehi┬Ł
cle routing and time window assignment cannot be 
considered independently; a slightly longer vehicle 
route could result in a much better time window 
assignment performance and vice versa. The canonical 
optimization problem addressing this joint issue is the 
time window assignment traveling salesperson prob┬Ł
lem with stochastic travel times (TWATSP-ST), which 
asks for jointly minimizing vehicle routing and time 
window assignment costs considering stochastic travel 
210 
TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE 
Vol. 59, No. 2, MarchŌĆōApril 2025, pp. 210ŌĆō228 
ISSN 0041-1655 (print), ISSN 1526-5447 (online) 
https://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/trsc 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

times. The TWATSP-ST aligns with the active research 
stream on vehicle routing that considers time window 
assignment as an integral part of the optimization 
problem (see, e.g., Jabali et al. 2015, Spliet, Dabia, and 
Van Woensel 2018, Vareias, Repoussis, and Tarantilis 
2019) rather than solely adhering to exogenously given 
time window constraints (see, e.g., Paradiso et al. 2020, 
W┬©olck and Meisel 2022).
The TWATSP-ST can be formulated as a two-stage, 
mixed-integer, stochastic program. Two-stage stochas┬Ł
tic programs involve initial first stage decisions before 
uncertainty is resolved and second stage recourse deci┬Ł
sions after uncertainty is realized. The objective is to 
minimize the expected cost associated with both sets of 
decisions. Regarding the TWATSP-ST, its two-stage, sto┬Ł
chastic program comprises binary and continuous first 
stage decision variables (i.e., routing and time window 
assignment) and continuous second stage decision vari┬Ł
ables related to time window violation. Currently, no 
exact solution method exists for this problem, and we, 
therefore, lack an understanding of how to combine 
time window assignment and vehicle routing optimally. 
In this paper, we present a new exact solution methodol┬Ł
ogy for solving the TWATSP-ST, namely, two-step 
Benders decomposition with scenario clustering (TBDS). 
Our TBDS is an exact solution method specifically 
designed to solve the TWATSP-ST. Extensive computa┬Ł
tional experiments demonstrate that TBDS outperforms 
state-of-the-art approaches such as Benders dual decom┬Ł
position and partial Benders decomposition. We can 
optimally solve instances with up to 25 customers and 
show how integrating the two decisions (compared 
with previous sequential heuristics) improves the deci┬Ł
sion quality comprising travel costs, time window 
width, and time window violations. Our approach also 
automatically caters to delay propagation throughout 
the execution of a vehicle route by solving the TWATSP- 
ST to optimality. This has either not been accounted for 
(Vareias, Repoussis, and Tarantilis 2019) or only been 
studied with exogenously given time windows (Ehmke, 
Campbell, and Urban 2015). Finally, we numerically 
show that the structure of the optimal solution smartly 
divides the high-variance travel-time arcs throughout 
the route.
Our new TBDS method explicitly exploits the fact 
that we have both continuous and binary first stage 
decision variables. It is general and can be applied 
to other two-stage, stochastic programs involving 
binary and continuous first stage decisions. Benders 
decomposition-inspired approaches, going back to the 
seminal works of Benders (1962), Dantzig (1955), and 
Van Slyke and Wets (1969), are commonly utilized to 
decompose the problem across scenarios. Recent signif┬Ł
icant advancements, including Benders dual decompo┬Ł
sition (Rahmaniani et al. 2020), tailored Lagrangian 
cuts (Chen and Luedtke 2022), and partial Benders 
decomposition (Crainic et al. 2021), renewed interest in 
these techniques.
The effectiveness of our novel TBDS stems from intro┬Ł
ducing two new, fundamental ideas that each indepen┬Ł
dently already significantly further current Benders 
methods: First, we introduce a new two-step decomposi┬Ł
tion approach that handles the first stage binary and con┬Ł
tinuous decision variables to generate optimality and 
feasibility cuts. Second, TBDS proposes a new scenario- 
retention strategy that integrates recent advancements in 
scenario-clustering techniques for stochastic program┬Ł
ming (see, e.g., Keutchayan, Munger, and Gendreau 
2020, Keutchayan, Ortmann, and Rei 2023), hereby gener┬Ł
alizing the principles of partial Benders decomposition.
The first key concept of TBDS involves decomposing 
the two-stage, stochastic program into a master prob┬Ł
lem (MP) and N + 1 subproblems, in which N repre┬Ł
sents the number of scenarios. The initial subproblem 
corresponds to the first step of the two-step decomposi┬Ł
tion, focusing solely on the binary decision variables 
from the master problem and considering a single con┬Ł
tinuous subproblem. This first step offers a notable 
advantage by producing a more robust solution for the 
continuous first stage decisions, which is then utilized 
in combination with the binary first stage solution in 
the subsequent N single-scenario subproblems. Conse┬Ł
quently, this two-step approach generates significantly 
stronger multioptimality cuts, leading to faster conver┬Ł
gence to the optimal solution. We theoretically show 
the benefit of this two-step decomposition.
The second key concept of TBDS is a new scenario- 
retention strategy that generalizes partial Benders 
decomposition by incorporating representative sce┬Ł
narios into the master problem. These representative 
scenarios are carefully selected, allowing us to opti┬Ł
mize our decisions in the first stage before the uncer┬Ł
tainty is observed. The selection of the scenario set 
involves a trade-off: a larger set of scenarios reflects 
underlying uncertainty better but increases computa┬Ł
tional complexity. There is growing interest in scenario 
generation and reduction methods to address this 
trade-off. These methods can be categorized as either 
distribution-driven, such as those proposed by, for 
example, Kleywegt, Shapiro, and Homem-de Mello 
(2002), Henrion, K┬©uchler, and R┬©omisch (2009), and 
Pflug and Pichler (2015), or problem-driven as dis┬Ł
cussed by, for example, Henrion and R┬©omisch (2022), 
Keutchayan, Ortmann, and Rei (2023), and this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we introduce the TWATSP-ST and provide the 
mathematical model. Next, Section 3 presents the TBDS 
methodology, explaining the two key innovations within 
TBDS. Section 4 specifies how TBDS is used to solve the 
TWATSP-ST. Section 5 provides computational results 
on the performance of TBDS and managerial results 
associated with solving the TWATSP-ST. We conclude 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
211 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

this paper and provide avenues for future research in 
Section 6.
2. Problem Definition
The TWATSP-ST concerns the a priori joint optimiza┬Ł
tion of a vehicle route and the assignment of time win┬Ł
dows to a given set of customers in the presence of 
travel time uncertainty.
The TWATSP-ST is defined on a graph G ┬ł (V,A), 
where V ┬ł {0,:::,n} is the set of nodes and A :┬ł {(i,j) Ōłł
V ├Ś V : i ŌēĀj} is the set of arcs. Node 0 acts as the depot 
at which the vehicle starts its tour, and all other nodes 
represent customers. The vehicle has a shift duration of 
length T. Each arc (i,j) ŌłłA has a known distance dij Ōēź0. 
Each customer i ŌłłV+ :┬ł V \ {0} faces a deterministic 
service time si Ōēź0. We assume that travel times over 
the arcs are stochastic with known distribution. Let ╬Š ┬ł
{tij}(i,j)ŌłłA represent the stochastic travel time vector on 
a scenario sample space Ōä”. We denote the particular 
realization of the travel time over arc (i,j) ŌłłA in sce┬Ł
nario Žē ŌłłŌä”as ╬ŠŽē ┬ł {tijŽē}(i,j)ŌłłA. In this way, we intrin┬Ł
sically cater for delay propagation unlike Vareias, 
Repoussis, and Tarantilis (2019).
In this context, the TWATSP-ST makes two interde┬Ł
pendent, a priori decisions: (i) A vehicle route visiting 
all customers in V+, starting and ending at the depot 
and (ii) a time window assignment yi ┬ł {ys
i,ye
i} for each 
customer i ŌłłV+. The objective of the TWATSP-ST is to 
minimize a weighted sum of expected earliness and 
lateness at the assigned time windows, the width of the 
assigned time window, the expected shift overtime of 
the vehicle, and the total distance the vehicle travels.
We encode the routing decision with variables xij Ōłł
{0,1} for all (i,j) ŌłłA. Together with the time window 
assignment variables y, these form the first stage deci┬Ł
sions in the TWATSP-ST. After the realization of the 
uncertainty, we can determine the earliness eiŽē and 
lateness liŽē to the arrival time of customer i relative to 
the assigned time window yi for each customer i ŌłłV+, 
the departure time wiŽē from a customer that is the time 
after customer i is served, and the shift overtime oŽē rel┬Ł
ative to the shift duration length T. We define zŽē ┬ł
{wiŽē,eiŽē,liŽē,oŽē}iŌłłV+ to encapsulate all second stage deci┬Ł
sion variables.
Then, we formulate the TWATSP-ST as the following 
two-stage, stochastic, mixed-integer program with con┬Ł
tinuous recourse:
min
X
iŌłłV
X
jŌłłV\{i}
dijxij +
X
jŌłłV+
Žā( ye
i  ys
i) +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽēQ(x, y, Žē)
(1) 
s:t:
X
iŌłłV\{ j}
xij ┬ł
X
iŌłłV\{ j}
xji ┬ł 1
ŌłĆj ŌłłV,
(2) 
X
iŌłłS
X
jŌłēS
xij Ōēź1
S ŌŖåV, 1Ōēż|S| Ōēż|V+|,
(3) 
ye
i  ys
i Ōēźsi
ŌłĆi ŌłłV+,
(4) 
xij Ōłł{0, 1}
ŌłĆ(i, j) ŌłłA,
(5) 
ye
i, ys
i ŌłłR+
ŌłĆi ŌłłV+:
(6) 
Here, Žā Ōēź0 is an exogenously set weight factor. Objec┬Ł
tive (1) consists of the travel and weighted time win┬Ł
dow assignment costs and the second stage recourse 
function Q(x,y,Žē). Constraints (2) ensure that the vehi┬Ł
cle visits each customer exactly once. Constraints (3) 
eliminate subtours, and Constraints (4) ensure that the 
time window assignment respects the service time at 
each customer.
The recourse function Q(x,y,Žē), as part of Objective 
(1), equals the expected shift overtime cost and the 
expected incurred earliness and lateness cost because 
of the time window assignment and vehicle routing 
decision:
Q(x,y,Žē) :┬ł min
X
jŌłłV+
Žå(ejŽē + ljŽē) + ŽłoŽē
(7) 
s:t:
wjŽē ŌēźwiŽē + tijŽē + sj  (1  xij)M
ŌłĆ(i,j) ŌłłA,
(8) 
ejŽē Ōēźys
j  wjŽē + sj
ŌłĆj ŌłłV+,
(9) 
ljŽē ŌēźwjŽē  ye
j
ŌłĆj ŌłłV+,
(10) 
oŽē ŌēźwjŽē + tj0Žē  T
ŌłĆj ŌłłV+,
(11) 
w0Žē ┬ł t0,
(12) 
wjŽē,ejŽē,ljŽē ŌłłR+
ŌłĆj ŌłłV+,
(13) 
oŽē ŌłłR+:
(14) 
Here, Žł and Žå are exogenous weight factors for the ear┬Ł
liness and lateness concerning the time window assign┬Ł
ment and the overtime of the vehicle, respectively. The 
objective function of the second stage problem (7) is a 
function of first stage variables (x,y) and a scenario 
Žē ŌłłŌä”. Constraints (8)ŌĆō(11) determine each customerŌĆÖs 
departure time, earliness, lateness, and overtime. We set 
M in (8)ŌĆō(10) equal to the longest total travel time among 
all scenarios. We require tours to start from the depot at 
a predetermined time t0 (Constraints (12)). Constraints 
(5), (6), (13), and (14) define the variable domain. Model 
(1)ŌĆō(14) is a two-stage, stochastic, mixed-integer pro┬Ł
gram with continuous recourse that fully defines the 
TWATSP-ST.
3. Exact TBDS
This section introduces our TBDS solution method. 
Before we explain the main novelties of TBDS in Sec┬Ł
tions 3.1 and 3.2, we first briefly introduce Benders 
decomposition, outlining the essential formulations 
upon which TBDS builds. To ensure a clear understand┬Ł
ing and compact presentation of TBDS for solving the 
TWATSP-ST, we present it using generic, scenario- 
based, two-stage, stochastic programming notation. Sce┬Ł
nario independence (reflecting the realization of random 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
212 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

vectors) ensures that a two-stage, stochastic program is 
decomposable over scenarios. The result is a single mas┬Ł
ter problem and one or multiple subproblems, depend┬Ł
ing on the selected decomposition among the scenarios. 
These subproblems represent the second stage recourse 
problem of the decomposed scenarios Žē ŌłłŌä”. Here, Ōä”is 
a finite set of scenarios or realized random events. Let ╬Š 
represent a random vector on a finite scenario sample 
space Ōä”. Specifically, ╬ŠŽē denotes the particular realiza┬Ł
tion of the random vector in scenario Žē ŌłłŌä”with pŽē as 
the associated probability.
In this paper, we consider general, two-stage, sto┬Ł
chastic, mixed-integer programs with relatively com┬Ł
plete continuous recourse:
min
x, y, z

cŌŖżx + dŌŖży +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽē f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē|WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”, (x, y) ŌłłX, zŽē ŌłłRm
+
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”:

,
(15) 
where x ŌłłZn1
+ denotes a vector of first stage integer deci┬Ł
sion variables, y ŌłłRn2
+ denotes a vector of first stage con┬Ł
tinuous decision variables, and zŽē ŌłłRm denotes a vector 
of continuous second stage decision variables for each sce┬Ł
nario Žē ŌłłŌä”. Furthermore, c ŌłłRn1,d ŌłłRn2, and fŽē ŌłłRm 
are the cost vectors of the first and second stage decisions; 
WŽē ŌłłRŌäō├Śn1,TŽē ŌłłRŌäō├Śn2, and SŽē ŌłłRŌäō├Śm are the technol┬Ł
ogy matrices capturing the constraints that link the first 
and second stage decisions; and hŽē ŌłłRŌäō is the right-hand 
side vector associated with the linking constraints. We 
denote the first stage constraints and their domains 
compactly as (x,y) ŌłłX :┬ł {(x,y) ŌłłZn1
+ ├Ś Rn2
+ |Ax + By Ōēźa}, 
where A ŌłłRk├Śn1, B ŌłłRk├Śn2, and a ŌłłRk. We assume that 
the above problem is primal feasible and bounded.
Remark 1. Comparing the general, two-stage, sto┬Ł
chastic program with the TWATSP-ST, the x variables 
are the first stage routing decisions, and the y vari┬Ł
ables are the first stage time window assignment deci┬Ł
sions. The zŽē variables are the second stage decision 
variables that capture the time window exceedances 
at each customer, the vehicle departure time, and the 
vehicle overtime for each travel time scenario Žē ŌłłŌä”.
To use Benders decomposition for solving Problem 
(15), we introduce an auxiliary decision variable ╬ĖŽē 
that approximates the second stage cost for a scenario 
Žē ŌłłŌä”and, subsequently, decomposes the problem 
into a master problem and multiple subproblems. We 
define the MP as
MP ┬ł min
x,y,╬ĖŽē
cŌŖżx + dŌŖży +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽē╬ĖŽē
(16) 
s:t:
╬ĖŽē Ōēź╬ĖŽē
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”,
(17) 
(x,y) ŌłłX,
(18) 
╬ĖŽē ŌłłR
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”,
(19) 
Feasibility and Optimality Cuts:
(20) 
Here, ╬ĖŽē is a lower bound on ╬ĖŽē to avoid unbounded┬Ł
ness for each Žē ŌłłŌä”. The feasibility and optimality cuts 
(20) bound the value of ╬ĖŽē in terms of linear equations 
in (x, y) by the logic of Benders decomposition. These 
cuts are generated in the following manner.
The solutions of the MP define lower bounds for the 
true two-stage, stochastic program (15). We solve the 
MP in a branch-and-cut manner. That is, at each integer 
branch-and-bound node, the MP solution values xŌłŚand 
yŌłŚare fixed in the second stage subproblem SP(xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ,Žē)
for each scenario Žē:
SP(xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ) :┬ł
min
xŽē,yŽē,zŽē{ f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē|WŽēxŽē + TŽēyŽē + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē,
xŽē ┬ł xŌłŚ,yŽē ┬ł yŌłŚ, xŽē ŌłłRn1
+ ,yŽē ŌłłRn2
+ ,zŽē ŌłłRm
+}:
(21) 
Note that the above problem is equivalent to the true 
two-stage, stochastic program (15) without the first 
stage constraints as they are redundant because of the 
constraints {xŽē ┬ł xŌłŚ, yŽē ┬ł yŌłŚ}. We directly decompose 
this subproblem over each scenario and write xŽē and 
yŽē in the constraint set. Benders decomposition then 
takes the extreme points or the direction of the extreme 
rays (in case of infeasibility) of the feasible region of 
the dual problem of (21) to generate optimality and 
feasibility cuts, respectively. These cuts are added to 
the MP and reduce the gap between the MP and the 
true two stage, stochastic program (15). This procedure 
is followed at each integer branch-and-bound node, 
solving the MP, ensuring it converges to the optimal 
integer solution.
We now make the optimality and feasibility cuts 
specific. For feasible MP solutions xŌłŚand yŌłŚ, let ╬ĮŽē and 
╬ĘŽē denote the dual multipliers to the constraints xŽē ┬ł
xŌłŚand yŽē ┬ł yŌłŚin SP(xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ,Žē), respectively. By solving 
the dual of Problem (21), we retrieve the extreme 
point `╬ĮŽē and `╬ĘŽē, and accordingly, a standard multiop┬Ł
timality cut can be derived:
╬ĖŽē Ōēźf ŌŖż
Žē `zŽē + (x  `xŽē)ŌŖż`╬ĮŽē + (y  `yŽē)ŌŖż`╬ĘŽē,
(22) 
where (`xŽē, `yŽē, `zŽē) is the optimal primal solution of 
SP(xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ,Žē).
If Problem (21) is infeasible for the first stage solu┬Ł
tions xŌłŚand yŌłŚ, indicating that the dual problem is 
unbounded, we utilize the dual of Problem (21) and 
generate feasibility cuts with the unbounded extreme 
ray of the feasible region of the dual problem to cut the 
solution (xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ) off from the MP. To generate the feasi┬Ł
bility cut, we solve the following feasibility problem:
min
x,y,z,╔ø{1ŌŖż╔ø|WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē + ╔ø ŌēźhŽē
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”, x ┬ł xŌłŚ,y ┬ł yŌłŚ,zŽē ŌłłRm
+,╔ø ŌłłRŌäō
+}:
(23) 
Note that the feasibility problem has not been decom┬Ł
posed over the various scenarios. This generates a 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
213 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

feasibility cut of the form
0 Ōēź1ŌŖż╦ś╔ø + (x  ╦śx)ŌŖż╦ś╬╗ + (y  ╦śy)ŌŖż╦ś╬▓,
(24) 
where ╦ś╔ø, ╦śx, and ╦śy refer to the values of ╔ø, y, and x in the 
optimal solution to the feasibility problem (23). Here, ╦ś╬╗ 
and ╦ś╬▓ are dual solutions to the constraints x ┬ł xŌłŚand 
y ┬ł yŌłŚ, respectively, and 1 is a vector of ones of size Ōäō.
The optimality and feasibility cuts (22) and (24) are 
added to the MP (i.e., Equation (20)) if the current MP 
solution is violating any of those cuts. Otherwise, Prob┬Ł
lem (15) is solved to optimality. This solution process 
sums up what is often referred to as the multicut ver┬Ł
sion of the L-shaped method (Birge and Louveaux 
1988; also, see Van Slyke and Wets 1969, Gendreau et al. 
1998 for the single-cut version wherein the scenario- 
based cuts generated at each iteration are aggregated 
into a single cut).
Adding optimality and feasibility cuts iteratively 
removes all guidance regarding the continuous first 
stage decision variables y concerning the second 
stage in the first iterations from MP. Regarding the 
TWATSP-ST, the first stage time-window assignment 
solutions y are not guided by the underlying travel 
time uncertainty. As a result, the MP solutions in 
early iterations are poor in terms of their lower 
approximations to the associated recourse cost encap┬Ł
sulated in the second stage subproblems. Moreover, 
these initial MP solutions might also be far from cost- 
efficient in the second stage. The solution process can 
become unduly slow because violated cuts are added 
only after solving the current MP. In the following 
section, we discuss two new strategies to enhance the 
efficiency of the Benders decomposition algorithm 
for solving two-stage, mixed-integer, stochastic pro┬Ł
grams with continuous recourse. First, we outline a 
new decomposition strategy to provide a strength┬Ł
ened version of the standard multioptimality cuts 
(22) in Section 3.1. After that, in Section 3.2, we dis┬Ł
cuss a new scenario-retention strategy for improving 
the MP lower bound.
3.1. Two-Step Decomposition for Strengthened 
Multioptimality Cuts
We now detail our newly proposed two-step decompo┬Ł
sition technique to strengthen the standard multiop┬Ł
timality cut (22). To do so, we consider an alternative 
master problem, MP ŌĆō 2:
MP-2 :┬ł
min
x, y, ╬ś, ╬Ė cŌŖżx + ╬ś
(25) 
s:t:
╬ś ŌēźdŌŖży +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽē╬ĖŽē,
(26) 
╬ĖŽē Ōēź╬ĖŽē
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”,
(27) 
(x, y) ŌłłX,
(28) 
Feasibility and Optimality cuts,
(29) 
╬ś ŌłłR+,
(30) 
╬ĖŽē ŌłłR
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”:
(31) 
In MP-2, we define the auxiliary decision variable ╬ś, 
which is a lower approximation of the cost associated 
with the continuous first stage decision variable y and 
the recourse cost, that is, dŌŖży + P
ŽēŌłłŌä”pŽē f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē. Clearly, 
P
ŽēŌłłŌä”╬ĖŽē is a lower approximation of P
ŽēŌłłŌä”pŽē f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē, so 
it follows directly that it is valid to impose ╬ś ŌēźdŌŖży+
P
ŽēŌłłŌä”pŽē f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē. Thus, MP ŌĆō 2 is equivalent to the original 
problem (15).
We define the following aggregated subproblem 
(AP) to derive optimality cuts:
AP(x) ┬ł min
x, y, z{dŌŖży +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽēf ŌŖż
Žē zŽē|WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”, x ┬ł x, y ŌłłY(x), zŽē ŌłłRm
+},
(32) 
where Y(x) :┬ł {y ŌłłRn2
+ |Ax + By Ōēźa} defines the domain 
of the y variables for AP. Notice that AP considers only 
the integer master problem solution x as input and 
optimizes over the continuous first stage decision vari┬Ł
able y with all the second stage decision variables of 
the complete scenario set Ōä”. We do not suffer from not 
decomposing AP over each scenario because it is a lin┬Ł
ear program and, thus, easy to solve computationally. 
Including all scenarios provides more information, 
resulting in a relatively good first stage solution of the 
continuous first stage decision variable y.
The core idea of the two-step decomposition in 
TBDS is as follows. Let y be the optimal solution of 
AP(x) for a feasible solution x of MP ŌĆō 2. Then, we con┬Ł
sider the subproblem
SP(x,y,Žē) :┬ł
min
xŽē,yŽē,zŽē{ f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē|WŽēxŽē + TŽēyŽē + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē,
xŽē ┬ł x,yŽē ┬ł y, xŽē ŌłłRn1
+ ,yŽē ŌłłRn2
+ ,zŽē ŌłłRm
+},
(33) 
which is similar to Subproblem (21) but takes the opti┬Ł
mal solution y from AP(x) instead of taking the optimal 
solution yŌłŚdirectly from MP-2 (or MP) as an input. 
Then consider the optimal MP-2 solution x and the 
optimal solution y to AP(x) and let ╦£╬ĮŽē and ╦£╬ĘŽē denote 
the dual multipliers to the constraints xŽē ┬ł x and yŽē ┬ł
y in SP(x,y,Žē), respectively. By solving the dual of 
Problem (33), we retrieve the extreme points ╦£╬ĮŽē and 
╦£╬ĘŽē. Accordingly, we derive a strengthened multioptim┬Ł
ality cut:
╬ĖŽē Ōēźf ŌŖż
Žē ╦£zŽē + (x  ╦£xŽē)ŌŖż╦£╬ĮŽē + (y  ╦£yŽē)ŌŖż╦£╬ĘŽē,
(34) 
where (╦£xŽē, ╦£yŽē, ╦£zŽē) is the optimal primal solution of 
SP(x,y,Žē).
To summarize the differences between the tradi┬Ł
tional approach of deriving multioptimality cuts and 
our two-step approach of deriving strengthened multi┬Ł
optimality cuts, we summarize the two procedures: 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
214 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

i. The traditional procedure solves MP ŌĆō 2 (or MP) 
to obtain xŌłŚand yŌłŚand then solves SP(xŌłŚ,yŌłŚ,Žē) to 
derive a standard multioptimality cut (22).
ii. Our two-step approach solves MP-2 to obtain x, 
solves AP(x) to obtain y, and then solves SP(x,y,Žē) to 
obtain the strengthened multioptimality cut (34).
In the following, we provide theoretical insight on 
why our two-step procedure is beneficial compared with 
the standard approach. We characterize the improve┬Ł
ment gained by following our two-step decomposition 
technique to derive the strengthened multioptimality cut 
(34) compared with deriving the standard multioptimal┬Ł
ity cut (22). In the interest of brevity, we use ZŽē :┬ł {zŽē Ōłł
Rm
+ |WŽēxŽē + TŽēyŽē + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē for some yŽē ŌłłRn2
+ ,xŽē ŌłłZn1
+ }
and ╦£X ┬ł X Ōł®{(x,y) ŌłłZn1
+ ├Ś Rn2
+ |WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē :
for some zŽē ŌłłRm
+} to represent the feasible region of the 
SP(┬Ę, ┬Ę ,Žē) for Žē ŌłłŌä”and to indicate the domain of the y 
variables constrained by the z variables, respectively.
The following proposition shows the benefit of tak┬Ł
ing our two-step decomposition compared with a clas┬Ł
sic decomposition. That is, we show the improvement 
gained by restraining the continuous first stage vari┬Ł
ables y by taking their solution via AP(┬Ę) instead of 
directly deriving a multioptimality cut for arbitrary 
dual vectors ╦å╬Į and ╦å╬Ę.
Proposition 1. Let ╦å╬Į ŌłłRn1 and ╦å╬Ę ŌłłRn2 be any dual multi┬Ł
pliers feasible for SP(┬Ę, ┬Ę ,Žē). The strengthened multioptim┬Ł
ality cut is at least ŌłåŌēź0 units tighter than the standard 
multioptimality cut in which
Ōłå┬ł
min
zŽēŌłłconv(Z)
(xŽē,yŽē)Ōłłconv( ╦£X )
{ f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē  xŌŖż
Žē ╦å╬Į  yŽē
ŌŖż╦å╬Ę}

min
zŽēŌłłconv(Z)
(xŽē,yŽē)Ōłłconv(X)
{ f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē  xŌŖż
Žē ╦å╬Į  yŽē
ŌŖż╦å╬Ę}:
(35) 
The proof is given in the online supplement. The intui┬Ł
tion of the proposition is that the left minimization 
term is derived from the strengthened optimality cut 
that considers (xŽē,yŽē) Ōłłconv( ╦£X ), which ensures that yŽē 
is restricted to be the solution of AP(┬Ę), whereas the 
right minimization term is derived from the standard 
optimality cut.
Besides using the AP (32) to generate the strength┬Ł
ened multioptimality cuts, we can also use AP to gener┬Ł
ate another set of optimality cuts by following the same 
logic as for deriving cuts based on Problem (32). Work┬Ł
ing in a branch-and-cut scheme, we consider an 
arbitrary node of the branch-and-bound tree and the 
corresponding solution x of subproblem AP. Let ┬Ą be 
the optimal value of the dual multipliers associated 
with the constraints x ┬ł x in AP. If AP is infeasible 
for x, we generate the feasibility cut (24). On the 
other hand, if the primal subproblem (AP) returns a fea┬Ł
sible solution (y,z), we derive a so-called generalized 
Benders optimality cut:
╬ś ŌēźdŌŖży +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”
pŽē f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē + (x  x)ŌŖż┬Ą:
(36) 
We illustrate and provide insights into the benefits 
of the proposed cut-generation strategy with a toy 
example.
Example 1. Consider the following toy example:
min
2ŌēżyŌēż8
xŌłłZ+,z, {y + z : 2x  3y + 5z Ōēź17,3y + 2z Ōēź10,
2x  z Ōēź10,  5x + 10y+ 2z Ōēź11,x + y + 2z Ōēź15}:
The optimal solution of the problem is x ┬ł 2, y ┬ł 2, 
z ┬ł 5.5 with a cost of 7.5. In Figure 1, we demonstrate 
the cuts generated in each iteration in the (x, y, z) 
space over the y ┬ł 2 plane. In Figure 1(a), we show the 
generalized Benders optimality cuts; in Figure 1(b), 
we show the strengthened multioptimality cuts; and 
in Figure 1(c), we show the standard multioptimality 
cuts. The color of the cuts refers to the iteration in 
which they are added as explained later.
Figure 1(c) shows that relying on standard Benders 
multioptimality cuts, we must generate four cuts to 
reach the optimal solution. As part of our TBDS ap┬Ł
proach, the strengthened multioptimality cuts only 
require three cuts to converge to the optimal solution. 
The first iteration produces an identical cut for all three 
optimality cuts. The reason is that the x solution for the 
first iteration is zero, which causes the y values from 
the MP and AP to be the same, which is two. Using the 
strengthened multioptimality cuts at the second itera┬Ł
tion, we increase the y value from 2 to 4.125. As seen in 
the figure, this elevates the x value and cuts off a large 
part of the feasible region. This cut is later implemen┬Ł
ted in the settings with generalized Benders optimality 
and standard multioptimality cuts. Therefore, they re┬Ł
quire additional iterations to converge to the optimal 
value. Details of each iteration are provided in the on┬Ł
line supplement.
3.2. A New Scenario-Retention Strategy for 
Improving the MP Lower Bound
The second key innovation within our TBDS method is 
a new scenario-retention strategy to enhance the MP 
lower bound. Relatively complete continuous recourse 
in stochastic, mixed-integer programs, as the TWATSP- 
ST possesses, typically entails weak bounds and many 
(superfluous) iterations of generating cuts as the MP 
loses all the information with the second stage vari┬Ł
ables (Rahmaniani et al. 2017). We adopt and general┬Ł
ize the idea of partial Benders decomposition (Crainic 
et al. 2021) to overcome this issue. In line with partial 
Benders decomposition, we include second stage 
constraints associated with a subset of scenarios Ōä”MP, 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
215 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

via constraints {WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”MP} by 
defining zŽē ŌłłRm
+, ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”MP in the MP. However, par┬Ł
tial Benders decomposition designs the set Ōä”MP using a 
row-covering strategy to retain scenarios from Ōä”to 
eliminate many feasibility cuts. Instead, we determine 
a representative scenario subset Ōä”MP. To pick the sce┬Ł
narios from the scenario set in a smart way to improve 
the MP lower bound, we propose using scenario clus┬Ł
tering as a scenario-retention strategy. We utilize the 
new promising approach proposed by Keutchayan, 
Ortmann, and Rei (2023), but in contrast to them, we 
use it within a Benders decomposition approach. To 
our knowledge, our paper is the first to introduce this 
concept for improving the lower bound of the MP 
within a Benders decomposition context. In the follow┬Ł
ing, we detail the exact scenario-retention strategy.
The representative scenarios in the master problem 
Ōä”MP ┬ł Ōä”1
MP Ōł¬Ōä”2
MP comprise actual scenarios Ōä”1
MP ŌŖåŌä”
and artificial scenarios Ōä”2
MP. Artificial scenarios are the 
result of convex combinations of actual scenarios.
We first detail how to determine Ōä”1
MP. The first step 
is to cluster the scenario set Ōä”. The second step is to 
select the representative scenarios from each of the 
clusters, which together define Ōä”1
MP. This is formalized 
in Definition 1.
Definition 1. Let K be the number of clusters. The set 
Ōä”1
MP ┬ł {r1,:::,rK} is constructed as follows: 
Step 1. Compute the opportunity-cost matrix V ┬ł
(Vij)|Ōä”|├Ś|Ōä”| , where
Vij ┬ł SP((╦åxi, ╦åyi),Žēj)
ŌłĆ(i,j) ŌłłŌä”, 
where (╦åxi, ╦åyi) is the optimal solution of the one-scenario 
subproblem:
( ╦åxi, ╦åyi) Ōłłarg min
x,y
SP(x,y,Žēi)
ŌłĆi ŌłłŌä”:
Step 2. Find a partition of the set Ōä”into K clusters 
C1,:::,CK and their representative scenarios r1 ŌłłC1, 
:::,rK ŌłłCK such that
rk Ōłłargmin |Ck |
|Ōä”| Vrk,rk 
1
|Ck |
X
jŌłłCk
Vrk,j


:
(37) 
By minimizing the clustering error (37), we create 
clusters that best fit the average cost function of all 
clusters. We provide an equivalent mixed-integer pro┬Ł
gram to solve Equation (37) in the online supplement. 
The reader is referred to Keutchayan, Ortmann, and 
Rei (2023) for more details.
The procedure in Definition 1 adds K representative 
scenarios into the MP by means of constraints {WŽēx 
+TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”1
MP}. In the context of the 
TWATSP-ST, we observe that this typically leads to 
clustering travel-time realizations that lead to similar 
routes. This reduces the root node optimality gap by 
improving the linear relaxation of the master prob┬Ł
lem. However, the value of K should be carefully 
selected. A K that is too large may lead to overpopu┬Ł
lating the master problem, increasing the solution 
time.
Additionally, we construct artificial scenarios Ōä”2
MP 
based on scenarios in Ōä”SP ┬ł Ōä”\ Ōä”MP. Adding artificial 
scenarios into the master problem affects the first stage 
variables. The goal is to improve the lower bound. To 
generate artificial scenarios Žē ŌłłŌä”2
MP, we use convex 
combinations of scenarios in Ōä”SP and add the con┬Ł
straints {WŽēx + TŽēy + SŽēzŽē ŌēźhŽē ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”2
MP} by defin┬Ł
ing zŽē ŌłłRm
+, ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”2
MP to the MP.
Definition 2. For Žē ŌłłŌä”SP, let ╬▒Žē
Žē Ōēź0, such that P
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP 
╬▒Žē
Žē ┬ł 1. Then, the realization of random vector for 
Figure 1. (Color online) Performance of Different Optimality Cuts in Solution Space of the LP Master Problem 
(a) 
(b)
(c)
Notes. (a) Generalized Benders optimality cut. (b) Strengthened multioptimality cuts. (c) Standard multioptimality cuts.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
216 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

artificially generated scenario Žē ŌłłŌä”2
MP is defined as
WŽē ┬ł
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
╬▒Žē
ŽēWŽē,
TŽē ┬ł
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
╬▒Žē
ŽēTŽē,
SŽē ┬ł
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
╬▒Žē
ŽēSŽē:
We can guarantee the same objective value of Problem 
(15) and improve the lower bound on ╬ĖŽē for Žē ŌłłŌä”SP 
as shown in Crainic et al. (2021), by including artificial 
scenarios and defining the second stage decision vari┬Ł
ables for an artificial scenario as f ŌŖż
Žē zŽē ┬ł P
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP╬▒Žē
Žē╬ĖŽē 
in the MP. Convex combinations of scenarios, as sug┬Ł
gested by Crainic et al. (2021), can create dominance 
relationships among scenarios, resulting in fewer fea┬Ł
sibility cuts and a considerable reduction in the opti┬Ł
mality gap upon termination. This technique also 
improves the number of instances that can be solved 
optimally within the time limit. Overall, including a set 
of scenarios Ōä”MP in the master problem can strengthen 
it and lead to faster convergence. They disclose several 
methods to create the artificially generated scenario Žē; 
for this application, we choose to continue with choos┬Ł
ing random values of ╬▒Žē
Žē.
3.3. The TBDS Algorithm
In this section, we provide the algorithmic explanation 
of our proposed method. We embed the two key novel┬Ł
ties, as explained in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, in a branch- 
and-cut algorithm. In addition, we use strengthened 
feasibility and optimality cuts as proposed by Rahma┬Ł
niani et al. (2017).
Algorithm 1 (TBDS) 
1. Input: AP(┬Ę), {SP(┬Ę,Žē)}ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
2. Output: (x,y,╬ś)
3. Initialize ╬ś ┬ł Ōł×, ╬ĖŽē ┬ł Ōł×
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”SP,
4. Start a callback procedure
5. Callback:
6. if (x,yŌłŚ) ŌłēX then
7. 
if AP(x) is a finite number then
8. 
Generate generalized Benders optimality cut 
(36), add to the MP
9. 
Obtain y from AP(x)
10. 
Solve SP(xŌłŚ,y,Žē) and generate strengthened 
multioptimality cut (34), add to the MP
11. 
else
12. 
Generate the feasibility cut (24)
13. 
end if
14. else
15. 
if xŌłŚcontains subtours then
16. 
Add subtour elimination constraint of DFJ 
formulation
17. 
end if
18. 
if AP(x) is a finite number then
19. 
if ╬śŌłŚ< AP(x) then
20. 
Generate generalized Benders optimality 
cut (36), add to the MP
21. 
for Žē ŌłłŌä”SP do
22. 
Obtain y from AP(x)
23. 
if ╬ĖŌłŚ
Žē < SP(x,y,Žē) then
24. 
Generate strengthened multioptimal┬Ł
ity cut (34), add to the MP
25. 
end if
26. 
end for
27. 
else
28. 
The solution (x,y) is optimal
29. 
end if
30. 
else
31. 
Generate the feasibility cut (24)
32. 
end if
33. end if.
We provide an efficient algorithmic implementation 
of TBDS along the lines of branch and cut to obtain an 
efficient algorithm for solving two-stage, stochastic, 
mixed-integer programs with continuous recourse. The 
TBDS algorithm dynamically adds optimality and fea┬Ł
sibility cuts during the branch-and-bound procedure. 
Note that the branch-and-bound procedure ensures 
integrality of the x variables so that x ŌłłX.
An algorithmic description of TBDS is provided in 
Algorithm 1. We start with a callback function that 
allows us to track or modify the state of the optimiza┬Ł
tion problem. We see two distinct cases for any arbi┬Ł
trary branch-and-bound node. First, if the associated 
solution x is fractional (line 6), we create a feasibility 
cut (24) in case AP is infeasible (line 12). Suppose the 
associated solution is feasible (lines 8ŌĆō10). In that case, 
however, we generate the strengthened optimality cuts 
by following Benders dual decomposition approach as 
these cuts are tighter than the classic optimality cuts for 
fractional first stage solutions (Rahmaniani et al. 2020). 
Second, if the associated solution x is integer and feasi┬Ł
ble, we generate generalized Benders optimality cuts 
(36) and strengthened optimality cuts (34). Note that 
following the concept of Benders dual decomposition 
to generate strengthened optimality cuts for integer 
solutions is not useful as they are not as tight as the 
cuts following the guidelines presented in this section 
(Rahmaniani et al. 2020). If x is not feasible for AP, we 
generate and add feasibility cut (24).
Finally, we stress that any other row-generation pro┬Ł
cedure on feasibility on X and Y can easily be included 
in this procedure. For example, we dynamically gener┬Ł
ate subtour elimination constraints when solving the 
TWATSP-ST (line 15).
4. Implementation Details of TBDS for 
TWATSP-ST
This section details how our TBDS approach can solve 
the TWATSP-ST. As stated in Section 3, our TBDS 
method consists of an MP and subproblems SP and 
AP. We first define the master problem of TBDS and 
the associated cuts in the remainder of this section.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
217 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

4.1. Master Program
We state the MP, including all the associated cuts we 
are going to generate dynamically for the TWATSP-ST 
as
(MP) : min
X
(i,j)ŌłłA
dijxij +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”1
MP
pŽē
X
jŌłłV+
Žå(ejŽē +ljŽē)+ŽłoŽē
0
@
1
A+╬ś
(38) 
s:t: First-Stage Constraints (2)ŌĆō(6)
(39) 
Second-Stage Constraints (8)ŌĆō(14) for (Ōä”MP),
(40) 
╬ś Ōēź
X
jŌłłV+
Žā( ye
i  ys
i) +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
pŽē╬ĖŽē,
(41) 
Generalized Benders Optimality Cuts,
(42) 
Strengthened Multi-Optimality Cuts (Ōä”SP),
(43) 
Feasibility Cuts(Ōä”SP),
(44) 
╬ś ŌłłR,
(45) 
╬ĖŽē ŌłłR
ŌłĆŽē ŌłłŌä”SP:
(46) 
The first term of the objective function of the MP is the 
total distance traveled, the second term is the expected 
time window exceedances and the overtime cost of sce┬Ł
narios included in the MP (set Ōä”1
MP), and the last term 
provides a lower bound on the expected second stage 
cost and the time window assignment cost. We include 
first stage Constraints (2)ŌĆō(6) and the second stage con┬Ł
straints associated with the scenario set Ōä”MP in the MP. 
Constraint (41) is the auxiliary variables ╬ś (and ╬Ė(Žē)) 
for the recourse cost of SP and AP. The optimality and 
feasibility cuts are made specific in the next section. 
Finally, Constraints (45) and (46) restrict the domain of 
the auxiliary variables ╬ś and ╬ĖŽē.
4.2. Cuts
In line with Section 3, we define an aggregated sub┬Ł
problem AP taking as input the binary first stage deci┬Ł
sions, that is, the routing decision in the TWATSP-ST. 
The second set of subproblems SP for each scenario Žē Ōłł
Ōä”SP are then obtained via the two-step decomposition 
as outlined in Section 3, that is, as input, we take the 
binary first stage decisions and the solution of the time 
window assignment variables after solving AP. For 
completeness, we provide the formulation of SP and 
AP for the TWATSP-ST in the online supplement. We 
state for the TWATSP-ST the generalized Benders opti┬Ł
mality cut (36) introduced in Section 3.1 as follows.
4.2.1. Generalized Benders Optimality Cut. For any 
solution ╦åx of MP-2 (or MP) that is feasible for AP, let ╬╗ 
indicate the values of the dual multipliers of the con┬Ł
straint {x ┬ł ╦åx} in AP(╦åx) and (x,y,z) be the optimal solu┬Ł
tion of AP(╦åx). The generalized Benders optimality cut 
is then given by
╬ś Ōēź
X
jŌłłV+
Žā(ye
i  ys
i) +
X
ŽēŌłłŌä”SP
pŽē
X
jŌłłV+
Žå(ejŽē + ljŽē) + ŽłoŽē
0
@
1
A
+
X
(i,j)ŌłłA
╬╗ij(xij  xij):
(47) 
For the second step of our decomposition, we define 
SP(x,y,Žē) and create strengthened multioptimality cuts 
(34) as detailed in Section 3.1.
4.2.2. Strengthened Multioptimality Cuts. For any solu┬Ł
tion ╦åx of MP-2 (or MP) that is feasible for AP and the 
solution (y ┬ł {ys, ye}) of AP(╦åx) for Žē ŌłłŌä”SP, let (╦£x, ╦£y, ╦£z) 
be the optimal solution of SP(╦åx,y,Žē) and (╦£╬Į, ╦£╬Ęs, ╦£╬Ęe) 
indicate the values of the dual multipliers related to 
constraints {x ┬ł ╦åx, ys ┬ł ys, ye ┬ł ye}, respectively; then,
╬ĖŽē Ōēź
X
jŌłłV+
(Žå(╦£ejŽē + ╦£ljŽē + Žł╦£oŽē) + ╦£╬Ęs
j(ys
j  ╦£ys
j) + ╦£╬Ęe
j(ye
j  ╦£ye
j))
+
X
(i,j)ŌłłA
╦£╬Įij(xij  ╦£xij)
(48) 
is the strengthened multioptimality cut for Žē ŌłłŌä”SP for 
MP. We emphasize that SP takes the routing decisions 
from MP and time window assignments from AP as 
input. Via the auxiliary decision variable ╬ĖŽē, we approx┬Ł
imate the cost function of each scenario Žē ŌłłŌä”SP (or the 
objective function value of each SP) with lifted strength┬Ł
ened multioptimality cuts.
As a final remark, we note that TWATSP-ST has the 
relatively complete recourse property. In other words, 
the second stage decision is always feasible for any fea┬Ł
sible first stage decision (routing and time window 
variables). Therefore, we do not need to check feasibil┬Ł
ity in the branch-and-cut tree when x is integer. How┬Ł
ever, for a fractional node, we state the following 
feasibility cut.
4.2.3. Feasibility Cuts. If the solution ╦åx of MP-2 (or 
MP) is infeasible for AP, we generate the feasibility cut
0 Ōēź
X
iŌłłV+
╦ś╔ø +
X
(i,j)ŌłłA
╦ś╬╗ij(xij  ╦śxij), 
where ╦ś╔ø and ╦śx are the optimal values of the ╔ø and z 
variables in the feasibility problem provided in the 
online supplement, and we set ╦ś╬╗ as the value of the 
dual variable associated with the constraint {x ┬ł ╦åx}.
5. Computational Results
In this section, we present the computational results of 
solving the TWATSP-ST with our new TBDS method. 
We first determine the impact of our proposed strate┬Ł
gies to strengthen the cut-generation process of Bend┬Ł
ers decomposition. We then seek to understand the 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
218 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

source of the computational benefits associated with 
using TBDS. Finally, we present an analysis of the 
problem context. We develop six variants of TBDS to 
assess and structurally benchmark the two main novel┬Ł
ties of TBDS: the two-step decomposition to generate 
strengthened multi and generalized Benders optimality 
cuts and the new scenario-retention strategy to include 
scenarios in the master problem. The six considered 
variants are the following: 
i. BD uses standard multioptimality cuts utilizing 
Benders dual decomposition as introduced by Rahma┬Ł
niani et al. (2020).
ii. TBD extends BD by including the decomposition 
over the integer and linear first stage variables. This 
variant tests the impact of our strengthened multiop┬Ł
timality cuts and generalized Benders optimality cuts 
compared with Benders dual decomposition.
iii. BDP extends BD by including the first stage con┬Ł
straints on the master problem of randomly chosen 
and artificial scenarios. This variant combines partial 
Benders decomposition (Crainic et al. 2021) with Bend┬Ł
ers dual decomposition.
iv. TBDP extends BDP by strengthened multioptim┬Ł
ality cuts. In other words, this is our TBDS method 
without the new scenario-retention strategy.
v. BDS extends BDP by the new scenario-retention 
strategy. Thus, this method combines benders dual 
decomposition and partial benders decomposition with 
our new scenario-retention strategy but does not include 
our two-step decomposition idea and the associated 
strengthened multioptimality cuts.
vi. TBDS extends BDS by including the two-step, first 
stage decomposition. This is our TBDS method as pre┬Ł
sented in Sections 3 and 4 and, thus, includes the two- 
step decomposition and the scenario-retention strategy.
The remainder of this section is structured as fol┬Ł
lows. We introduce a new set of benchmark instances 
in Section 5.1. Details on the parameter tuning are pro┬Ł
vided in Section 5.2. We compare the performance 
of the six variants of TBDS on the new benchmark 
instances in Section 5.3. Further details explaining the 
effectiveness of TBDS are given in Section 5.4. We pro┬Ł
vide insights into the value of integrated decision mak┬Ł
ing and the value of the stochastic solution in Section 
5.5. Finally, we provide insight into the optimal time 
window assignment structure in Section 5.6.
5.1. Benchmark Instances
We adapt benchmark instances from the literature to 
our problem setting, generating 126 new benchmark 
instances. Specifically, we derive 56 instances with 
clustered customer locations based on single vehicle 
routes from SolomonŌĆÖs vehicle routing problem with 
time windows-RC instances proposed by Potvin and 
Bengio (1996) and 70 instances from Gendreau et al. 
(1998), which include not only the customer locations, 
but also the associated service times. We refer to these 
as rc_ and n_w_ instances, respectively. The end of the 
depotŌĆÖs time window defines the shift length T. All 
instances and associated solutions are included as sup┬Ł
plementary material to this paper.
To balance the four penalty terms in the objective 
function and make them directly comparable concern┬Ł
ing the routing cost for most problem instances, we 
used penalty weights of Žå ┬ł 3 and Žā┬ł1 to penalize 
expected delay/earliness and time window width at 
customer i ŌłłV+, respectively. Comparably to Jabali 
et al. (2015), we set the penalty for expected shift over┬Ł
time to Žł┬ł4.
We conduct a sample average approximation analy┬Ł
sis to determine the number of scenarios to correctly 
represent uncertainty, considering our routing solu┬Ł
tionsŌĆÖ stability as the number of customers in the 
instances increases. This results in 100 scenarios, which 
we use throughout all experiments.
We follow a similar approach for generating random 
travel times as Jabali et al. (2015) and Vareias, Repous┬Ł
sis, and Tarantilis (2019). For each scenario, we deter┬Ł
mine the travel time tij for arc (i,j) ŌłłA by adding a 
random disruption parameter ╬┤ij to the Euclidean dis┬Ł
tance dij. We assume a Gamma-distributed disruption 
parameter with shape k and scale ╬Ėij depending on the 
distance and a coefficient of variation cov┬ł0.25 to 
model realistic travel times and disruptions. We define 
╬Ę ┬ł 0:35 as a congestion level, representing the expected 
increase in travel time after a disruption occurs, that is, 
E[╬┤ij] ┬ł ╬Ędij. We assume ╬┤ij ~ G(k,╬Ėij), resulting in
E[╬┤ij] ┬ł k╬Ėij ┬ł ╬Ędij,
Var(╬┤ij) ┬ł k╬Ė2
ij:
Here, parameters k and ╬Ėij are set according to
k ┬ł
1
cov2 ,
╬Ėij ┬ł ╬Ędij cov2:
5.2. Parameter Settings and Implementation 
Details
The master problem (38)ŌĆō(46) contains both a set of 
selected scenarios Ōä”1
MP and some artificial scenarios 
Ōä”2
MP. Section 3.2 explains in detail how to select and 
create artificial scenarios. The performance of our 
method depends on the number of scenarios added to 
the master problem. By varying the fraction of scenar┬Ł
ios added to the master problem for actual scenarios 
(5%, 10%, 15%) and artificial scenarios (5%, 10%), we 
evaluate the performance of the methods BDP, TBDP, 
BDS, and TBDS under different scenario-selection strat┬Ł
egies. To create artificial scenarios, we randomly select 
the values for the convex composition. The results pre┬Ł
sented for the methods above are obtained by selecting 
the best combination of scenario levels corresponding 
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
219 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

to the highest number of solved instances in each 
method.
We embed all method variants in a branch-and-cut 
framework. We only add Benders cuts (47) and (48) at the 
root node and upon discovery of a possible incumbent 
solution. Subtour elimination constraints are included 
dynamically. All algorithms are coded in Python 3.9.7 in 
combination with Gurobi 9.5.1. The experiments were 
run on a virtual machine with 32 CPU cores and 64 GB 
RAM under the Linux operating system, which was suffi┬Ł
cient for all experiments. All algorithms have a time limit 
of three hours. All computation times reported are in 
minutes.
5.3. Overall Performance of TBDS
We start by analyzing the ability of the six method var┬Ł
iants and of a straightforward Gurobi implementation 
to solve our benchmark instances. Figure 2 illustrates 
the fraction of solved instances within a three-hour 
time limit. In Tables 1 and 2, we present the average 
optimality gap at the termination for each method vari┬Ł
ant and the average amount of time until termination.
These results show that our proposed solution 
approach, TBDS, solves up to 25 customers in both 
sets of benchmark instances. Looking at the total num┬Ł
ber of solved instances within the time limit displayed 
in Figure 2, it is evident that the variants with two- 
step decomposition outperform the variants without 
two-step decomposition. Specifically, TBDS solved 
72.8% and 75.2% of instances in both benchmark sets 
to optimality, whereas BDS only solved 1.78% of 
instances. In contrast, BD and BDP failed to solve 
any instance. The TBD and TBDP variants were able 
to solve between 10% and 62.5% of all benchmark 
instances. The significant increase in the performance 
of TBDS can be attributed to the use of a new scenario- 
retention strategy and the two-step decomposition 
over continuous and binary first stage variables.
Next, we focus on looking at the solution time until 
termination and the average optimality gap if the 
instance is unsolved. Tables 1 and 2 provide detailed 
results for each benchmark set. Noting that the BD and 
Figure 2. (Color online) Percentage of Instances Solved 
Within Three Hours 
Table 1. Performance of the Six TBDS Variants on n_w_ Instances
Customers
BD
BDP
BDS
TBD
TBDP
TBDS
10
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
4
10
10
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
45.6
4.2
13.1
Optimality gap
94.5
93.4
93.5
20.2
0.0
0.0
13
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
2
8
9
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
67.9
6.0
12.7
Optimality gap
93.9
91.4
91.7
20.4
24.1
16.2
15
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
1
10
10
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
75.6
18.0
15.7
Optimality gap
93.6
91.0
91.0
23.9
0.0
0.0
18
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
8
10
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
28.4
18.5
Optimality gap
92.7
88.8
89.0
26.1
0.0
0.0
20
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
2
10
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
20.4
23.1
Optimality gap
92.3
89.3
89.2
28.3
0.0
0.0
23
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
0
1
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
18.5
Optimality gap
91.7
85.8
86.8
34.3
31.9
33.6
25
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
0
1
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
135.3
Optimality gap
91.2
86.6
84.7
47.6
45.9
39.4
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
220 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

BDP variants fail to solve every instance within the 
three-hour time limit, the computational time of the 
solved instance in the BDS is close to 180 minutes. We 
see a clear decrease in computational time ranging 
between 17.7 and 65.7 minutes in the variants with the 
two-step decomposition with the largest share of the 
runtime stemming from the master problem. Compar┬Ł
ing BD, BDP, and BDS, the average optimality gap of 
nonsolved instances decreases significantly. Among 
variants without two-step decomposition, the average 
optimality gap decreases from 91.1% to 88.2%.
Similarly, with the variants with two-step decompo┬Ł
sition, we see that the average optimality gap decreases 
from 31.5% to 25.5%. The results clearly show that our 
TBDS outperforms the state of the art as it solves more 
instances to optimality and obtains smaller optimality 
gaps for the instances unable to solve optimally. We 
can say that, within the time limit, for the instances that 
benchmark methods are unable to solve, TBDS pro┬Ł
duces a solution of provably higher quality than the 
benchmark methods. Essential is combining the two 
main ideas of TBDS, that is, the two-step decomposi┬Ł
tion and the new scenario-retention strategy.
5.4. Details on the Performance of TBDS
In this section, we answer multiple questions regarding 
the methodsŌĆÖ performances. We begin by analyzing the 
convergence rate of the benchmark algorithms. After┬Ł
ward, we focus on the impact of our strengthened multi┬Ł
optimality cuts and our new scenario-retention strategy 
by analyzing the root node optimality gaps. Recall that 
we solve the TWATSP-ST with the aforementioned cuts 
with a branch-and-cut algorithm wherein cuts are gen┬Ł
erated throughout the tree search. Because we did not 
observe a significant difference between the two bench┬Ł
mark sets, we present the results for convergence rate 
for both instance sets without differentiation.
5.4.1. Convergence Rate. Figure 3 compares the num┬Ł
ber of iterations required (on average) and the average 
number of open and explored nodes in the tree search 
at termination. We see that using two-step decomposi┬Ł
tion either on its own or combined with a new scenario- 
retention strategy greatly speeds up convergence. We 
also note that the new scenario-retention strategy low┬Ł
ers the number of iterations needed rather than random 
selection or no selection of scenarios. We next look into 
the size of the branch-and-bound tree. We consider the 
average number of open and explored nodes in the 
branch-and-bound tree at termination to measure con┬Ł
vergence. Figure 3(b) shows the average number of 
nodes at the termination for each method. Including 
strengthened multi and generalized Benders, optimality 
cuts result in much smaller search trees. These results 
also support the findings that TBDS yields high-quality 
bounds at the root node, which are analyzed in detail in 
the next section.
Another statistic to measure convergence is the num┬Ł
ber of Benders cuts generated. As such, Figure 4 reports 
the number of optimality and feasibility cuts generated 
for different methods. We consider both the cuts gener┬Ł
ated when solving the linear programming relaxation 
Table 2. Performance of the Six TBDS Variants on rc_ Instances
Customers
BD
BDP
BDS
TBD
TBDP
TBDS
10
Number solved (/10)
0
0
1
3
8
8
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
21.0
3.1
10.7
Optimality gap
92.0
90.8
90.6
11.6
0.0
0.0
13
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
3
8
8
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
58.7
8.7
20.6
Optimality gap
91.3
88.8
89.0
14.4
0.0
0.0
15
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
3
8
8
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
98.5
13.1
23.1
Optimality gap
90.7
88.7
87.3
16.9
0.0
0.0
18
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
3
7
8
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
25.8
82.7
Optimality gap
89.7
86.8
86.5
19.7
0.0
0.0
20
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
1
4
8
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
188.1
26.0
32.0
Optimality gap
89.0
85.2
85.5
17.6
0.0
0.0
23
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
0
0
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
Optimality gap
87.9
84.8
84.5
24.0
25.9
21.3
25
Number solved (/10)
0
0
0
0
0
2
Time to optimality, min.
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
180.0
62.9
Optimality gap
87.2
83.1
84.2
26.5
22.4
23.1
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
221 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

of the TWATSP-ST and solving the TWATSP-ST via 
branch and cut.
We observe from the results that the new scenario- 
retention strategy and having a two-step decomposition 
yields a significant decrease in optimality cuts (both gen┬Ł
eralized and multicuts) and feasibility cuts. Two-step 
decomposition significantly reduces the amount of feasi┬Ł
bility cuts and optimality cuts needed. We look into the 
bounds found at the root node to understand why two- 
step decomposition and the new scenario-retention strat┬Ł
egy impact the cuts generated throughout the search. 
We discuss these results in the following section.
5.4.2. Bounds at the Root Node. Table 3 and 4 com┬Ł
pare root-node lower bounds (LB), root-node upper 
bounds (UB), and root-node gaps of the six TBDS var┬Ł
iants (BD, TBD, BDP, TBDP, BDS, TBDS) for different 
instance sizes (10, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25) listed in the first 
column. The root node gap is computed as ((UB 
LB)=LB) ├Ś 100) and gives the relative difference between 
the lower and upper bound at the root node. The lower 
and upper bound information is obtained as the root 
node in evaluating the full branch-and-cut algorithm 
after the first branching decision, which partly depends 
on the procedures embedded within Gurobi.
Comparing the results in Tables 3 and 4, a few obser┬Ł
vations stand out. First, comparing TBD to BD, the 
upper bounds in TBD decrease substantially with a 
reduction of 68.7% compared with BD for the n_w_ and 
rc_ instances.
Second, partial Benders decomposition helps tighten 
the lower bound at the root node, that is, comparing 
BDP and TBDP with BD and TBD. It alleviates the pri┬Ł
mal inefficiencies with redundant solutions in early 
Figure 3. (Color online) Convergence Rate by Method 
(a)
(b)
Notes. (a) Number of iterations. (b) Number of nodes in the search tree.
Figure 4. (Color online) Number of Optimality and Feasibility Cuts by Method 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Notes. (a) Generalized cuts. (b) Multioptimality cuts. (c) Feasibility cuts.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
222 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

iterations of the BD and TBD methods. Adding any sce┬Ł
narios improves the lower and upper bound on aver┬Ł
age by 14.5% and 86.1% over the n_w_ instances, 
respectively. For the rc_ instances, the lower bound 
improves on average by 11.4% with the addition of any 
scenarios. Similarly, the upper bound decreases by 
81.8% for the rc_ instances.
We observe the benefit of choosing scenarios with 
the new scenario-retention strategy as it tightens the 
lower bound on average by 1.5% for n_w_ instances 
and 1.7% for rc_ instances comparing the BDS and 
TBDS methods to the BDP and TBDP methods. Com┬Ł
paring TBDP with TBDS, we see that in TBDS, on aver┬Ł
age, the root node gap tightens by 3.4%.
Table 3. Average Root Node Lower and Upper Bounds of n_w_ Instances for the TBDS Variants
Number of customers
BD
BDP
BDS
TBD
TBDP
TBDS
10
Lower bound
407.9
332.7
339.5
248.2
322.6
331.6
Upper bound
5,586.1
4,778.7
4,775.0
314.9
386.7
372.0
Root node gap, %
92.7
93.0
92.9
21.2
14.2
13.3
13
Lower bound
516.5
446.7
439.0
518.6
446.7
441.5
Upper bound
9,914.3
4,892.7
4,874.5
634.0
510.3
512.9
Root node gap, %
94.8
90.9
91.0
18.2
12.5
13.9
15
Lower bound
571.6
536.0
555.3
335.3
537.8
519.2
Upper bound
13,446.9
4,982.0
4,990.8
440.0
634.1
608.4
Root node gap, %
95.7
89.2
88.9
23.8
15.2
14.7
18
Lower bound
689.5
590.6
627.1
323.5
577.4
635.4
Upper bound
18,862.6
5,036.6
5,062.6
428.7
692.3
775.3
Root node gap, %
96.3
88.3
87.6
24.5
16.6
18.0
20
Lower bound
753.7
659.0
678.5
353.9
667.4
663.4
Upper bound
23,932.4
5,105.0
5,114.0
480.0
807.6
804.8
Root node gap, %
96.9
87.1
86.7
26.3
17.4
17.6
23
Lower bound
845.4
831.1
800.0
845.4
831.1
800.0
Upper bound
41,065.3
5,277.1
5,235.5
1,086.2
1,031.1
994.2
Root node gap, %
97.9
84.3
84.7
22.2
19.4
19.5
25
Lower bound
923.5
957.5
902.0
380.6
961.7
928.4
Upper bound
43,749.3
5,403.5
5,337.5
535.1
1,610.9
1,591.8
Root node gap, %
97.9
82.3
83.1
28.9
40.3
41.7
Table 4. Average Root Node Lower and Upper Bounds of rc_ Instances for the TBDS Variants
Number of customers
BD
BDP
BDS
TBD
TBDP
TBDS
10
Lower bound
676.4
597.9
648.8
397.2
626.9
647.2
Upper bound
5,988.8
5,043.9
5,147.0
457.8
718.2
690.6
Root node gap, %
88.7
88.1
87.4
13.2
9.8
9.3
13
Lower bound
756.6
729.6
730.1
756.6
683.9
751.7
Upper bound
5,706.6
5,175.6
5,228.3
870.2
778.2
831.6
Root node gap, %
86.7
85.9
86.0
13.1
12.1
9.6
15
Lower bound
769.9
810.3
809.5
421.7
802.1
815.0
Upper bound
12,160.6
5,256.3
5,307.6
473.9
929.8
923.1
Root node gap, %
93.7
84.6
84.7
11.0
12.3
13.1
18
Lower bound
999.9
996.3
1,004.0
597.4
940.1
1,002.2
Upper bound
19,988.2
5,442.3
5,502.1
718.4
1,097.1
1,168.8
Root node gap, %
95.0
81.7
81.8
16.9
14.3
14.3
20
Lower bound
1,058.3
1,055.9
989.2
572.7
964.7
1,051.8
Upper bound
22,563.0
5,501.9
5,487.4
700.4
1,115.4
1,212.6
Root node gap, %
95.3
80.8
82.0
18.2
13.3
13.5
23
Lower bound
1,260.9
1,237.3
1,285.3
1,260.9
1,219.0
1,235.4
Upper bound
32,158.6
5,683.3
5,783.4
1,495.7
1,459.8
1,436.2
Root node gap, %
96.1
78.2
77.8
15.7
15.4
15.1
25
Lower bound
1,326.2
1,433.5
1,388.2
675.1
1,391.4
1,389.9
Upper bound
37,700.7
5,879.5
5,886.3
854.3
1,757.4
1,753.6
Root node gap, %
96.5
75.6
76.4
21.0
20.8
20.7
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
223 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

As the number of customers increases in both instances, 
the benefits gained from the new scenario-retention 
strategy and two-step decomposition become more pro┬Ł
nounced although the root gap remains high. After exam┬Ł
ining the methodŌĆÖs computational performance in depth, 
we shift our attention to problem-specific analysis.
5.5. Value of Integrated Decision Making and the 
Stochastic Solution
Our problem-specific analysis touches upon multiple 
points around the impact of integrated decision making 
and the value of the stochastic solution. To do so, we 
compare four alternative approaches that solve the 
TWATSP-ST by considering different levels of integra┬Ł
tion on decision making and the explicit consideration 
of the effects of the stochastic solution.
Tables 5 and 6 summarize the costs for various 
instance sizes (10, 13, 15, 18, 20), considering four solu┬Ł
tion types. The traveling salesperson solution (TSP) 
fixes the routing according to the shortest tour and 
optimizes the time window assignments subject to all 
scenarios. As defined before, the stochastic solution 
Table 5. Analysis of Different Routing Decisions in n_w_ Instances
Number of customers
Solution type
Routing cost
TWA cost
Recourse cost
Total cost
10
SS
158.72
121.30
32.96
312.99
TSP
152.84
128.54
43.51
324.89
MVP
152.84
125.99
40.25
319.07
EMVP
152.84
100.00
72.82
325.66
13
SS
176.64
158.56
45.83
381.03
TSP
172.57
168.83
61.96
403.36
MVP
172.57
169.14
61.19
402.91
EMVP
172.57
130.00
110.67
413.25
15
SS
189.47
183.30
51.43
424.21
TSP
179.91
197.90
79.12
456.93
MVP
179.91
198.59
77.82
456.33
EMVP
179.91
150.00
139.37
469.29
18
SS
204.47
218.99
60.85
484.30
TSP
192.16
232.74
80.93
505.84
MVP
192.16
235.58
91.11
518.85
EMVP
192.16
180.00
161.38
533.54
20
SS
203.77
249.17
77.74
530.68
TSP
196.59
269.01
109.09
574.68
MVP
196.59
268.03
106.60
571.22
EMVP
196.59
200.00
192.33
588.92
Table 6. Analysis of Different Routing Decisions in rc_ Instances
Number of customers
Solution type
Routing cost
TWA cost
Recourse cost
Total cost
10
SS
187.52
239.18
29.20
455.90
TSP
182.71
246.89
43.02
472.63
MVP
182.71
245.69
39.18
467.58
EMVP
182.71
220.62
70.85
474.19
13
SS
201.08
288.89
37.47
527.43
TSP
190.95
301.77
56.19
548.91
MVP
190.95
301.25
57.05
549.25
EMVP
190.95
264.75
103.24
558.93
15
SS
214.35
314.22
39.88
568.45
TSP
197.47
326.08
61.38
584.93
MVP
197.47
331.78
67.64
596.90
EMVP
197.47
287.86
123.18
608.51
18
SS
228.69
342.42
51.30
622.41
TSP
211.25
390.83
82.96
685.04
MVP
211.25
389.71
79.33
680.29
EMVP
211.25
339.71
141.97
692.93
20
SS
224.65
376.85
68.36
669.86
TSP
221.24
429.87
95.99
747.10
MVP
221.24
426.65
97.73
745.62
EMVP
221.24
369.14
169.85
760.24
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
224 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

(SS) is the optimal solution to the TWATSP-ST. The 
mean value problem (MVP) solution is obtained by 
solving a deterministic version of TWATSP-ST consid┬Ł
ering only a single scenario representing the expected 
travel times. Then, the routing and time window solu┬Ł
tion of the MVP problem is used as input in our model 
subject to all scenarios. On the other hand, the expected 
mean value problem (EMVP) solution evaluates both 
routing and time windows solutions obtained from the 
deterministic model on each scenario. The column 
ŌĆ£routing costŌĆØ gives the resulting routing cost, the col┬Ł
umn ŌĆ£TWA costŌĆØ presents the time window assign┬Ł
ment cost, and the column ŌĆ£recourse costŌĆØ gives the 
second stage costs.
Our analysis reveals that even small variations in 
routing decisions yield significant reductions in time 
window width and recourse costs. Moreover, the TSP 
solution performs poorly in the second stage, particu┬Ł
larly as the number of customers increases. That sug┬Ł
gests that wider time window assignments do not 
necessarily result in better performance in the second 
stage. With more customers, the stochastic solutionŌĆÖs cost 
advantage over MVP and TSP solutions becomes more 
pronounced. We observe that, compared with the TSP 
solution, simultaneously optimizing time windows and 
routing decreases the expected time window exceedance 
by 34.1% and reduces the width of assigned time win┬Ł
dows by 14.3%, whereas routing costs only increase 
slightly (2.1%).
Next, we turn to the improvement in costs because 
of considering stochasticity in modeling. For this pur┬Ł
pose, we utilize the SS and the EMVP solutions. We 
observe that considering travel time uncertainty results 
in slightly longer travel times and slightly wider time 
windows but drastically improves the on-time deliv┬Ł
ery. On average, over all instances, the on-time delivery 
decreases by 63.4% at the expense of a 2.1% increase in 
routing cost and 3.9% wider time windows. Overall, this 
results in a value of the stochastic solution (VSS, differ┬Ł
ence between SS and EMVP) of 9.7% and 14.1% for 
n_w_ and rc_ instances, respectively. In preliminary 
experiments, we observed that the VSS does not change 
substantially for different realistic objective weights.
Finally, we compare customer-specific and fixed time 
window assignments in our problem setting. Table 7
shows the solutions for the fixed time window widths 
(FTWAS) and the stochastic solution for small instances 
with 10ŌĆō13 customers. The FTWAS policy fixes the time 
window width to the mean of the time window assign┬Ł
ments in the stochastic solution. The associated costs are 
reported in Table 7. We observe that customers receive 
at most 11.7% wider time windows and at least 7.3% 
narrower time windows than the fixed time windows. 
The results highlight the importance of assigning time 
windows individually rather than providing the same 
interval for every customer. The flexibility to vary the 
time window width among the customers in the tour 
decreases the total time window width by 18.7% and 
decreases total cost by 7.8% on average; 67.2% of custo┬Ł
mers receive narrower time windows compared with 
assigning only fixed-width ones.
5.6. Optimal Time Window Assignments
We further analyze the nature of routing and time win┬Ł
dow assignment solutions generated by TBDS. We 
observe that optimal routes exhibit a zigzag pattern 
with high variations and large time windows alternat┬Ł
ing with smaller variations and smaller time windows.
Figure 5 shows the variance of the travel time of arcs 
within the optimal routing sequence for n_w_ and rc_ 
instances with 18 customers and, similarly, provides 
the optimal width of the time windows. An orange line 
highlights an example instance to illustrate the pattern 
more clearly. The width of the time windows is more 
evenly distributed in the nw_ instances than in the rc_ 
(see Figure 5, (c) and (d)), indicating a balance between 
risky and nonrisky customer choices. This pattern also 
explains why incorporating customer-specific time 
windows and considering stochastic travel times sig┬Ł
nificantly improves performance. ObservingŌĆöor con┬Ł
structing and utilizingŌĆöthese alternating patterns is 
impossible with current heuristics, which ignore delay 
propagation.
As expected, customers using arcs with high vari┬Ł
ance receive wider time windows. As such, the model 
immediately hedges for delays. The optimal solution 
combines riskier and less risky choices. Like this, delays 
do not propagate too severely through the route as 
observed in Figure 6. Figure 6 shows the average time 
window violations for n_w_ and rc_ instances with 18 
customers. Even though there seems to be an increasing 
trend along the route, considering the significantly 
small range of time window violations, we see that 
Table 7. Analysis of Fixed Time Window Assignment
Instances
Solution type
Routing cost
TWA cost
Recourse cost
Total cost
n_w_
SS
155.55
66.08
36.52
258.16
FTWAS
156.13
74.95
33.60
264.68
rc_ 
SS
184.25
215.61
30.46
430.33
FTWAS
184.36
271.52
26.83
482.72
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
225 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

customers do not suffer from severe delays by combin┬Ł
ing risky and less risky choices.
6. Conclusions
Assigning (accurate) time windows to customers in 
last-mile delivery can significantly improve customer 
satisfaction, but if done suboptimally, it can increase 
costs tremendously. So far, the TWATSP-ST has not 
been optimally solved. The TWATSP-ST is a funda┬Ł
mental and challenging combinatorial problem formu┬Ł
lated as a two-stage, stochastic, mixed-integer program 
with continuous recourse for which no efficient exact 
solution methods exist. We present a new method 
called TBDS for solving the TWATSP-ST, which can 
readily be applied to general two-stage, stochastic, 
mixed-integer programs.
Our method combines and generalizes the recent 
advancements in Benders decomposition and scenario- 
clustering techniques. In particular, our TBDS method 
introduces a novel two-step decomposition strategy for 
the binary and continuous first stage variables, resulting 
in improved continuous first stage solutions, generating 
optimality cuts. This two-step decomposition approach 
leads to high-quality initial first stage solutions, effec┬Ł
tively reducing unnecessary iterations in current 
state-of-the-art Benders decomposition approaches. 
Consequently, it enhances computational efficiency by 
facilitating faster convergence.
The second key contribution of TBDS is the new 
scenario-retention strategy, which is, to the best of the 
authorsŌĆÖ knowledge, the first time that such scenario- 
clustering techniques and state-of-the-art Benders 
decomposition approaches are combined. By clustering 
the scenarios, we improve the linear programming (LP) 
relaxation of the master problem, obtaining superior 
lower bounds in the early iterations. By combining these 
essential elements (i.e., the two-step decomposition and 
the scenario clustering), our method achieves consis┬Ł
tently tighter bounds at the root node and produces 
higher quality incumbent solutions compared with state- 
of-the-art approaches in the extant literature, including 
Benders dual decomposition and partial Benders decom┬Ł
position. Specifically, these methods can be considered 
special cases of TBDS.
Figure 5. (Color online) Optimal Routing Solutions 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Notes. (a) Travel time variance in n_w_ instances. (b) Travel time variance in rc_ instances. (c) Time window assignments in n_w_ instances. 
(d) Time window assignments in rc_ instances.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
226 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effec┬Ł
tiveness of TBDS. Our method solves more instances to 
optimality, and significantly better lower and upper 
bounds are obtained for the instances not solved to opti┬Ł
mality. In particular, TBDS achieves optimality for 73.9% 
of the instances in our benchmark set, surpassing other 
benchmark algorithms that can solve at most 47% of the 
instances. This showcases the superior performance and 
efficiency of our TBDS method in handling TWATSP-ST. 
Furthermore, our study reveals that the simultaneous 
optimization of time windows and routing leads to a 
noteworthy 11.1% improvement in total costs, incurring 
only a minor increase in routing costs. Allowing different 
time window lengths enables hedging against high var┬Ł
iances encountered throughout the route. As a result, our 
method produces shorter routes with fewer time win┬Ł
dow violations, contributing to the overall cost reduction.
In future studies, the alternating pattern of high and 
low variance arcs traveled, as observed in the structure 
of the optimal solution, can serve as a foundation for 
developing efficient heuristics explicitly tailored for the 
TWATSP-ST. Additionally, evaluating our algorithm 
on extended versions of the vehicle routing problem, 
such as the capacitated vehicle routing problem and 
the multidepot vehicle routing problem, can offer valu┬Ł
able insights into the versatility and applicability of our 
TBDS method in diverse real-world scenarios.
From a methodological perspective, we envision that 
the problem-specific selection of representative scenar┬Ł
ios combined with Benders decomposition approaches 
can start several new research lines. For instance, using 
supervised learning to predict which scenarios to label 
as representative based on instance-specific informa┬Ł
tion, such as vehicle information and customer loca┬Ł
tions, seems promising. Mainly for applications with 
limited information, it would be valuable to research 
how well such predictions translate to slightly different 
settings. Alternatively, methods other than those in 
TBDS can be developed and tested to generate repre┬Ł
sentative scenarios.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the editorial and review team for their 
numerous and very helpful comments.
Figure 6. (Color online) Time Window Violations 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Notes. (a) Earliness at customers in n_w_ instances. (b) Earliness at customers in rc_ instances. (c) Lateness at customers in n_w_ instances. 
(d) Lateness at customers in rc_ instances.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
227 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 

References
Benders J (1962) Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables 
programming problems. Numerische Mathematik 4(1):238ŌĆō252.
Birge JR, Louveaux FV (1988) A multicut algorithm for two-stage 
stochastic linear programs. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 34(3):384ŌĆō392.
Chen R, Luedtke J (2022) On generating Lagrangian cuts for 
two-stage stochastic integer programs. INFORMS J. Comput. 
34(4):2332ŌĆō2349.
Crainic TG, Hewitt M, Maggioni F, Rei W (2021) Partial Benders 
decomposition: General methodology and application to sto┬Ł
chastic network design. Transportation Sci. 55(2):414ŌĆō435.
Dantzig GB (1955) Linear programming under uncertainty. Manage┬Ł
ment Sci. 1(3ŌĆō4):197ŌĆō206.
Ehmke JF, Campbell AM, Urban TL (2015) Ensuring service levels 
in routing problems with time windows and stochastic travel 
times. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 240(2):539ŌĆō550.
Gendreau M, Hertz A, Laporte G, Stan M (1998) A generalized inser┬Ł
tion heuristic for the traveling salesman problem with time win┬Ł
dows. Oper. Res. 46(3):330ŌĆō335.
Henrion R, R┬©omisch W (2022) Problem-based optimal scenario gen┬Ł
eration and reduction in stochastic programming. Math. Pro┬Ł
gramming 191:183ŌĆō205.
Henrion R, K┬©uchler C, R┬©omisch W (2009) Scenario reduction in sto┬Ł
chastic programming with respect to discrepancy distances. 
Comput. Optim. Appl. 43(1):67ŌĆō93.
Jabali O, Leus R, Van Woensel T, De Kok T (2015) Self-imposed 
time windows in vehicle routing problems. OR Spectrum 37(2): 
331ŌĆō352.
Keutchayan J, Munger D, Gendreau M (2020) On the scenario-tree 
optimal-value error for stochastic programming problems. 
Math. Oper. Res. 45(4):1572ŌĆō1595.
Keutchayan J, Ortmann J, Rei W (2023) Problem-driven scenario cluster┬Ł
ing in stochastic optimization. Comput. Management Sci. 20(1):13.
Kleywegt AJ, Shapiro A, Homem-de Mello T (2002) The sample 
average approximation method for stochastic discrete optimiza┬Ł
tion. SIAM J. Optim. 12(2):479ŌĆō502.
Paradiso R, Roberti R, Lagan┬┤a D, Dullaert W (2020) An exact solu┬Ł
tion framework for multitrip vehicle-routing problems with 
time windows. Oper. Res. 68(1):180ŌĆō198.
Pflug GC, Pichler A (2015) Dynamic generation of scenario trees. 
Comput. Optim. Appl. 62(3):641ŌĆō668.
Potvin JY, Bengio S (1996) The vehicle routing problem with time win┬Ł
dows part II: Genetic search. INFORMS J. Comput. 8(2):165ŌĆō172.
Rahmaniani R, Crainic TG, Gendreau M, Rei W (2017) The Benders 
decomposition algorithm: A literature review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 
259(3):801ŌĆō817.
Rahmaniani R, Ahmed S, Crainic TG, Gendreau M, Rei W (2020) The 
Benders dual decomposition method. Oper. Res. 68(3):878ŌĆō895.
Spliet R, Gabor AF (2015) The time window assignment vehicle 
routing problem. Transportation Sci. 49(4):721ŌĆō731.
Spliet R, Dabia S, Van Woensel T (2018) The time window assign┬Ł
ment vehicle routing problem with time-dependent travel 
times. Transportation Sci. 52(2):261ŌĆō276.
Van Slyke RM, Wets R (1969) L-shaped linear programs with appli┬Ł
cations to optimal control and stochastic programming. SIAM J. 
Appl. Math. 17(4):638ŌĆō663.
Vareias AD, Repoussis PP, Tarantilis CD (2019) Assessing customer ser┬Ł
vice reliability in route planning with self-imposed time windows 
and stochastic travel times. Transportation Sci. 53(1):256ŌĆō281.
W┬©olck M, Meisel S (2022) Branch-and-price approaches for real-time 
vehicle routing with picking, loading, and soft time windows. 
INFORMS J. Comput. 34(4):2192ŌĆō2211.
C┬Ėelik et al.: Two-Step Benders Decomposition for TWATSP 
228 
Transportation Science, 2025, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 210ŌĆō228, ┬® 2025 INFORMS 
Downloaded from informs.org by [131.155.24.24] on 01 April 2025, at 23:04 . For personal use only, all rights reserved.