TITLE: Fast Calibration of Car-Following Models to Trajectory Data Using the Adjoint Method
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2020.1027
---

Fast Calibration of Car Following models to Trajectory data using the
Adjoint Method
Ronan Keane
Systems Engineering, Cornell University, Email: (rlk268@cornell.edu)
H. Oliver Gao
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Email: (hg55@cornell.edu)
September 22, 2020
Abstract
Before a car-following model can be applied in practice, it must ﬁrst be validated against real data in a process
known as calibration. This paper discusses the formulation of calibration as an optimization problem, and compares
diﬀerent algorithms for its solution. The optimization consists of an arbitrary car following model, posed as either an
ordinary or delay diﬀerential equation, being calibrated to an arbitrary source of trajectory data which may include
lane changes.
Typically, the calibration problem is solved using gradient free optimization. In this work, the gradient of the
optimization problem is derived analytically using the adjoint method. The computational cost of the adjoint method
does not scale with the number of model parameters, which makes it more eﬃcient than evaluating the gradient
numerically using ﬁnite diﬀerences. Numerical results are presented which show that quasi-newton algorithms using
the adjoint method are signiﬁcantly faster than a genetic algorithm, and also achieve slightly better accuracy of the
calibrated model.
1
arXiv:1901.06452v3 [cs.SY] 21 Sep 2020

1
Introduction
1.1
The Case for Car Following and Trajectory Data
A complete traﬃc simulator consists of many diﬀerent modules, including algorithms to determine the demand for
diﬀerent road sections, complex rules to govern lane changes, mergers, and diverges, a model to describe traﬃc ﬂow
and driving behaviors, and more. Out of all these modules, the description of traﬃc ﬂow is the most fundamental.
The decision of what model is used to describe traﬃc ﬂow has impacts on the simulator’s strengths, weaknesses,
and overall performance.
In particular, one important distinction is whether to simulate at the macroscopic or
microscopic level.
At the microscopic level, car following models are often used. Car following models describe how a vehicle behaves
as a function of its surroundings; typically they are expressed as diﬀerential equations where any vehicle is coupled
to the vehicle directly ahead (i.e. its lead vehicle). Many car following models are based on common sense rules
of driving. Some simple examples are adopting a speed based on the distance between you and your leader, or
accelerating based on the diﬀerence in speeds between you and your leader.
Whereas microscopic traﬃc models describe the motions of individual vehicles, their macroscopic counterparts
treat traﬃc as a ﬂuid. At the macroscopic level, there are no vehicles, only traﬃc densities. Congested road sections
with high densities slowly trickle forward, while uncongested traﬃc at low densities ﬂow freely. This connection
to ﬂuid dynamics was originally made by [1], and the inﬂuence of the resulting traﬃc ﬂow theory can hardly be
overstated. In the more than six decades since, numerous works have attempted to improve upon the so-called
Lighthill-Whitham-Richards (LWR) model in order to better describe various complex elements of traﬃc ﬂow. Among
those, [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] are perhaps some of the most notable. Nonetheless, when it comes to macrosimulation, the
LWR model, and its discrete numerical formulation ([7]), is still widely used today.
For all its merits, the LWR model is not without its limitations. A key relationship between ﬂow and density
known as the “fundamental diagram”, must be supplied. More importantly, it is assumed vehicles are homogeneous
and exhibit static behavior. In real traﬃc, drivers behave diﬀerently; vehicles have varying performances; traﬃc
demand ﬂuctuates; controlled intersections and lane changes have complex eﬀects. Traﬃc ﬂow is incredibly dynamic
and inhomogeneous.
The shortcomings of the LWR model become apparent in practice (see [4, 8, 9]).
In the
fundamental diagram, instead of equilibrium curves, one ﬁnds a wide scattering of points. The time evolution of
real traﬃc ﬂow shows a much richer picture than what the LWR model predicts. Examining the evolution of a
vehicle trajectory in the speed-spacing plane, one sees complex hysteresis loops which are inconsistent with current
macroscopic theory ([10], [11] or Fig. 2 are examples of such plots). Given these limitations, one would hope for
some car following model that could explain all these phenomena.
However, existing works are not prepared to oﬀer guidelines as to which car following models are best. It is also
not clear as to how much more accurate car following models are compared to macro-models (like LWR). Answering
either of these pressing questions is diﬃcult: the traﬃc microsimulation literature consists of literally hundreds of
diﬀerent models, many of which have never actually been thoroughly validated ([12]). Works such as [13], [14], [15],
and [16] have attempted to address this long-standing problem of car following models but have had varying results
as to which models are best.
Drawing conclusions on the eﬃcacy of diﬀerent car following models requires both a large vehicle trajectory
dataset (e.g.
[17] or [18]) to facilitate comparison, as well as a reliable methodology for model calibration and
validation. The aim of this work is to develop new methodology to improve the calibration of car following models.
However, one should keep in mind that this only addresses one half of the challenge; equally important is the creation
of new datasets and new approaches for collecting accurate and meaningful traﬃc data.
There is a need for an increased use of trajectory data to study traﬃc ﬂow. This need goes far beyond the
validation of existing car following models. As new technologies like autonomous vehicles, connected cities and on-
demand mobility become fully realized, the LWR model assumption of homogeneous drivers exhibiting static behavior
becomes increasingly unrealistic. The limitations of macrosimulation and the uncertainty of new technology are both
good reasons to suspect a growing demand for microsimulation. At the same time, vehicle trajectory data (which is
needed for microsimulation/car following) is easier to get than ever before because of new technologies like computer
vision, lidar/radar, and GPS. Compared to the more commonly used loop detector data, trajectory data describes
traﬃc ﬂow at much higher temporal and spatial resolutions. These new sources of data, still largely unexploited, can
help advance both micro- and macro- theory.
1.2
Calibration Using Trajectory Data
It is relatively simple to write down some mathematical equations and call them a traﬃc model. Far more diﬃcult is
applying this model in practice. In order to validate a model against real data, one must ﬁnd the model parameters
2

Figure 1: On the left, an excerpt of a single lane from the NGSim data.
“Incomplete” trajectories are due to
vehicles changing to/out of the lane pictured. One can observe many of the important features of traﬃc ﬂow such
as shockwaves, lane changing events, and individual driver behaviors. Compared to macroscopic data, these features
are captured at higher temporal/spatial resolutions and without aggregation. On the right, a car following model
(the OVM) has been calibrated to the trajectory data.
that best explain the data: this is known as calibration. Solving the calibration problem requires both a dataset
describing the quantity of interest, as well as a mathematical model that explains the data. This paper deals with
car-following models that are posed as diﬀerential equations, and may include elements such as delays, bounds on
acceleration/speed, and multiple driving regimes. The car-following model is to be calibrated against trajectory data,
time series data that describes the motion of individual vehicles.
Existing literature has covered various aspects of the trajectory data calibration problem: the use of meta-models,
sensitivity analysis, optimization algorithms, measures of performance (e.g. speed or spacing data), and goodness-
of-ﬁt function (i.e. loss function). [19], [20], and [21] are good works focused primarily on methodology. [22], [23],
[15] and [16] are good works focused on both calibration and the benchmarking of various models.
In this paper calibration is posed as an optimization problem. For a wide class of models, being calibrated to
trajectory data gathered from any source, the gradient of the optimization problem has been derived in an eﬃcient
way using the adjoint method. This enables the calibration problem to be solved by more eﬃcient optimization
routines which use gradient information. Several state of the art algorithms are benchmarked in order to determine
both the accuracy of the ﬁt they can achieve, as well as the computational eﬀort required to apply the algorithm.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces car following models and discusses current research directions
for improving car following models. Section 3 describes the optimization problem and discusses some issues arising in
its solution. Section 4 applies the adjoint method to the optimization problem and compares it to ﬁnite diﬀerences.
Section 5 compares diﬀerent algorithms for solving the calibration problem.
2
Car-Following Models
We will consider any car-following model that can be expressed as either an ordinary or delay diﬀerential equation.
This describes the majority of models in the literature, as well as the majority of models used in commercial
microsimulation packages ([24]). We deal with models of the following form
¨xn(t) = h( ˙xn−1(t −τ), xn−1(t −τ), ˙xn(t −τ), xn(t −τ), p)
(1)
where xn(t) is the position of vehicle n at time t. h is the car-following model, which depends on parameters p, the
“following” vehicle xn and “lead” vehicle xn−1. τ is a time-delay parameter which represents human reaction time.
Eq. (1) states that a driver’s behavior (how they choose to accelerate) is determined from the speed and position of
their own car, the speed and position of the leading car, and parameters p. Given a lead vehicle trajectory xn−1(t),
3

parameters p, and initial condition xn(tn), the car following model (1) will produce the follower trajectory xn(t).
The presence of nonzero τ leads to a delay diﬀerential equation (DDE). Many car-following models (including most
of those used in commercial software) treat reaction time explicitly by using a DDE.
Besides ODEs and DDEs, some car-following models are formulated as stochastic diﬀerential equations or derived
using nonparametric techniques. We brieﬂy discuss these types of models in section 2.3 but the current methodology
does not address their calibration.
2.1
Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations
Eq. (1) gives a general form for car-following models. The simplest type of model is a ﬁrst-order ODE where the
speed of the following vehicle n is completely determined by the space headway (xn−1 −xn). In this type of model,
each driver adopts a speed based on the distance between their car and the leading car.
This simple kind of model is important because of its connection to macroscopic theory and the LWR model.
Speciﬁcally, if one assumes all vehicles are identical, and interprets the reciprocal of density as headway, then a
functional relationship between traﬃc ﬂow and density can be recast as a relationship between vehicle speed and
headway ([25]). Under these assumptions, the fundamental diagram can be thought of as describing a ﬁrst-order
car-following model. Consider the Newell car following model an example
˙xn(t) = min{vf, xn−1(t) −xn(t) −sjam
α
}.
(2)
vf, α and sjam are parameters describing a triangular fundamental diagram ([22]). Namely vf is the speed of a vehicle
during free ﬂow, sjam is the distance between two completely stopped vehicles, and −sjam/α is the shockwave speed.
The Newell model can also be written as a trajectory translation model, where the trajectory of a following vehicle
is equivalent to the lead vehicle trajectory, translated over both space and time.
xn(t) = xn−1(t −α) −sjam
(3)
We refer to Eq. (3) as Newell (TT) and Eq. (2) as Newell (DE), where the acronyms stand for trajectory translation
and diﬀerential equation, respectively. In the special case where the TT and DE models both use a numerical time
step equal to α, and vehicles are always in the congested regime (i.e. not moving at their free ﬂow speeds), the two
models become equivalent ([25]). In this special case, either model gives trajectories that exactly obey the LWR
model with a triangular fundamental diagram. In general however, the two models are diﬀerent (see for example
Fig. 2). The advantages of the Newell (TT) or (DE) models are that they contain a small number of parameters,
and those parameters are easily interpretable under macroscopic theory.
More complicated car-following models (compared to those of Newell) are sometimes criticized for two main
reasons: ﬁrst, for not having enough empirical support for their validity, and second, for having too many parameters.
Despite these criticisms, more complicated models have behaviors that attract researchers. For example, the optimal
velocity model (OVM) proposed by [26] exhibits a spontaneous phase transition between free ﬂow and congested
states, which may describe “phantom” traﬃc jams ([27]). Another example is the intelligent driver model (IDM)
proposed by [28], which can qualitatively reproduce a number of complex (empirical) traﬃc states. Besides more
recent models like OVM or IDM, there are also a plethora of older models to complicate the mix ([12]). The default
models in most modern traﬃc simulator packages (for example, VISSIM or AIMSUN) are still older car-following
models ([24]), presumably because it is unclear if the newer car-following models oﬀer any beneﬁts.
Fig. 2 compares each of the four models just mentioned by calibrating them to a single vehicle trajectory from
the reconstructed NGSim data ([29]). The calibration minimized the root mean square error (RMSE) between the
simulation and measurements. The vehicle (ID 1013) was recorded for only 55 seconds, but even in that time many
hysteresis loops were recorded in the speed-headway plane. For the NGSim data, which was recorded on the freeway
in congested conditions, trajectories that qualitatively resemble this one are the rule rather than the exception. The
diﬀerent models all give a diﬀerent caricature of the oscillatory behavior observed. In particular, the Newell (TT)
model (with a simulation time step of .1 s) appears to better capture the seemingly chaotic nature of the oscillations,
whereas the more complicated (and computationally expensive to calibrate) IDM or OVM models result in a lower
RMSE and better capture the width of the hysteresis (the diﬀerences in speeds at a given headway). The point of
this ﬁgure is not to make a case for one model over the other, but rather to point out the interesting behavior shown
even in a single short trajectory. It also raises an important question which existing research seems unprepared to
answer.
With so many diﬀerent models, each of varying complexities, which ones best describe traﬃc ﬂow? Our work on
calibration is motivated by this question.
4

Figure 2: Four diﬀerent car following models are calibrated to a single empirical vehicle trajectory by minimizing the
root mean square error between simulation and measurements. The trajectories are plotted in the speed - headway
plane.
2.2
Delay-Diﬀerential Equations
Compared to ODEs, DDEs are more complicated to analyze and solve. Car-following models typically only consider
the simplest case, where time delay (reaction time) is a constant. It seems the distinction between ODEs and DDEs
has been given limited importance in the calibration literature, even though the addition of time delay as a parameter
causes extra complications. As for the literature as a whole, the eﬀect of nonzero time delay on car-following models
is still not fully understood.
When studying the behavior of car-following models, one common approach is to consider a line of cars with
identical model parameters on a closed loop. In this special setting, one can ﬁnd an “equilibrium” solution where all
vehicles have the same speed and same headway, with zero acceleration. The equilibrium solution is contrasted with
an oscillatory/periodic solution, where the speed of a vehicle can oscillate in a manner reminiscent of stop-and-go
or congested traﬃc. Since most analytic (i.e. not numerical) results come from studying the behavior around the
equilibrium solution, the stability of the equilibrium solution is particularly important. Adjusting parameters in
a model can be said to have a stabilizing (destabilizing) eﬀect if the equilibrium solution will persist (degenerate)
under a wider variety of conditions. Intuitively, one expects that drivers having slower reaction times will have a
destabilizing eﬀect, and this seems to be generally correct.
It has been shown for both the optimal velocity model (OVM) and intelligent driver model (IDM) that the
inclusion of time delays has a destabilizing eﬀect (see [30], [31], [32]). But time delay is not the only model parameter
5

that can have such eﬀects. For example, [33] showed that increasing (decreasing) the OVM’s “sensitivity parameter”
has stabilizing (destabilizing) eﬀects (the sensitivity parameter is proportional to how strongly the driver accelerates).
Time delay can also have more subtle eﬀects: [31] found the inclusion of time delays for OVM caused bistability
between equilibrium and oscillatory solutions.
In [34] the OVM is considered with diﬀerent reaction times ≤0.3 seconds. In this range, no qualitative changes
to the model are observed. The authors state that changing the sensitivity parameter can account for the eﬀects of
reaction time. [23] and [30] have done experiments on OVM with larger reaction times (≈1 seconds) and found that
while it is true that reaction time is not especially important at low values, once increased past some threshold it
will start to cause unstable behavior leading to vehicle collisions. A similar behavior was found in [35] for the Gipps
car-following model. These ﬁndings show the inclusion of reaction time will have a destabilizing eﬀect, but large
reaction times seem to have especially unstable eﬀects, perhaps owing to some sort of phase transition.
In practice, one can observe that calibrated values for reaction time greatly vary across the literature, even for
the same model. Consider that [36],[15], and [16] all calibrate the Gipps model, but all ﬁnd very diﬀerent means and
variances for drivers’ reaction times. One found the mean to be 0.57 s with a variance of 0.02 s. Another found the
mean to be 1.73 s with variance 1.35 s.
Besides reaction time, another interesting extension to a model is the inclusion of “anticipation” eﬀects. Examples
of anticipation are a driver estimating the future speed/position of a leading vehicle, or a following vehicle reacting
to multiple vehicles instead of just its leader. [32] showed that anticipation has a stabilizing eﬀect for IDM, and
[37] showed the same for OVM. Of course, due to nonlinearities, stabilizing and destabilizing eﬀects will not simply
cancel out.
2.3
Stochastic and Data-Driven Models
In this paper we consider the calibration of car following models formulated as ODEs or DDEs. This section dis-
cusses some recent research directions in which car following models are formulated as stochastic diﬀerential equations
(SDEs), or derived from data using nonparametric models.
Papers using SDEs to model traﬃc ﬂow typically argue that the stochastic models are better able to describe the
formation and growth of congestion.
Besides being able to achieve a closer ﬁt to data, authors have concluded
that deterministic models cannot reproduce some qualitative features of congestion. In particular, some recent ﬁeld
experiments involving 25 and 51 human driven vehicles on a straight road ([38]) showed that the standard deviation
of traﬃc speeds initially grow in a concave way, whereas deterministic models seem to only be able to show convex
growth.
SDEs in the literature are usually based on modifying an existing deterministic ODE model rather than created as an
entirely novel model. Two common stochastic mechanisms are acceleration noise, and action points. For acceleration
noise, white noise is added to the output of the deterministic model. The white noise may be sampled from either a
uniform or normal distribution. Closely related to acceleration noise, is the case where the noise is added to a model
parameter instead of directly to the output of the model. In [39] and [40] gaussian acceleration noise was added to
the Newell model and IDM respectively. In 2D-IDM from [41] uniform noise is added to a model parameter (in that
case, the desired time headway parameter).
Action points are implemented by creating a model regime where the driver is insensitive to changes in the headway
and/or lead vehicle velocity. Thus when inside the regime, a driver will maintain their current behavior until a suﬃ-
ciently large diﬀerence in the state is achieved, at which point the driver will react to the now signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
driving situation. The reader is referred to [42] or [43] for speciﬁc details on implementing action points.
The motivation for including white noise is to model random human behavior and reﬂect the fact that humans can-
not perfectly control their vehicles, whereas the motivation for action points is that drivers are not able to perceive
minute changes to the traﬃc situation and thus a suﬃciently large diﬀerence is required before they can start to
react. [42] shows that action points and white noise have similar eﬀects on traﬃc simulations, and suggests that both
mechanisms should be included.
Data-driven car following models are based on machine learning models and algorithms, and as a result their formula-
tion is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than the ODE/DDE/SDE discussed so far. However, despite their diﬀerent formulation,
the inputs (current headway, follower and leader velocities) and output (current follower acceleration) are typically
very similar. Papers in the literature have reported that data-driven models can achieve better ﬁts to empirical
data compared to parametric models such as OVM or IDM. The discussion of these machine learning techniques is
outside the scope of this paper but we mention the diﬀerent approaches which have been successfully applied. In
[44] k-nearest neighbor (knn) is used, and [45] uses locally weighted regression (loess), which can be thought of as a
generalization of knn. [46] discuss using feedforward neural networks with a single hidden layer and ReLU nonlinear-
6

ity. That paper also uses recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to overcome some diﬃculties of the feedforward neural
networks. [47] uses long short-term memory neural networks, a special kind of RNN. [48] use deep reinforcement
learning (deep RL) and policy gradients, and do a comparison between deep RL, IDM, RNN, loess, and feedforward
neural networks.
3
Calibration
It is useful to rewrite the second order diﬀerential equation Eq. (1) as a system of ﬁrst order equations:
˙xn(t) =
 ˙x∗
n(t)
˙vn(t)

=

vn(t)
h∗(xn−1(t −τn), xn(t −τn), pn)

= hn(xn(t), xn(t −τn), xL(n)(t −τn), pn)
(4)
where xn is now a vector consisting of the position and velocity of vehicle n at time t. x∗
n and vn refer to the position
and speed for vehicle n. pn denotes the parameters for vehicle n. L(n, t) refers to the leader of vehicle n at time t, and
we denote the lead trajectory as xL(n) (time dependence suppressed) to reﬂect the fact that the index corresponding
to the lead vehicle may change due to lane changing. Eq. (4) is what we refer to when we say “car-following model”
and its solution xi(t) is a “simulated trajectory”.
The calibration is done for some arbitrarily sized platoon of n vehicles, indexed as 1, . . . , n. Each vehicle has some
individual parameters pi and a corresponding car following model hi, so all vehicles have their own set of parameters,
and pi only describes vehicle i.
Let p be a concatenated vector of all the parameters, so p = [p1, p2, . . . , pn].
Calibration ﬁnds the parameters p which minimize the total loss between the simulated trajectories xi(t) and the
corresponding measured vehicle trajectories, which are denoted ˆxi(t). The loss function is denoted as f(xi, ˆxi, t) and
represents the goodness of ﬁt of the simulated trajectory xi at time t. The measurements ˆxi(t) are known in the
interval [ti, Ti] for each i.
In order to compute the simulated trajectories for each vehicle i, we require a lead vehicle trajectory xL(i)(t) as well
as an initial condition xi(ti). The time interval that the lead vehicle trajectory is known is denoted [ti, Ti−1]. xi(ti)
is the initial condition, which is speciﬁed as xi(ti) = ˆxi(ti) for an ODE model.
For an ODE, the optimization problem is
min
p
F =
n
X
i=1
Z Ti−1
ti
f(xi, ˆxi, t)dt
(5)
s.t.
˙xi(t) −hi(xi(t), xL(i)(t), pi) = 0,
t ∈[ti, Ti−1],
i = 1, . . . , n
xi(ti) −ˆxi(ti) = 0
i = 1, . . . , n
blow ≤p ≤bhigh
The objective function F is deﬁned as the integral of the loss function f over time, summed over each simulated
vehicle.
The constraints are that the simulated trajectories xi obey the car-following model hi from time ti to
Ti−1, with the initial conditions xi(ti) = ˆxi(ti). There may also be some box constraints blow, bhigh which prevent
parameters from reaching unrealistic values.
The DDE case is similarly deﬁned:
min
p
F =
n
X
i=1
Z T ∗
i−1
ti+τi
f(xi, ˆxi, t)dt
(6)
s.t.
˙xi(t) −hi(xi(t), xi(t −τi), xL(i)(t −τi), pi) = 0,
t ∈[ti + τi, T ∗
i−1],
i = 1, . . . , n
xi(t) −ˆxi(t) = 0
t ∈[ti, ti + τi],
i = 1, . . . , n
blow ≤p ≤bhigh
where T ∗
i−1 = min{Ti−1 + τi, Ti}, and the reaction time for vehicle i, τi, is assumed to be a model parameter.
xi(t) −ˆxi(t) = 0 deﬁnes the history function for xi (DDEs have history functions as their initial conditions).
3.1
Downstream Boundary Conditions for Car Following Models
In Eqs. (5) and (6) we have speciﬁed the initial conditions, which give the times vehicles enter the simulation and their
position/speed upon entering. These conditions might also be referred to as upstream boundary conditions since they
state how vehicles enter the simulation. For video data such as NGSim, which is recorded on a ﬁxed section of road,
downstream boundary conditions also need to be speciﬁed. Video data has staggered observation times (Ti−1 < Ti)
7

meaning that a vehicle’s leader leaves the study area before the vehicle itself. Figure 3 gives a visual depiction of this.
2
𝐿(1)
1
Direction of travel 
End of simulation
2
1
Direction of travel 
End of simulation
Figure 3: Boxes represent vehicles; vehicle 2 follows 1, and 1 follows L(1). In top panel, the leader L(1) is still in
the simulation and so the car following model can be used to update vehicle 1. In bottom panel, L(1) is no longer
in the simulation, and so a downstream boundary condition is used to update vehicle 1.
Car following models require a lead vehicle trajectory as input, therefore once the lead vehicle leaves the simulation,
the car following model can no longer be used. Downstream boundary conditions then give a rule for the dynamics
a vehicle follows once its lead vehicle leaves the simulation (i.e. they specify the dynamics for xi(t),
t ∈[Ti−1, Ti]).
The the boundary conditions we implement in this paper are
˙xi(t) = ˙ˆxi(t),
t ∈[Ti−1, Ti]
(7)
meaning that when a vehicle’s leader is no longer available, the vehicle will move with whatever speed was recorded
in the data. Under these boundary conditions, the velocity vi(t) and acceleration ˙vi(t) will be piecewise continuous
(they will have a jump discontinuity at Ti−1). The objective F and gradient dF/dp are still continuous under this
boundary condition (see sections 3.3 and 4.1.2 for the relevant discussion on discontinuities in car following models
and how they impact the calibration problem). Note that for a DDE, the time T ∗
i−1 is used instead of Ti−1.
It is necessary to specify the downstream boundary conditions for two reasons. First, it allows vehicles to exit the
simulation area. Second, it allows congestion to propogate into the simulation area from downstream. This happens
when the boundary conditions specify a reduction in speed.
3.2
Reaction Time as a Parameter
Simulated trajectories are computed numerically with a speciﬁed time discretization. Since we want to compare
the simulated trajectories with the actual measurements, it makes sense for the simulation to use the same time
discretization as the data. For example, if the data is recorded every 0.1 seconds, the simulated trajectories should
use a time step of 0.1 seconds. If the simulation used a diﬀerent time step (e.g. 0.09), then the loss can only be
calculated at a few points (e.g. 0.9, 1.8) unless we deﬁne some interpolation procedure.
For a DDE, the time discretization and reaction time need to be multiples of each other. If the simulation uses
a time step of 0.1 seconds, then the reaction time will have to be an integer multiple of 0.1 (e.g. 0.1, 0.2). We can
either:
1. Enforce that every vehicle’s reaction time is a integer multiple of 0.1
2. Allow reaction time to be a continuous variable and deﬁne the loss function through interpolation.
If we choose 1, it leads to a mixed integer nonlinear programming problem (MINLP). This is a much harder problem
than the original nonlinear program. One approach used in [16] would be to split up all vehicles into small platoons
(either pairs or triplets) and use a brute force search for reaction time.
However, even when the platoons are
small, using brute force vastly increases computation because the calibration has to be repeated for every possible
combination of reaction times.
8

The other option is to use an approach similar to [23] where reaction time is a continuous variable and interpolation
is used on the simulated trajectories. In general, any sort of interpolation could be used, but linear interpolation is
the most common. In this approach, interpolation needs to be used on the lead trajectory and initial history function
in order to deﬁne the model. Assuming the numerical time step is not equal to the delay, interpolation will need to
be used on the simulated trajectory as well.
One issue with interpolation is how to compute the loss function. Speciﬁcally, assuming the simulation is deﬁned
on a diﬀerent set of times than the measurements, should the simulation be interpolated onto the measurement’s
times or vice versa? We suggest doing both. This avoids the possibility of error cancelation occurring during the
interpolation and causing the loss function to be erroneously small. In this scenario it would be preferable to reweight
the loss function as well since the loss will be computed over more points.
3.3
Multiple Regimes, Lane Changing, and Discontinuities in Car Following Models
We say a model has multiple regimes when the model is expressed either as a piecewise function, or by using min
and max functions. These types of modiﬁcations are frequently applied in practice. Perhaps the most common are
examples like Eq. (2), where the maximum speed is explicitly constrained by some constant vf. For second order
models, often the acceleration will be constrained between minimum and maximum accelerations amin, amax. Besides
these simpler regimes which implement bounds on the acceleration and/or velocity, there are also models which use
diﬀerent regimes to describe diﬀerent car following behavior. The Gipps model ([49]) is one such example, which
has one regime to describe normal car following behavior, and a second regime which implements an emergency
braking behavior. Other examples of multi-regime models are the constant acceleration heuristic proposed in [50],
the follower stopper controller proposed in [51], or any model implementing action points. We consider
hi(xi, xL(i), pi) =
(
hi,2
gi,2(xi, xL(i), pi) ≥0
hi,1
otherwise
(8)
as a general form of a two regime car following model, with the two regimes hi,1 and hi,2. The condition for the
associated regime to become activated is gi,2 (which is possibly a vector valued function). For example with Eq. (2):
hi,1 = (xL(n) −xn −sjam)/α, hi,2 = vf and gi,2 = hi,1 −hi,2. There must always be m −1 such conditions for a
model with m regimes, so a model with more regimes will simply have hi,2, . . . , hi,m and gi,2, . . . , gi,m.
In the case of a ﬁrst order model’s velocity being bounded, or a second order model’s acceleration being bounded,
the resulting model hi is everywhere continuous (because both regimes will be equal when the switching condition
gi,2 is met). In general a multi-regime model need not be everywhere continuous. Gipps and follower stopper are
both examples of a multi-regime model being everywhere continuous; the constant acceleration heuristic or a model
implementing action points are examples not guarenteed to be continuous when switching between regimes.
Of
course, even for a multi-regime model which is everywhere continuous, its derivatives will have discontinuities when
switching between regimes. Note that a multi-regime model written using min and max will always be continuous.
The reason why we prefer using the form Eq. (8) is because 1) it is more general, 2) we can explicitly refer to the
switching condition gi,2 and 3) the regime of the model is explicitly stated, which avoids the problem of the regime
being ambiguous when the quantities inside a min / max are equal.
Lane changing is another issue which causes discontinuities in car following models. Speciﬁcally, whenever a lead
vehicle changes, i.e. L(i, t) changes, then the lead vehicle trajectory xL(i) will have a jump discontinuity, and therefore
hi will have a jump discontinuity as well.
Given that lane changing always causes discontinuities and multi-regime models may cause discontinuities, one may
worry whether or not the objective F will have discontinuities, and whether or not the gradient dF/dp is even
guarenteed to exist. We give suﬃcient conditions for the continuity of F and dF/dp in section 4.1.2.
3.4
Algorithms for Solving the Calibration Problem
Eqs. (5) and (6) are nonlinear and non-convex optimization problems that must be solved numerically. Current
approaches usually rely on gradient-free optimization, with genetic algorithm (GA) and Nelder-Mead simplex algo-
rithm (NM) being the two most commonly applied algorithms ([12, 52, 13, 14, 53, 23, 15, 16]). These methods have
the disadvantage of being slow to converge, and require many objective function evaluations. The objective F is
relatively expensive to compute in this context because we ﬁrst must solve a system of diﬀerential equations (i.e.
compute the simulated trajectories). As an alternative to directly solving the optimization problems (5) and (6),
parameters can be estimated directly from data using statistics techniques ([54, 55, 56, 57]) but this approach is not
guaranteed to ﬁnd local minima. Also, models may have parameters which do not have clear physical interpretations,
and therefore cannot be directly estimated.
9

Gradient-based optimization algorithms can potentially solve the calibration problem faster than gradient-free
approaches. However, even though most optimization algorithms use gradient information, not many gradient-based
algorithms have been examined in the calibration literature. To the authors’ knowledge, the only gradient-based
algorithms that have been considered are simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA) (see [58]),
Lindo’s Multistart (a commercial solver’s global optimization routine, see [59]), and sequential quadratic programming
using ﬁltering (SQP-ﬁlter, see [60]). In [61] SQP-ﬁlter was found to give better solutions than NM or GA, as well
as solve the problem up to 10 times faster; even better results were found when it was additionally combined
with gradient-free algorithm DIRECT ([62]). [35] did not consider computational speed, but found the Multistart
algorithm had a much higher chance of ﬁnding the true global minimum compared to GA or NM.
Even if one only knows how to explicitly evaluate the objective function F, it is not necessary to use gradient-free
optimization because the gradient (the vector dF/dp) can be calculated numerically. To do this, one varies the
parameters p one at a time, and recomputes the objective each time a parameter is varied. Then the gradient can
be calculated using ﬁnite diﬀerences. We refer to this as the ﬁnite diﬀerence approach for computing the gradient,
and it requires us to recompute the simulated trajectories of every single vehicle m additional times, where m is the
number of parameters. When using a forward euler scheme with stepsize ∆t for an ODE model, the computation
cost for computing the simulated trajectories once is O(T(n)), where T(n) = Pn
i=1(Ti−1 −ti)/∆t. So computing the
gradient with ﬁnite diﬀerences has a complexity of O(mT(n)). The adjoint method has complexity O(T(n)), and so
it is the prefered method for computing the gradient when m is large ([63, 64]).
4
Adjoint Method and Gradient-Based Optimization
In this paper we are primarily concerned with applying the adjoint method to Eq. (5) in order to eﬃciently evaluate
the gradient dF/dp for an ODE model. The gradient can then be used with any gradient-based optimization routine.
In this section we derive the gradient and compare it to using ﬁnite diﬀerences; we consider diﬀerent optimization
algorithms in the next section.
The adjoint method can also be applied to the calibration problem (6) where the model includes time delay. It can
also be used to calculate the hessian. Both of these extensions follow the same techniques elaborated in this section,
and are included in the appendix.
We ﬁrst consider the calibration of a single vehicle (n = 1) before dealing with the general case of an arbitrary
number of vehicles.
4.1
Adjoint Method for ODEs
In our notation, xi, hi, and p are vectors, and f and F are scalars. A derivative of a scalar with respect to a
vector is a vector, so for example ∂f/∂xi = [∂f/∂x∗
i , ∂f/∂vi]. A derivative of a vector with respect to a vector is
a matrix, where the rows correspond to the vector being diﬀerentiated, and the columns correspond to the vector
being diﬀerentiated with respect to. For example,
∂xi
∂p =

∂x∗
i /∂p1
∂x∗
i /∂p2
. . .
∂x∗
i /∂pm
∂vi/∂p1
∂vi/∂p2
. . .
∂vi/∂pm

where pj represents the jth parameter. Additionally, the superscript T indicates transpose.
Deﬁne the augmented objective function, denoted L
L =
Z Tn−1
tn
dt

f(xn, ˆxn, t) + λT (t)
 ˙xn(t) −hn(xn(t), xL(n)(t), pn)

(9)
in this equation, λ(t) is referred to as the adjoint variable. λ(t) has the same dimension as the state variable xn(t),
so it is a length two vector for a second order model. Note that since ˙xn −hn(·) = 0, we have that L = F. These
equalities are always true regardless of the choice of λ(t).
Following the observation that L = F, it follows that dL/dp = dF/dp, so diﬀerentiating Eq. (9) with respect to the
parameters p gives
d
dpF = d
dpL =
Z Tn−1
tn
dt
 ∂f
∂xn
∂xn
∂p + λT (t)
∂˙xn
∂p −∂hn
∂xn
∂xn
∂p −∂hn
∂p

(10)
where quantities are evaluated at time t if not explicitly stated. Note in this case there are no terms depending on
the lead trajectory xL(n) since the platoon consists only of xn and the lead trajectory is regarded as ﬁxed.
10

Eq. (10) cannot be computed in the current form because we have no way to calculate ∂xn/∂p. The adjoint method
works by choosing the the adjoint variable λ(t) in a way which allows us to avoid the computation of the unknown
∂xn/∂p. When doing this, one will ﬁnd that the correct choice of λ(t) results in solving a similar system to the
original constraint, but “backwards” (e.g. when the model is an ODE, λ(t) will end up being deﬁned as an ODE
which is solved backwards in time). The equations which deﬁne the adjoint variable are known as the adjoint system.
To derive the adjoint system, ﬁrst apply integration by parts:
Z Tn−1
tn
λT (t)∂˙xn
∂p dt = λT (t)∂xn
∂p

Tn−1
tn
−
Z Tn−1
tn
˙λT (t)∂xn
∂p dt
(11)
The quantity ∂xn(tn)/∂p is known because it simply depends on the initial conditions; based on (5) it is simply zero.
We will choose λ(Tn−1) = 0 to eliminate the ∂xn(Tn−1)/∂p term. This choice becomes the initial conditions for the
adjoint system; note that L = F regardless of how the initial conditions for λ are chosen. Now combining Eqs. (10)
and (11):
d
dpF =
Z Tn−1
tn
dt
  ∂f
∂xn
−˙λT (t) −λT (t)∂hn
∂xn
 ∂xn
∂p −λT (t)∂hn
∂p

Then to avoid calculating ∂xn/∂p we will enforce:
∂f
∂xn
−˙λT (t) −λT (t)∂hn
∂xn
= 0,
t ∈[Tn−1, tn]
(12)
Eq. (12) deﬁnes a new diﬀerential equation in λ(t). Our choice λ(Tn−1) = 0 is the corresponding initial condition.
Then after solving for λ(t) we can calculate the desired gradient:
d
dpF = −
Z Tn−1
tn
λT (t)∂hn
∂p dt
(13)
4.1.1
N Car Platoon
Now we will apply the adjoint method to a platoon of arbitrary size, and sketch a general algorithm for computing
the gradient. Deﬁne the augmented objective function and proceed as before. Again, we suppress t dependence for
clarity.
L =
n
X
i=1
 Z Ti−1
ti
f(xi, ˆxi) + λT
i
 ˙xi −hi(xi, xL(i), pi)

dt +
Z Ti
Ti−1
λT
i ( ˙xi −˙ˆxi)dt
!
(14)
d
dpF = d
dpL =
n
X
i=1
 Z Ti−1
ti
∂f
∂xi
∂xi
∂p −λT
i (t)∂hi
∂xi
∂xi
∂p −λT
i (t)∂hi
∂p dt
!
+
n
X
i=1
 Z Ti
ti
λT
i (t)∂˙xi
∂p −1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)λT
G(i)(t)∂hG(i)
∂xi
∂xi
∂p dt
!
Here, λn corresponds to the adjoint variables for vehicle n. Similar to how L(n, t) was deﬁned, G(n, t) is deﬁned
as the index of vehicle n’s follower at time t, so that xG(n) is the following trajectory of vehicle n. If vehicle n has
no follower at time t, or if the follower is not part of the platoon being calibrated, let G(n, t) return zero. 1 is the
indicator function. When n > 1, the downstream boundary conditions must be put into the augmented objective
function, because a vehicle i may aﬀect its follower in the time [Ti−1, Ti], even though it only contributes to the loss
function during [ti, Ti−1].
Apply integration by parts, take the initial condition as λi(Ti) = 0, and gather terms with ∂xi/∂p to form the adjoint
system:
−˙λT
i (t) + 1(t ≤Ti−1)
 ∂f
∂xi
−λT
i (t)∂hi
∂xi

−1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)λT
G(i)(t)∂hG(i)
∂xi
= 0,
t ∈[Ti, ti], ∀i
(15)
Comparing this adjoint system to the one for a single vehicle (12), the diﬀerence here is that there is an extra
contribution which occurs from the coupling between vehicles. This coupling term occurs only when a vehicle acts
as a leader for another vehicle in the same platoon. After solving the adjoint system,
d
dpF =
n
X
i=1
 
−
Z Ti−1
ti
λT
i (t)∂hi
∂p dt
!
(16)
11

All the partial derivatives in Eqs. (15), (16) are computed exactly for a given loss function and car-following model.
Solving for xi(t), λi(t), and dF/dp is done numerically with an appropriate time discretization. The same discretiza-
tion should be used for all quantities, so if one uses a forward euler scheme for xi, the same forward euler scheme
should be used for λi and the integral in F should use a left Riemann sum. Note as well that for a multi-regime
model, one should keep the regime for each timestep in memory, because otherwise the switching condition gi,n will
have to be evaluated at each timestep when computing the adjoint variables.
We deﬁne a general algorithm for computing F, d
dpF:
Inputs: measured trajectory data ˆx1(t), . . . , ˆxn(t), any necessary lead vehicle trajectories xL(i)(t) for i ∈[1, . . . , n], L(i, t) /∈
[1, . . . , n]. Models h1, . . . , hn with parameters p1, . . . , pn.
1. For each vehicle i ∈[1, . . . , n]:
(a) Compute simulated trajectory xi(t), t ∈[ti, Ti−1] by solving ˙xi(t) = hi(xi, xL(i), pi) with intial condition
xi(ti) = ˆxi(ti).
(b) Compute xi(t), t ∈[Ti−1, Ti] using downstream boundary conditions Eq. (7)
(c) Keep in memory: xi(t), G(i, t), and the regime of hi at each time
2. Compute objective F = Pn
i
R Ti−1
ti
f(xi, ˆxi, t)dt
3. For each adjoint variable i ∈[n, . . . , 1] : compute λi(t), t ∈[Ti, ti] by solving adjoint system Eq. (15) with
initial condition λi(Ti) = 0.
4. Compute gradient dF/dp = −Pn
i
R Ti−1
ti
λT
i ∂hi/∂p dt
Outputs:
F, dF/dp
4.1.2
Suﬃcient Conditions for a Continuous Objective and Gradient
Theorem 1. The following are suﬃcient conditions for F and dF/dp to be continuous:
1. the loss function f(xi, ˆxi) and its partial derivative ∂f/∂xi are piecewise continuous on [ti, Ti−1] for all i
2. the car following model hi(xi, xL(i), pi) and its partial derivatives ∂hi/∂xi, ∂hi/∂p, and ∂hi/∂xL(i) are piecewise
continuous on [ti, Ti−1] for all i
3. ∂hi/∂xi must be able to be bounded by a constant
4. for a multi-regime model, the Eq. 17 must be satisﬁed
where it is additionally assumed that xL(i)(t), L(i, t) /∈[1, . . . , n] (any lead vehicle trajectories which are required but
not simulated) are piecewise continuous and ˆxi(t), i ∈[1, . . . , n] are continuous.
Corollary 1. If in addition to F and dF/dp being continuous, ∂f/∂xi, ∂hi/∂xL(i), and ∂hi/∂p are bounded, then
F is Lipschitz continuous.
We conclude that a multi-regime model need not be continuous when switching between regimes, and lane
changing, which will always cause jump discontinuities in hi(xi, xL(i), pi), is allowed. Note that by piecewise continuity
we mean a model (or loss function) can switch regimes only a ﬁnite number of times in a ﬁnite time interval (and
each regime is continuous); additionally, the time interval of each regime must be continuous with respect to the
model parameters. Refer to the the full proof in the appendix for further details. We also show in the appendix that
the objective is Lipschitz continuous for the OVM, which was the model used for the numerical experiments in this
paper.
4.2
Implementation of Adjoint Method and Calibration Problem
To test the adjoint method and optimization algorithms, the calibration problem Eq. (5) was implemented in python
for the optimal velocity model. The equations below show the functional form of the model as originally formulated
in [57] and [26].
¨xn(t) = c4(V (s) −˙xn(t))
V (s) = c1[tanh(c2s −c3 −c5) −tanh(−c3)]
12

c1 through c5 are the 5 parameters of the model. s is the space headway, deﬁned as s = xL(i) −xi −lL(i), where li
is the length of vehicle i. All vehicles have their own unique parameters, so the total number of parameters in the
optimization problem is 5 times the number of vehicles.
The optimal velocity model and its adjoint system were both discretized with a forward euler scheme. The data
used was the reconstructed NGSim data ([29]), so a time step of .1 seconds was used to be consistent with this data.
The loss function f used was square error, which was discretized with a left Riemann sum.
f(xi, ˆxi, t) = (x∗
i (t) −ˆx∗
i (t))2
F =
n
X
i=1
Ti−1
X
t=ti
f(xi, ˆxi, t)
which is equivalent to minimizing the root mean square error (RMSE)
RMSE =
s
F
Pn
i=1 Ti−1 −ti
Since only a car following model is being calibrated, any lane changes in the measurements will be the same lane
changes in the simulation. This also means that the leader/follower relationships in the simulation are the same as
they are in the data. This allows trajectories to be calibrated at the level of individual vehicles, since it does not make
sense to directly compare the simulated and measured trajectories of a vehicle if the simulation and measurements
have diﬀerent lead vehicles.
4.3
Adjoint method compared to other methods for calculating the gradient
Many optimization algorithms will automatically use ﬁnite diﬀerences to compute the gradient if an explicit gradient
function is not given. Simultaneous perturbation is another option when using an optimization algorithm like the
one outlined in [58]. Then, assuming that one has chosen to use a gradient-based algorithm for calibration, it is of
practical interest to investigate how the adjoint method compares to both of these methods. Speciﬁcally, how does
the speed and accuracy of these three methods compare in practice?
4.3.1
Comparison of Speed
The computational cost of an objective function evaluation is O(T(n)), where T(n) is the number of simulated
timesteps, added over all n vehicles. The theoretical computational complexities for the adjoint method is O(T(n)),
while forward diﬀerences has O(mT(n)), where m is the number of parameters. The simultaneous perturbation
method has O(kT(n)) complexity, where the ﬁnal gradient is the average of k estimates of the gradient. Note that
these computational complexities are only for the gradient calculation and do not consider the complexity of whatever
optimization algorithm the gradient is used with.
To test these theoretical results in practice, the gradient of the calibration problem was calculated and the platoon
size was varied. Since the OVM was used, the total number of parameters is 5 times the number of vehicles. We
considered a platoon having between 1 and 15 vehicles. The results are shown in the ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4’s left panel shows the total CPU time, measured in seconds, needed to calculate the gradient of the calibration
problem using the three diﬀerent methods. The simultaneous perturbation was done with both 1 and 3 trials, denoted
SPSA and SPSA-3. The right panel shows the time needed to calculate the gradient divided by the time needed to
calculate the objective. To minimize the randomness in the CPU times, each data point was repeated 10 times and the
results were averaged. Some variation is still present because some vehicles are observed for shorter times. The same
15 vehicles were used in the experiment and always added in the same order. It should also be stated that for either
a ﬁnite diﬀerencing scheme or for the adjoint method, one needs to ﬁrst compute the objective before computing the
gradient. Therefore, it should be implicitly understood that “time to calculate the gradient”, really refers to “time to
calculate both the objective and gradient” for those two methods. This shows that using a ﬁnite diﬀerence method
quickly becomes intractable when the number of parameters increases. The time increases quadratically in the left
panel because both m and T(n) are increasing. In the right panel, when the time needed to calculate the gradient is
divided by the time needed to calculate the objective, one sees the complexity growing as a linear function of m. In
that ﬁgure, we also see that the complexities for the adjoint method and simultaneous perturbation do not depend
on m.
The table 1 shows the cpu times for 5-15 parameters. One can observe that this implementation of the adjoint
method for OVM requires the equivalent of 4 objective function solves, whereas forward diﬀerences requires m + 1
(where there are m parameters).
13

Figure 4: Time for a single evaluation of the gradient for a progressively larger calibration problem. The objective
varied from the loss from a single vehicle (5 parameters) to 15 vehicles (75 parameters).
Table 1: Table of speeds for adjoint method compared to ﬁnite diﬀerences for computing the gradient. Relative time
refers to the equivalent number of objective function evaluations.
Parameters
Obj. time (s)
Adjoint time (s)
Adjoint relative time
Finite time (s)
Finite relative time
5
.0062
.0250
4.03
.0390
6.3
10
.0109
.0438
4.02
.1250
11.5
15
.0172
.0686
3.99
.2811
16.3
4.3.2
Comparison of Accuracy
For the calibration problem, there is no way to calculate the gradient exactly because there is no closed form solution
for the car following model. To evaluate the accuracy of the adjoint method and simultaneous perturbation, we
will therefore treat the result from forward diﬀerences as the true solution. In the experiment, points were evenly
sampled between an initial starting guess and the global minimum of the calibration problem for a single vehicle. At
each of these points in the parameter space, the relative error was calculated
relative error = ||∇fdF −∇F||2
||∇fdF||2
where ∇fdF is the gradient calculated with forward diﬀerences, ∇F is the gradient calculated with the adjoint
method or simultaneous perturbation, and ||·||2 denotes the 2 norm. The results of the experiment are shown below.
For the adjoint method, the relative error is usually small, on the order of 10−6. When the parameters start to
become close to a local minimum, the relative error starts to rapidly increase to the order of 10−4 −10−3. When
at the optimum, the relative error becomes as high as .3. The reason why the relative error increases is because as
the parameters approach the minimum, the norm of the gradient decreases. The right panel shows the relationship
between the log of the norm of the gradient calculated with ﬁnite diﬀerences, and the log of the relative error. One
can see that they are inversely proportional to each other. This makes theoretical sense: we expect the residual
∇fdF −∇F to always be on approximately the same order of magnitude since it depends mainly on truncation error
which does not change with the parameters. Then, it follows that the relative error is dominated by the ||∇fdF||
term in the denominator, which is what we observe.
The relative error for simultaneous perturbation follows the same shape as the adjoint method, but is always about
6 orders of magnitude larger. Of course, you would not use simultaneous perturbation as a substitute for the ﬁnite
diﬀerence gradient, since it is used with its own optimization algorithm.
Nonetheless, this shows that although
the two methods (adjoint and simultaneous perturbation) both have a ﬂat computational cost with the number of
14

Figure 5: Compares the accuracy of the gradient for the adjoint method and simultaneous perturbation. The ﬁnite
diﬀerences gradient is treated as the exact gradient.
parameters, they have diﬀerent uses. The reason why the the error for simultaneous perturbation is quite high in
this context is because the gradient is scaled very poorly for the OVM model, meaning the parameters have very
diﬀerent sensitivities. This poor scaling is a common feature for car following models.
5
Benchmarking diﬀerent Algorithms and the Adjoint method
The ideal optimization algorithm would be one that can not only solve the problem quickly, but also one that is
able to avoid bad solutions corresponding to local extrema. Because existing literature has focused on gradient-free
optimization algorithms, not much is known about using gradient/Hessian-based optimization to solve the calibration
problem. The only works the authors know of in the car following calibration literature that consider gradient based
optimization are [61] and [35]. Both those works found the gradient based algorithms to work best overall. This result
is consistent with other engineering applications; for example [65] and [66] deal with aerodynamic shape optimization
and material science respectively, and report that gradient-based optimization can oﬀer signiﬁcant speed increases.
To establish the beneﬁts of gradient based optimization and the adjoint method, we consider 2 gradient-free and 5
gradient-based optimization algorithms. The diﬀerent algorithms, their speciﬁc implementations, and abbreviations
used throughout the rest of the paper, are detailed below.
• Genetic Algorithm (GA) - an initial population of trial solutions is randomly selected throughout the parameter
space. In each iteration, the population is altered through stochastic processes referred to as “mutation” and
“crossover”, and then updated in a selection step. An implementation following [67] is part of the scipy package
in python.
• Nelder-Mead Simplex (NM) - a given initial guess is used to deﬁne a collection of points (a simplex).
In
each iteration, the corners of the simplex are updated according to deterministic rules. Implemented in scipy
following [68]. NM works on unconstrained problems, so a large penalty term was added to the objective if the
parameters went outside the bounds.
• Limited memory BFGS for bound constraints (BFGS) - at every iteration, gradient information from the previ-
ous iterates is used in the BFGS formula to form an approximation to the hessian. A quadratic approximation
to the objective is formed, and the generalized cauchy point of this approximation is then found, which deﬁnes a
set of active bound constraints. A minimization is then performed over the variables with inactive constraints,
while the variables with active constraints are held ﬁxed. The solution to this last minimization ﬁnally de-
ﬁnes the search direction for the algorithm, and a line search is performed to determine the step length. The
algorithm, referred to as l-bfgs-b, is due to [69] and [70] and wrapped as part of the scipy package.
15

• Truncated Newton Conjugate (TNC) - at every iteration, instead of explicitly computing the Newton direction
−∇2F −1∇F, the conjugate gradient method is applied to the newton system ∇2Fd = −∇F (where d is the
search direction to be determined). Conjugate gradient is itself an iterative algorithm, and it is terminated
early (truncated) to give an approximate solution to the newton system which is also guaranteed to deﬁne
a direction of descent. A line search is then performed to deﬁne the step length. The conjugate gradient
algorithm only needs hessian-vector products which can be computed eﬃciently using ﬁnite diﬀerences, so the
full hessian never needs to be calculated. An implementation due to [71] is wrapped as part of scipy. That
implementation uses a conjugate gradient preconditioner based on the BFGS update, and the search direction
is projected to enforce the bound constraints.
• Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation (SPSA) - At each iteration, the gradient is approximated
using simultaneous perturbation. Then the algorithm moves in the direction of the negative gradient with a
ﬁxed step length, so no line search is performed. The size of the step length is gradually reduced in subsequent
iterations. Implemented in python following [58]; the step sizes and number of iterations were manually tuned
by hand.
• Gradient Descent (GD) - At every iteration, the negative gradient is computed and scaled according to the
spectral step length (also known as the Barzilei Borwein method). The scaled gradient is then projected onto
the bound constraints to deﬁne the search direction, and a nonmonotone backtracking linesearch is used to
deﬁne the step length. Implemented according to [72] in python. The algorithm was tested with diﬀerent line
searches (backtracking, weak/strong wolfe, watchdog, see [73]) and the nonmonotone backtracking gave the
best performance.
• Sequential quadratic programming (SQP) - At every iteration the hessian is computed and the search direction
is deﬁned by the newton direction projected onto the bound constraints. This algorithm explicitly computes the
hessian instead of approximating it. Because the hessian may fail to be positive deﬁnite, the search direction is
safeguarded so that if the newton direction fails to deﬁne a direction of descent, the algorithm instead searches
in the direction of the negative gradient. A small regularization is also added to the hessian so that it can
always be inverted. The algorithm is a simple python implementation of sequential quadratic programming
based on [73]. We again found the nonmonotone backtracking linesearch to be most eﬀective.
In summary, out of all the algorithms tested: NM and GA are gradient-free; SPSA and GA are stochastic; BFGS
and TNC are quasi-newton; GD and SPSA do not use hessian information; SQP explicitly computes the hessian;
GA is the only global algorithm.
For the TNC, BFGS, GD, and SQP algorithms, we considered two separate modiﬁcations for each algorithm.
First, either the ﬁnite diﬀerence method or the adjoint method can be used to compute the gradient, and we denote
this by either “Fin” or ”Adj” respectively. Second we considered starting from multiple initial guesses. Multiple
initial guesses are speciﬁed, and after each calibration, if the RMSE was above a speciﬁed threshold, the next initial
guess would be used. The same 3 initial guesses were used in the same order for all algorithms requiring an initial
guess. So with a threshold of 0, 3 guesses are always used, and with an arbitrarily large threshold, only a single
guess will be used. The thresholds of 0, 7.5 and ∞were used, and denoted in reference to the algorithm. The initial
guesses used are based oﬀof the calibrated parameters found from [57].
5.1
Evaluating Algorithm Performance
As detailed in section 4.2, we tested the calibration problem on the OVM car following model using squared error
in distance as the loss function (equivalent to minimizing the RMSE). In this experiment, for each algorithm, every
vehicle in the reconstructed NGSim dataset was calibrated using the true measurements of its lead trajectory. In
total, there were 7 unique algorithms and 23 total algorithms tested when including the variants described above.
The calibration results are evaluated primarily based on three diﬀerent measures: the average calibration time for
a single vehicle, the % of the time the algorithm found the global minimum, and the average RMSE of a calibrated
vehicle. Since there is no way to know the actual global minimum for the calibration problem, we regard the global
minimum for a vehicle as being the best result out of all the algorithms, and we regard an algorithm as having found
the global minimum if its RMSE is within 1/12 ft (1 inch) of this best result.
Based on these three metrics, all algorithms on the pareto front were identiﬁed and are shown in the table 2. In
ﬁgure 6 every algorithm is plotted in the RMSE - time and % found global optimum - time plane. The algorithms
on the pareto front are circled in black.
The only three algorithms on the pareto front were the GA, TNC, and BFGS. GA gave the best % of ﬁnding the
global optimum. TNC with the adjoint method and three guesses gave the best overall RMSE, and was the fastest
16

Table 2: Algorithms on the Pareto front. All algorithms tested shown in appendix.
Algorithm
% found
global opt
Avg.
RMSE (ft)
Avg.
Time (s)
Avg. RMSE / %
over global opt
Initial
Guesses
# Obj. Evals
# Grad. Evals
Adj BFGS-0
94.0
6.46
7.42
.10 / 2.0%
3
307.1
307.1
Adj BFGS-7.5
85.2
6.56
4.16
.20/6.8%
1.67
165.0
165.0
GA
95.0
6.47
33.5
.10/2.2%
-
5391
0
Fin BFGS-0
94.3
6.46
11.4
.10/2.2%
3
311.5
311.5
Fin BFGS-7.5
85.7
6.55
6.32
.19/6.3%
1.66
164.8
164.8
Adj TNC-0
90.7
6.43
6.87
.05/2.4%
3
285.7
285.7
Adj TNC-7.5
82.7
6.48
3.82
.11/5.0%
1.63
152.3
152.3
Adj TNC-∞
77.3
6.62
2.26
.25/7.7%
1
94.1
94.1
Figure 6: All algorithms plotted by the three metrics time, RMSE, and % found the global optimum. Algorithms on
the pareto front with respet to these three metrics circled in black.
algorithm overall when used with the adjoint method and a single guess. BFGS was slightly slower than TNC and
has a slightly higher RMSE, but it has a higher chance of ﬁnding the global optimum.
The conclusion of what algorithms are on the pareto front depends strongly on how “ﬁnding the global optimum”
is deﬁned. Here, we treat an algorithm as having found the global optimum if it gives a result within an inch (1/12)
of the best RMSE. Let us refer to this value of 1/12 as the “tolerance” for ﬁnding the global optimum. If a smaller
tolerance is used, then GA will no longer be on the pareto front. If a larger tolerance is used, GA and BFGS will
no longer be on the pareto front. For example, with a tolerance of 0, the pareto front consists of only the adj TNC
and adj BFGS variants, and adj BFGS-0 gives the highest chance of ﬁnding the global optimum. With a tolerance
of 1/2, the adj TNC variants are the only algorithms on the pareto front. The eﬀects of changing the tolerance are
shown in the table 3. Adj TNC will always be on the pareto front regardless of the tolerance because it gives the
best average RMSE for any given speed. No algorithms other than adj TNC, BFGS, and GA are ever on the pareto
front. The behavior shown in table 3 is explained by ﬁgure 7. That ﬁgure shows how the % found global optimum
metric changes with tolerance. For example, a tolerance of 1/12 corresponds to -1.08 in a log scale, and the top right
panel shows that at that point, the GA has the highest chance of ﬁnding the global optimum. The same panel shows
that if the tolerance increases, adj TNC-0 will have the highest chance, and that adj BFGS-0 will have the highest
chance if the tolerance decreases.
BFGS typically found the best solution out of all the algorithms tested, but its distribution of RMSE has a
heavier tail in the sense that there were also some vehicles for which BFGS couldn’t ﬁnd a good solution. TNC is
most consistent because its distribution shows less of a heavy tail (it is the ﬁrst to reach 100% found global optimum
as the tolerance increases). The GA has a tail similar to BFGS and performs well when only a moderate tolerance
is needed.
The appendix includes a plot that shows the distributions of RMSE (on a non-log scale), and the diﬀerences
17

Table 3: Algorithms on the Pareto front depend on how “ﬁnding the global optimum” is deﬁned (without that
metric, TNC with the adjoint method would be the only algorithm on the pareto front). Set notation indicates the
strategies used for initial guesses.
Tolerance for
global opt (ft)
Algorithms on the pareto front
0
Adj TNC-{0, 7.5, Inf}, Adj BFGS-{0, 7.5, Inf}
1/24
Adj TNC-{0, 7.5, Inf}, Adj BFGS-{0, 7.5, Inf}, Fin BFGS-{0, 7.5}
1/12
Adj TNC-{0, 7.5, Inf}, Adj BFGS-{0, 7.5}, Fin BFGS-{0, 7.5}, GA
1/4
Adj TNC-{0, 7.5, Inf}, GA
1/2
Adj TNC-{0, 7.5, Inf}
between the three algorithms are essentially indistinguishable at that resolution.
Figure 7: Shows the distribution of RMSE over the global optimum for GA, Adj TNC-0, Adj BFGS-0 in top two
panels. Bottom two panels show the distributions over all algorithms on the pareto front (with a tolerance of 1/12
used for obtaining the pareto front). Right panels are zoomed in windows of left panels.
Overall, these diﬀerences between the three algorithms (GA, adj TNC-0, adj BFGS-0) are relatively minor, with
all three giving essentially the same average RMSE (GA had a slightly worse RMSE than the other two). It’s not
clear to the authors whether the subtle diﬀerences between them would cause any diﬀerences in practice. However,
the BFGS and TNC algorithms both give a signiﬁcant speed increase; the adjoint method with BFGS or TNC is
about 5 times faster than the GA on average. Even when using ﬁnite diﬀerences instead of the adjoint method,
BFGS is still about 3 times faster than the GA (ﬁnite diﬀerences with TNC did not work well). A much larger
speed increase can be realized with only a small trade oﬀin accuracy. Adj TNC-Inf had an average RMSE of 6.62
compared to 6.47 for the GA, but is 15 times faster. Adj TNC-7.5 had an average RMSE of 6.48 while being 9 times
faster than the GA.
The comparison between the diﬀerent strategies for initial guesses (0, 7.5, Inf) shows the trade oﬀbetween speed
and accuracy when starting a local search based algorithm multiple times. For car following models, it seems that
even a suboptimal local minimum still gives a reasonable accuracy. The diﬀerence in accuracy made by starting
a algorithm multiple times is smaller than the diﬀerence from using another algorithm, so regardless of the initial
guess, the local search seems to converge to similar parameters. We also saw that a good local search algorithm
(in this case, the quasi-newton algorithms) can give results equivalent to a global search algorithm (the GA) when
a small number of initial guesses are used. Of course, each initial guess used greatly increases the time needed for
18

the algorithm, so a hybrid strategy similar to the one proposed in [61] can be considered if a large number of initial
guesses are needed to achieve good performance.
Comparing the results of using the adjoint method to ﬁnite diﬀerences, the diﬀerences between the two methods
depends heavily on the algorithm used.
For BFGS, using ﬁnite diﬀerences instead of the adjoint method gives
essentially the same result, in the same number of objective/gradient evaluations, and the diﬀerence is speeds is
consistent with the speed increase found in section 4. For TNC, the algorithm does not perform well when ﬁnite
diﬀerences is used.
All the attention so far has been concentrated on the TNC, BFGS, and GA algorithms since those gave good
results. None of the other algorithms performed well. NM is designed for unconstrained problems, so it is unsurprising
that it did not perform as well as an algorithm designed speciﬁcally to deal with box constraints (recall that here the
box bounds were enforced by adding a penalty term). GD suﬀered from the problem widely reported in the literature
where it takes a very large number of iterations to fully converge. The majority of the time, the algorithm terminates
due to exceeding the maximum number of evaluations allowed. For the SQP (recall in this case we explicitly computed
the Hessian), we found that the newton direction often fails to deﬁne a direction of descent, and the algorithm simply
searches in the direction of the gradient instead. Then, the algorithm spends a lot of computational time computing
the Hessian but ends up not using it for anything, so explicitly computing the hessian seems to not work poorly for
car following calibration; BFGS updating to estimate the Hessian, or a truncated newton method for estimating the
newton direction should be used instead. SPSA performed worst out of all algorithms tested because of the vastly
diﬀerent sensitivities for car following models, as well as the rapidly changing magnitude of the gradient. A variant
of SPSA such as c-SPSA ([74]) or W-SPSA ([75]) may have overcome these issues.
The analysis in this section has shown the value of gradient based algorithms and the adjoint method; compared
to gradient free methods, they can give the same overall performance while oﬀering a signiﬁcant speed increase. We
found that for the calibration of a single vehicle, the truncated newton (TNC) algorithm with the adjoint method
gives a slightly more accurate calibration than a genetic algorithm, while also being 5 times faster. TNC is 15 times
faster than the genetic algorithm if ≈2% decrease in accuracy is acceptable (when only a single initial guess is used).
Actually, as we will see in the next subsection, when the calibration problem becomes larger, the beneﬁt of gradient
based algorithms and the adjoint method becomes even larger.
5.2
Calibration of larger platoons
Deﬁne platoon size as the number of vehicles calibrated at the same time (n in Eq. (5)). The simplest case is when
n = 1: a single vehicle is calibrated at a time (this was the strategy used in the above section). Taking n = 1 is how
most of the literature treats car following calibration. Moreover, trajectories are typically calibrated to the measured,
as opposed to simulated, lead trajectory. To the authors’ knowledge, [16] is the only paper which has taken a platoon
size of larger than 1 (n = 2 in that paper) and [46] is the only paper which considers the issue of predicting on the
simulated vs. measured lead trajectory. In actual traﬃc simulations, all vehicles are simulated at the same time,
and measured trajectories aren’t assumed to be available. In that case, errors from one vehicle can accumulate in
the following vehicles and produce unrealistic eﬀects. This motivates the question of calibrating platoons of vehicles,
where each vehicle uses the simulated lead trajectory.
In this section, we are interested in two questions regarding the calibration for a platoon size of n > 1. First, for
the diﬀerent methods considered so far (gradient free, gradient based with ﬁnite diﬀerences, adjoint method) how
does the time needed to solve the calibration problem scale with the number of parameters. Second, what is the
beneﬁt (in terms of RMSE) from considering a larger platoon of vehicles.
A platoon of 100 vehicles was formed from the NGSim data. The platoon was formed by randomly selecting
the ﬁrst vehicle to be calibrated, and then repeatedly adding vehicles which have their leaders in the platoon. We
considered calibrating these 100 vehicles with a platoon size n = 1, 2, . . . 10. When the platoon size doesn’t divide
100, the last platoon used will be the remainder (e.g. for n = 3, the last platoon is of size 1). Here the calibration is
done sequentially, so each vehicle is calibrated to the simulated trajectory of its leader.
To compare how diﬀerent algorithms scale, we performed calibration using the GA, Adj TNC, and Fin TNC
algorithms, as shown in ﬁgure 8. For each platoon of a speciﬁc size, the number of equivalent objective evaluations is
recorded. Gradient evaluations are converted into objective evaluations following the results of 4.3.1 (adjoint method
can compute the gradient and objective in the equivalent of 4 objective evaluations, ﬁnite diﬀerences computes the
gradient and objective in the equivalent of m + 1 objective evaluations, where m is the number of parameters). The
results are shown in ﬁgure 8.
Assuming that a gradient based algorithm converges in approximately the same number of gradient/objective
evaluations for either using ﬁnite diﬀerences or the adjoint method, the equivalent number of objective evaluations can
be easily converted between the two methods. Namely, if using the adjoint method requires g(m) total computational
19

Figure 8: Log (base 10) of equivalent number of objective evaluations required to solve the calibration problem for
an increasing platoon size (n). The number of parameters in each platoon is 5n. The brackets show the standard
deviation for the data points. The work required to solve the calibration problem increases at a much faster rate
when using gradient free optimization or ﬁnite diﬀerences compared to the adjoint method.
Table 4: Compares the number of equivalent objective evaluations for the calibration problem for an increasing
number of parameters, relative to the Adj TNC-0 algorithm.
# parameters
Adj TNC
Fin TNC
Fin TNC
relative evals.
GA
GA
relative evals.
5
1098
1790
1.63
5256
4.79
10
1200
3300
2.75
37715
31.4
15
1780
7139
4.01
135485
76.1
eﬀort for computing the gradient, for some arbitrary function g, then ﬁnite diﬀerences will require m+1
4 g(m). So
using ﬁnite diﬀerences will always scale an order of m worse than the adjoint method. For the GA, it is clear that
its cost is growing extremely fast with the number of parameters, and we only considered a platoon up to size 3
because of this reason. It was about 75 times as expensive as using TNC with the adjoint method for a problem
size of only 15 parameters. We conclude that when the number of parameters becomes large, using the adjoint
method with gradient based optimization can oﬀer an arbitrarily large speed increase compared to either gradient
free optimization or ﬁnite diﬀerences.
As for the eﬀect of platoon size on the overall RMSE of all 100 vehicles, the results are shown in ﬁgure 9. Note
overall RMSE is diﬀerent than average RMSE because vehicles are weighted according to how many observations
they have (see section 4.2). Also, the RMSE is expected to be higher here compared to the previous section since
the calibration is being done sequentially using the leader’s simulated trajectory instead of the leader’s measured
trajectory. The left panel shows the overall RMSE versus platoon size. The right panel shows the relative improve-
ment in RMSE. To calculate the relative improvement, the percent change in RMSE compared to a platoon size of
1 is calculated for a speciﬁc platoon. Then the average and standard deviation of the percent change is calculated
over all platoons of the speciﬁc size (e.g. 33 size 3 platoons or 10 size 10 platoons). The standard deviations are
quite large: for any speciﬁc platoon, the improvement could be as large as 50%, or the RMSE could sometimes be
signiﬁcantly worse. For a platoon size n = 2 or 3, we saw a neglible overall improvement. In both those cases, we
saw that the majority of platoons had an improvement of around 8% −9%, but there were some platoons which
achieved a signiﬁcantly worse ﬁt (20%-40%+ worse). These signiﬁcantly worse ﬁts suggest that in those cases, the
algorithm was converging to bad local minima which apparently were avoided when calibrating vehicles one at a
time. As the platoon size increased, the improvement became more consistent, and for platoon size n = 9 and 10 we
saw an overall 13.8% and 17.8% improvement respectively. The authors stress that this improvement was achieved
20

Figure 9: Left panel shows overall RMSE when using a varying platoon size for the calibration problem. Right panel
shows the percentage improvement from using the larger platoon sizes compared to calibrating a single vehicle at a
time. The bars show the standard deviation for each point.
without changing the algorithm or the model at all. The only thing that was changed was the platoon size (n in Eq.
(5)).
Overall, these results suggest that considering a larger platoon size can improve calibration results, and further
research on larger platoon sizes should be considered. In ﬁgure 9 we saw that the GA starts to perform better than
TNC when the platoon size increases. We also saw that for larger platoon sizes, there were some platoons which
ended up with a signiﬁcantly worse ﬁt compared to the case of n = 1. This suggests that the local search algorithm
(TNC) was having problems converging to bad local minima for n > 1. We therefore conclude that while using
multiple guesses was adequate for the calibration of a single vehicle, a more sophisticated strategy is needed when
multiple vehicles are being calibrated.
6
Conclusion
We considered an optimization based formulation of the calibration problem for car following models being calibrated
to trajectory data. It was shown how to apply the adjoint method to derive the gradient or hessian for an arbitrary
car following model formulated as either an ordinary or delay diﬀerential equation. Several algorithms for solving the
calibration problem were compared, and it was found that the best overall algorithms were the genetic algorithm,
l-bfgs-b, and truncated newton conjugate.
For the calibration of a single vehicle at a time, it was found that using the adjoint method and a quasi-newton
method gives slightly better performance than a genetic algorithm, and is 5 times faster. As the number of parameters
increases, the speed increase oﬀered by the adjoint method and gradient based optimization can become arbitrarily
large (for 15 parameters, a truncated newton algorithm using the adjoint method was 75 times faster than a genetic
algorithm). The adjoint method will always perform better than ﬁnite diﬀerences as the number of parameters
becomes large, because computing the gradient with the adjoint method has a ﬂat cost with respect to the number
of parameters, whereas using ﬁnite diﬀerences has a cost which increases linearally with the number of parameters.
Numerical experiments used the reconstructed NGsim data and the optimal velocity model.
There are two main directions for future research. In this paper we consider only the calibration of a car following
model, while a full microsimulator has several other important modules, such as route choice or lane changing
decision models. The question of how to apply the adjoint method to those other components can be considered in
the future so that the methodology could be applied to a full microsimulation model. There are also more questions
regarding the calibration of car following models. Future research can consider the eﬀect of a larger platoon size on
the calibration problem, so that multiple vehicles (which share leaders) are calibrated at a time. Another interesting
question is using the new highly accurate vehicle trajectory data ([18]) to compare and validate diﬀerent car following
21

models. Since it was found during this study that lane changing vehicle trajectories are not described well by car
following models, another question is how to incorporate lane changing dynamics into an arbitrary car following
model, and the authors have recently proposed a method for doing so in [76].
Appendix A - Proof of Theorem 1 and Corollary 1
Deﬁnition 1. We say that the function h(y(t), z(t)) is piecewise continuous on an interval I if there are a ﬁnite
number of points t ∈I where h(y(t), z(t)) is not continuous.
Deﬁnition 2. (Existence and Uniqueness Theorem.) Deﬁne the initial value problem
˙x(t) = h(t, x(t)),
x(t0) = x0
where h(t, y(t)) is a continuous function on the region R = {(t, x) : |t −t0| < s, |x −x0| < y}, and h is uniformly
Lipschitz in x, meaning

∂h
∂x
 ≤C
for some constant C in the region R. Then the solution x(t) exists and is unique on the interval |t −t0| < s∗for
some 0 < s∗< s.
Proof 1 (Proof of Theorem 1.). We say that there is a discontinuity for vehicle i, either in its car following model
or its adjoint variable, if at time t: a) its lead vehicle changes, b) its model regime changes, c) the vehicle changes
from the car following model to the downstream boundary condition, or d) the loss function f is not continuous at
time t. We will refer to these diﬀerent causes of discontinuities as types a) - d) respectively. Deﬁne the times θj for
j = 0, . . . , m as the set of all times when when any vehicle xi, i = 1, . . . , n experiences a discontinuity. The set {θj}
is of measure zero because each vehicle can contribute only a ﬁnite number of discontinuities. The assumption that
f and hi are piecewise continuous and switch regimes only a ﬁnite number of times means a vehicle can contribute
only a ﬁnite number of type b) or d) discontinuities. A vehicle switches to the downstream boundary only once,
contributing a single type c) discontinuity. And based on the physical nature of the problem it can be assumed that a
vehicle can change its lead vehicle only a ﬁnite number of times in a ﬁnite interval.
Some of the times θj may depend on the switching condition g in Eq. (8). These times may therefore depend on the
parameters p, and we use the notation θj(p) to refer to the switching times for parameters p. Besides the set {θj}
being ﬁnite, we also require that
lim
ϵ→0{θj(p + ϵ)} = {θj(p)}
(17)
meaning that the times of discontinuities must be continuous with respect to the parameters.
Let the set {θj} be ordered in increasing time,and let it include the ﬁrst and last times of the simulation θ0 =
min{t1, . . . , tn} and θm = max{T1, . . . , Tn}.
Since all vehicles have the same lead vehicle on each time interval
[θj, θj+1], on that interval there exists some ordered set of vehicles χj which contains all vehicles which are simulated
in that time interval, ordered such that the ﬁrst vehicle has no simulated vehicles as leaders (i.e. the vehicle farthest
downstream) and the last vehicle has no simulated vehicles as followers (i.e. the vehicle farthest upstream). Following
the deﬁnition it is true that for i ∈χj and t ≤Ti−1 all the partial derivatives ∂f/∂xi, ∂hi/∂xi, ∂hi/∂p, ∂hi/∂xL(i)
as well as f and hi are continuous with respect to their arguments, except possibly at the endpoints.
22

𝑣𝑖(𝑡)
𝑡
𝜃𝑗= 𝑡𝑖
𝜃𝑗+1
𝜃𝑗+2
𝜃𝑗+3
𝜃𝑗+4
𝜃𝑗+5 = 𝑇𝑖−1
𝑔𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝐿(𝑖), 𝑝
≥0
Figure 10: Illustration of the velocity vi(t) when hi(·) may have discontinuities. The times θj, where discontinuities
can occur are marked as dashed lines. The region inside the two blue lines is the region where the switching condition
g(xi, xL(i), p) ≥0, so the model changes regimes at times θj+1 and θj+2. The model is discontinuous at θj+1 and
θj+2 but vi(t) is still continuous. At θj+3 some other vehicle in the platoon experiences a discontinuity, but i is
unaﬀected. At θj+4, the lead vehicle changes, causing a discontinuity in the model (but vi is still continuous at that
time). At θj+5, the vehicle switches to the downstream boundary condition which causes a jump discontinuity in vi.
First we show that xi(t), i ∈χ0 is continuous on the interval [θ0, θ1]. This is guaranteed by applying the existence
and uniqueness theorem in order to each vehicle. Since by construction hi(xi, xL(i), pi) is continuous in this interval
excluding the right endpoint, and ∂hi/∂xi is bounded, then the initial value problem ˙xi = hi with initial condition
xi(ti) = ˆxi(ti) has a solution, namely
xi(t) = ˆxi(ti) +
Z θ1
ti
hi(xi, xL(i), pi)dt,
ti ≤t < θ1
which is valid for ti ≤t < θ1. Any discontinuity which may exist at θ1 is not felt by the integral since the point has
measure 0. Since we solve for each vehicle following the order χ0, the continuity of xL(i) for L(i) ∈χ0 is already
obtained by the time it is needed to compute its follower.
For some arbitrary interval [θj, θj+1], where the previous interval is already solved, take the left sided limit of the
previous interval as the initial condition, i.e. xi(θj) = lim
ϵ→0 xi(θj −ϵ). This point will always be deﬁned by the previous
interval. Then the solution on the new interval is deﬁned as
xi(t) = xi(θj) +
Z θj+1
θj
hi(xi, xL(i), pi)dt,
θj ≤t < θj+1
xi(θj) = lim
ϵ→0 xi(θj −ϵ)
Note that any possible discontinuities in hi at times θj and θj+1 do not aﬀect the integral because they are of measure
0. Applying the existence and uniqueness theorem again, we have that xi(t) is continuous on [θj, θj+1]. Our choice
of initial conditions guarentees continuity on the larger interval [θj−1, θj+1].
Thus it is clear from an induction
argument that xi(t) will be continuous on the interval [ti, θj+1], despite any possible discontinuities in hi.
The exception to the continuity of xi is at time Ti−1, where the downstream boundary conditions will cause a jump
discontinuity. Upon reaching the θj = Ti−1, the remaining trajectory of xi is to be taken as
xi(t) = xi(Ti−1) +
Z Ti
Ti−1
˙ˆxi(t)dt
xi(Ti−1) = (lim
ϵ→0 x∗
i (Ti−1 −ϵ), ˆvi(Ti−1))T
23

which guarantees continuity only in position (i.e. x∗
i , the ﬁrst component of vector xi) and the speed vi will have a
jump discontinuity.
Thus we proven that the simulated trajectories xi are continuous on the interval [ti, Ti−1] (excluding Ti−1) by repeat-
edly applying the existence and uniqueness theorem on the intervals [θj, θj+1] for an arbitrary j.
Then for the objective
F =
n
X
i=1
Z Ti−1
ti
f(xi, ˆxi, t)dt
since f is assumed to have a ﬁnite number of discontinuities in t, ˆxi is assumed to be continuous, and we have shown
xi(t) is continuous on the interval ti ≤t < Ti−1, it follows that F is continuous.
To show that λi(t) is continuous, apply the existence and uniqueness theorem starting with the last interval [θm, θm−1],
going backwards over vehicles on χm−1. Deﬁne
γi = 1(t ≤Ti−1)
 ∂f
∂xi
−λT
i (t)∂hi
∂xi

−1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)λT
G(i)(t)∂hG(i)
∂xi
and for an arbitrary interval [θj, θj−1] deﬁne
λi(t) = λi(θj) +
Z θj−1
θj
γidt,
θj ≥t > θj−1
λi(θj) = lim
ϵ→0 λi(θj + ϵ)
where additionally for the ﬁrst interval for λi (the interval where θj = Ti), the initial condition should be λi(θj) = 0.
The justiﬁcation for why λi(t) is continuous follows the same argument as for xi. The Lipschitz condition for λi nec-
essary to apply the existence and uniqueness theorem for λi(t) is the same as the Lipschitz condition for xi (∂hi/∂xi
is bounded). Additionally, by assumption we have all the partial derivatives of hi are continuous on each interval
excluding the endpoints. Since the adjoint system contains the term 1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)λT
G(i)(t)∂hG(i)
∂xi
the λi need to be
solved backwards in the order χj so that the follower’s adjoint variable is already proven as continuous by the time it
is needed. Also note that ∂hG(i)
∂xi
is simply ∂hk/∂xL(k) where k = G(i).
Because λi is continuous on [ti, Ti], xi is continuous on [ti, Ti−1), and ∂hi/∂p contains a ﬁnite number of disconti-
nuities, it follows that λT
i (t)∂hi/∂p is a piecewise continuous function with a ﬁnite number of discontinuities. Then
the gradient
d
dpF =
n
X
i=1
 
−
Z Ti−1
ti
λT
i (t)∂hi
∂p dt
!
is continuous since the number of discontinuities over the integral is of measure 0.
Proof 2 (Proof of Corrolary 1.). Showing F is lipschitz continuous is equivalent to showing that dF/dp is bounded.
To do this deﬁne
α(t) =
Z t
Ti
1(t ≤Ti−1) ∂f
∂xi
 +
1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)λT
G(i)(t)∂hG(i)
∂xi
 dt
β(t) = ∂hi
∂xi
Then by deﬁnition we have
λi(t) ≤α(t) +
Z t
Ti
β(s)λi(s)ds
and by Gronwall’s inequality in integral form
λi(t) ≤α(t) exp
Z t
Ti
β(s)ds

(18)
24

To show that all λi(t) are bounded, prove that each λi, i ∈χj are bounded in the interval [θj, θj−1] going backwards
over the order speciﬁed by χj−1, starting with j = m. Since we assumed that ∂f/∂xi and ∂hi/∂xi are both bounded,
and for the last vehicle k in χj, G(i, t) = 0, then it follows from Eq. (18) that λk(t) is bounded in the interval
[θj, θj−1]. Then after showing this for k, it can be shown for the other vehicles in χj. Repeating this process for each
interval shows that each λi(t) is bounded on [Ti, ti].
Then for the gradient Eq. (15) since we showed λi(t) is bounded, and ∂hi/∂pi is bounded by assumption, then it
follows that dF/dp is also bounded, and hence F is Lipschitz continuous.
A.1 - Example with OVM
Written as a ﬁrst order model OVM is
˙xi(t) = d
dt
x∗
i (t)
vi(t)

=

v
c4c1 tanh(c2si(t) −c3 −c5) −c4c1 tanh(−c3) −c4vi(t)

= hi(xi, xL(i), pi)
Where pi = (c1, c2, c3, c4, c5) > 0 and si(t) = x∗
i (t) −xL(i)(t) −l (where l is the length of the lead vehicle). Since it
is a single regime model, it will be everwhere continuous. The partial derivative
∂hi
∂xi
=

0
1
−c1c2c4 sech(c3 + c5 −c2(si))2
−c4

⇒

∂hi
∂xi
 ≤

0
1
c1c2c4
c4

so it can be bounded by a constant for an arbitrary vector space. The other partial derivatives can be bounded as

∂hi
∂xL(i)
 ≤

0
0
c1c2c4
0


∂hi
∂pi
 ≤
 0,
0,
0,
0,
0
2c4,
c1c4si,
c1c4,
vi + 2c1,
c1c4

And so the objective will be Lipschitz continuous assuming that the headway si(t) and velocity vi(t) are ﬁnite.
25

Appendix B - Supplemental ﬁgures/tables for comparison of algorithms
Table 5: The full table showing all variants of the 7 algorithms considered.
Algorithm
% found
global opt
Avg.
RMSE (ft)
Avg.
Time (s)
Avg. RMSE / %
over global opt
Initial
Guesses
# Obj.
# Grad.
# Hess.
Adj BFGS-0
94.0
6.46
7.42
.10 / 2.0%
3
307.1
307.1
0
Adj BFGS-7.5
85.2
6.56
4.16
.20/6.8%
1.67
165.0
165.0
0
Adj BFGS-∞
75.6
6.96
2.55
.59 / 15.4%
1
107.3
107.3
0
GA
95.0
6.47
33.5
.10/2.2%
-
5391
0
0
NM
39.4
7.25
6.85
.88/21.0%
1
1037
0
0
Fin BFGS-0
94.3
6.46
11.4
.10/2.2%
3
311.5
311.5
0
Fin BFGS-7.5
85.7
6.55
6.32
.19/6.3%
1.66
164.8
164.8
0
Fin BFGS-∞
77.0
6.88
3.91
.52/13.8%
1
107.3
107.3
0
Adj GD-0
20.2
7.58
25.5
1.21/28.2%
3
1374
542.5
0
Adj GD-7.5
13.4
7.83
18.1
1.46/40.8%
1.93
1094
436.6
0
Adj GD-Inf
8.8
8.90
8.75
2.53/67.2%
1
719.3
282.6
0
Adj SQP-0
29.1
8.37
21.1
2.01/61.7%
3
287.6
83.8
80.8
Adj SQP-7.5
21.5
8.59
15.4
2.22/71.4%
2.17
244.8
71.3
69.1
Adj SQP-∞
10.0
11.1
5.87
4.70/140.7%
1
141.6
39.4
38.4
SPSA
4.2
53.2
38.5
46.8/786%
1
6001
0
0
Fin GD-∞
9.1
8.86
14.7
2.50/66.2%
1
657.3
258.5
0
Fin SQP-∞
2.6
9.61
15.8
3.25/81.8%
1
179.4
67.2
66.2
Adj TNC-0
90.7
6.43
6.87
.05/2.4%
3
285.7
285.7
0
Adj TNC-7.5
82.7
6.48
3.82
.11/5.0%
1.63
152.3
152.3
0
Adj TNC-∞
77.3
6.62
2.26
.25/7.7%
1
94.1
94.1
0
Fin TNC-0
36.3
6.84
13.2
.47/11.0%
3
302.4
302.4
0
Fin TNC-7.5
24.9
7.05
8.35
.69/20.8%
1.82
183.2
183.2
0
Fin TNC-∞
18.0
7.63
4.49
1.27/33.2%
1
100.8
100.8
0
26

Figure 11: Shows the distribution of RMSE for diﬀerent algorithms tested. Left panels show overall RMSE, right
panels show the RMSE for vehicles that experience lane changes (solid) and those that don’t (dashed). The RMSE
for lane changing vehicles is much higher because car following models don’t describe lane changes well. For example,
for the genetic algorithm, the average RMSE for vehicles which do not experience lane changes is 4.75, whereas it is
8.17 for vehicles which do. The other algorithms have very similar numbers.
Appendix C - Adjoint method for gradient with DDE model
We will now deal with calculating the gradient for Eq. (6). As before, if not explicitly stated, quantities can be
assumed to be evaluated at time t. Deﬁne the augmented objective function:
L =
n
X
i=1
 Z T ∗
i−1
ti+τi
f(xi, ˆxi) + λT
i (t)

˙xi(t) −hi(xi(t), xi(t −τi), xL(i)(t −τi), pi)

dt +
Z Ti
T ∗
i−1
λT
i ( ˙xi −˙ˆxi)dt
!
(19)
and since F = L
d
dpF =
n
X
i=1
 Z T ∗
i−1
ti+τi
∂f
∂xi
∂xi
∂p −λT
i (t)∂hi
∂xi
∂xi
∂p −λT
i (t)
∂hi
∂xi(t −τi)
∂xi(t −τi)
∂p
−λT
i (t)
∂hi
∂xi(t −τi) ˙xi(t −τi)∂(t −τi)
∂p
−λT
i (t)∂hi
∂p dt −
Z Ti
ti+τi
˙λT
i (t)∂xi
∂p dt

+
n
X
i=1
X
j∈S(i)
Z Ti+τj
ti+τj
1(G(i, t −τj) = j)

+ . . .
−λT
j (t)
∂hj
∂xi(t −τj)
∂xi(t −τj)
∂p
−λT
j (t)
∂hj
∂xi(t −τj) ˙xi(t −τj)∂(t −τj)
∂p
dt

(20)
27

where S(i) is deﬁned as the set of all followers for vehicle i and we have chosen λT
i (T ∗
i−1) = 0. For a DDE, use a
change of coordinates on terms containing ∂xi(t −τ)/∂p.
−
Z T ∗
i−1
ti+τi
λT
i (t)
∂hi
∂xi(t −τi)
∂xi(t −τi)
∂pi
dt = −
Z T ∗
i−1−τi
ti+τi
λT
i (t + τi)∂hi(t + τi)
∂xi(t −τi)
∂xi(t)
∂pi
dt
n
X
i=1
X
j∈S(i)
Z Ti+τj
ti+τj
−1(G(i, t −τj) = j)λT
j (t)
∂hj
∂xi(t −τj)
∂xi(t −τj)
∂p
dt
=
n
X
i=1
X
j∈S(i)
Z Ti
ti+τi
−1(G(i, t) = j)λT
j (t + τj)∂hj(t + τj)
∂xi(t −τj)
∂xi(t)
∂p
dt
(21)
Where we make use of the fact that ∂xi(t)/∂p = 0 for t ∈[ti, ti + τi] since the initial history function doesn’t depend
on the parameters. Now substituting Eq. (21) into Eq. (20) and grouping terms, one obtains the adjoint system:
−˙λT
i (t) + 1(t ≤T ∗
i−1)
 ∂f
∂xi
−λT
i (t)∂hi
∂xi

−1(t ≤T ∗
i−1 −τi)λT
i (t + τi)∂hi(t + τi)
∂xi(t −τi) . . .
−
X
j∈S(i)
1(G(i, t) = j)λT
j (t + τj)∂hj(t + τj)
∂xi(t −τj) = 0,
t ∈[Ti, ti + τi],
∀i
(22)
with initial conditions λi(Ti) = 0. For a DDE model, the adjoint system also becomes a DDE. After solving for the
adjoint variables, one can compute the gradient:
d
dpF =
n
X
i=1
 Z T ∗
i−1
ti+τi
−λT
i (t)
∂hi
∂xi(t −τi) ˙xi(t −τi)∂(t −τi)
∂p
−λT
i
∂hi
∂p dt

+
n
X
i=1
X
j∈S(i)
Z Ti+τj
ti+τj
−1(G(i, t −τj) = j)λT
j (t)
∂hj
∂xi(t −τj) ˙xi(t −τj)∂(t −τj)
∂p
dt
(23)
Appendix D - Extension of adjoint method for Hessian
In this section, for a scalar being diﬀerentiated with respect to two vectors, the result is a matrix where the rows
correspond to the ﬁrst vector, and the columns correspond to the second vector. For example,
∂f
∂xi∂p =
∂f/∂x∗
i ∂p1
∂f/∂x∗
i ∂p2
. . .
∂f/∂x∗
i ∂pm
∂f/∂vi∂p1
∂f/∂vi∂p2
. . .
∂f/∂vi∂pm

For a matrix being diﬀerentiated to two vectors, the result is a 3-dimensional array which should be interpreted as
a vector of matrices. For example
∂hi
∂p∂xi
=
∂h1
i /∂p∂xi
∂h2
i /∂p∂xi

where h1
i and h2
i refer to the two components of hi. So the normal rules of linear algebra can be applied, e.g.
∂xi
∂p
T
∂hi
∂p∂xi
T
λi = ∂xi
∂p
T 
h1
i
∂p∂xi
T
,
h2
i
∂p∂xi
T 
λi =

∂xi
∂p
T ∂h1
i
∂xi∂p,
∂xi
∂p
T ∂h2
i
∂xi∂p
 λ1
i
λ2
i

= ∂xi
∂p
T ∂h1
i
∂xi∂pλ1
i + ∂xi
∂p
T ∂h2
i
∂xi∂pλ2
i
where λ1
i and λ2
i are the two components of the adjoint variable.
The adjoint method extends in a straightforward way for computing the Hessian. Using ﬁnite diﬀerences would have
complexity O(m2T(n)), whereas the adjoint method can be shown to have complexity O(mT(n)) ([77]).
When calculating the gradient, the beneﬁt of the adjoint method is that you avoid calculating ∂xi/∂p terms. When
calculating the Hessian, the adjoint method will be used to avoid calculating ∂2xi/∂p2 terms. We will still be left
with the unknowns ∂xi/∂p, which need to be calculated using the “variational” approach, also known as the “forward
sensitivity” approach (see [64, 63]).
28

To obtain the variational system, diﬀerentiate the model Eq. (4) with respect to the parameters
d
dp ˙xi = d
dphi(xi, xL(i), pi)
and then switch the order of diﬀerentiation on the left hand side to obtain the variational system
d
dt
∂xi
∂p = ∂hi
∂xi
∂xi
∂p + ∂hi
∂pi
+ 1(L(i, t) ∈[1, n]) ∂hi
∂xL(i)
∂xL(i)
∂p
,
t ∈[ti, Ti−1]
∀i.
(24)
Eq. (24) gives ∂xi(t)/∂p starting from the initial conditions ∂xi(ti)/∂p. Note that the variational system for xi
is only deﬁned up to time Ti−1 because ∂xi(t)/∂p = ∂xi(Ti−1)/∂p for t ∈[Ti−1, Ti]. Now starting from Eq. (9),
diﬀerentiate twice instead of once
d2
dp2 F = d2
dp2 L =
n
X
i=1
 Z Ti−1
ti
∂xi
∂p
T ∂2f
∂x2
i
T ∂xi
∂p + ∂f
∂xi
∂2xi
∂p2 −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hi
∂x2
i
T
λi
∂xi
∂p −λT
i
∂hi
∂xi
∂2xi
∂p2 + . . .
−∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hi
∂p∂xi
T
λi −λT
i
∂2hi
∂p2 −∂2hi
∂xi∂p
T
λi
∂xi
∂p dt +
Z Ti
ti
λT
i
∂2 ˙xi
∂p2 dt

+ . . .
+
n
X
i=1
Z Ti
ti
1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)

−∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂x2
i
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂p∂xi
T
λG(i) −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂xG(i)∂xi
T
λG(i)
∂xG(i)
∂p
+ . . .
−λT
G(i)
∂hG(i)
∂xi
∂2xi
∂p2 −∂2hG(i)
∂xi∂p
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p −∂xG(i)
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂xi∂xG(i)
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p dt

The adjoint variables are deﬁned the same way whether the gradient or Hessian is being computed. Eq. (15)
gives the adjoint system for the unmodiﬁed objective F. After solving for all the adjoint variables, in addition to
solving the variational system Eq. (24), one can calculate the Hessian:
d2
dp2 F =
n
X
i=1
 Z Ti−1
ti
∂xi
∂p
T ∂2f
∂x2
i
T ∂xi
∂p −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hi
∂x2
i
T
λi
∂xi
∂p −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hi
∂p∂xi
λi −λT
i
∂2hi
∂p2 + . . .
−∂2hi
∂xi∂p
T
λi
∂xi
∂p dt

+
n
X
i=1
Z Ti
ti
1(G(i, t) ̸= 0)

−∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂x2
i
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p −∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂p∂xi
T
λG(i) + . . .
−∂xi
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂xG(i)∂xi
T
λG(i)
∂xG(i)
∂p
−∂2hG(i)
∂xi∂p
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p −∂xG(i)
∂p
T ∂2hG(i)
∂xi∂xG(i)
T
λG(i)
∂xi
∂p dt

+ . . .
(25)
References
[1] M. J. Lighthill and G. B. Whitham. On kinematic waves ii. a theory of traﬃc ﬂow on long crowded roads.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 229(1178):317–
345, 1955.
[2] Boris S. Kerner. Three-phase theory of city traﬃc: Moving synchronized ﬂow patterns in under-saturated city
traﬃc at signals. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 397:76 – 110, 2014.
[3] Jorge A. Laval and Carlos F. Daganzo. Lane-changing in traﬃc streams. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 40(3):251 – 264, 2006.
[4] D. Helbing, A. Hennecke, V. Shvetsov, and M. Treiber. Micro- and macro-simulation of freeway traﬃc. Mathe-
matical and Computer Modelling, 35(5):517 – 547, 2002.
[5] Kai Nagel and Michael Schreckenberg. A cellular automaton model for freeway traﬃc. Journal de Physique I,
2(12):2221–2229, 1992.
[6] G.C.K Wong and S.C Wong. A multi-class traﬃc ﬂow model an extension of lwr model with heterogeneous
drivers. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 36(9):827 – 841, 2002.
[7] Carlos F. Daganzo. The cell transmission model: A dynamic representation of highway traﬃc consistent with
the hydrodynamic theory. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 28(4):269 – 287, 1994.
29

[8] B. S. Kerner and H. Rehborn. Experimental properties of phase transitions in traﬃc ﬂow. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
79:4030–4033, Nov 1997.
[9] Jorge A. Laval and Ludovic Leclercq. Microscopic modeling of the relaxation phenomenon using a macroscopic
lane-changing model. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 42(6):511 – 522, 2008.
[10] Benjamin Coifman and Lizhe Li. A critical evaluation of the next generation simulation (ngsim) vehicle trajectory
dataset. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 105:362 – 377, 2017.
[11] Dirk Helbing and Benno Tilch. Generalized force model of traﬃc dynamics. Phys. Rev. E, 58:133–138, Jul 1998.
[12] Mark Brackstone and Mike McDonald. Car-following: a historical review. Transportation Research Part F:
Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour, 2(4):181 – 196, 1999.
[13] Elmar Brockfeld, Reinhart Khne, and Peter Wagner.
Calibration and validation of microscopic traﬃc ﬂow
models. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1876:62–70, 2004.
[14] Elmar Brockfeld, Reinhart Khne, Alexander Skabardonis, and Peter Wagner. Toward benchmarking of mi-
croscopic traﬃc ﬂow models. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
1852:124–129, 2003.
[15] Vincenzo Punzo and Fulvio Simonelli. Analysis and comparison of microscopic traﬃc ﬂow models with real traﬃc
microscopic data. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1934:53–63,
2005.
[16] Saskia Ossen, Serge Hoogendoorn, and Ben Gorte. Interdriver diﬀerences in car-following: A vehicle trajectory-
based study. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1965:121–129,
2006.
[17] U.
S.
Department
of
Transportation.
Next
generation
simulation
(ngsim)
vehi-
cle
trajectories
and
supporting
data.
https://data.transportation.gov/Automobiles/
Next-Generation-Simulation-NGSIM-Vehicle-Trajector/8ect-6jqj, 2006. Accessed: 2018-05-05.
[18] Robert Krajewski, Julian Bock, Laurent Kloeker, and Lutz Eckstein. The highd dataset: A drone dataset of
naturalistic vehicle trajectories on german highways for validation of highly automated driving systems. In 2018
IEEE 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2018.
[19] Martin Treiber and Arne Kesting. Microscopic calibration and validation of car-following models a systematic
approach. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 80:922 – 939, 2013. 20th International Symposium on
Transportation and Traﬃc Theory (ISTTT 2013).
[20] Vincenzo Punzo, Biagio Ciuﬀo, and Marcello Montanino. Can results of car-following model calibration based
on trajectory data be trusted? Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
2315:11–24, 2012.
[21] V. Punzo, M. Montanino, and B. Ciuﬀo. Do we really need to calibrate all the parameters? variance-based
sensitivity analysis to simplify microscopic traﬃc ﬂow models. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 16(1):184–193, Feb 2015.
[22] Hwasoo Yeo, Alexander Skabardonis, John Halkias, James Colyar, and Vassili Alexiadis. Oversaturated free-
way ﬂow algorithm for use in next generation simulation.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, 2088:68–79, 2008.
[23] Arne Kesting and Martin Treiber. Calibrating car-following models by using trajectory data: Methodological
study. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2088:148–156, 2008.
[24] P Hidas.
A functional evaluation of the aimsun, paramics and vissim microsimulation models.
Road and
Transport Research, 14:45–59, 12 2005.
[25] Carlos F. Daganzo.
In traﬃc ﬂow, cellular automata=kinematic waves.
Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 40(5):396 – 403, 2006.
30

[26] M Bando, K Hasebe, A Nakayama, A Shibata, and Y Sugiyama. Dynamical model of traﬃc congestion and
numerical simulation. Physical review. E, Statistical physics, plasmas, ﬂuids, and related interdisciplinary topics,
51(2):10351042, February 1995.
[27] Yuki Sugiyama, Minoru Fukui, Macoto Kikuchi, Katsuya Hasebe, Akihiro Nakayama, Katsuhiro Nishinari,
Shin ichi Tadaki, and Satoshi Yukawa. Traﬃc jams without bottlenecksexperimental evidence for the physical
mechanism of the formation of a jam. New Journal of Physics, 10(3):033001, 2008.
[28] Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traﬃc states in empirical observations and
microscopic simulations. Physical Review E, 62:1805–1824, 02 2000.
[29] Marcello Montanino and Vincenzo Punzo.
Trajectory data reconstruction and simulation-based validation
against macroscopic traﬃc patterns. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 80:82 – 106, 2015.
[30] L.C. Davis. Modiﬁcations of the optimal velocity traﬃc model to include delay due to driver reaction time.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 319:557 – 567, 2003.
[31] G´abor Orosz and G´abor St´ep´an. Subcritical hopf bifurcations in a car-following model with reaction-time delay.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 462(2073):2643–
2670, 2006.
[32] Martin Treiber, Arne Kesting, and Dirk Helbing. Delays, inaccuracies and anticipation in microscopic traﬃc
models. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 360(1):71 – 88, 2006.
[33] I. Gasser, G. Sirito, and B. Werner. Bifurcation analysis of a class of car following traﬃc models. Physica D:
Nonlinear Phenomena, 197(3):222 – 241, 2004.
[34] L. C. Davis. Comment on “analysis of optimal velocity model with explicit delay”. Phys. Rev. E, 66:038101,
Sep 2002.
[35] Biagio Ciuﬀo, Vincenzo Punzo, and Marcello Montanino. The Calibration of Traﬃc Simulation Models: Report
on the Assessment of Diﬀerent Goodness of Fit measures and Optimization Algorithms. Technical Report EU
Cost Action TU0903 MULTITUDE, European Commission Joint Research Centre, 2012.
[36] Biagio Ciuﬀo, Vincenzo Punzo, and Marcello Montanino. Thirty years of gipps’ car-following model. Trans-
portation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2315:89–99, 2012.
[37] H. X. Ge, S. Q. Dai, L. Y. Dong, and Y. Xue. Stabilization eﬀect of traﬃc ﬂow in an extended car-following
model based on an intelligent transportation system application. Phys. Rev. E, 70:066134, Dec 2004.
[38] Rui Jiang, Cheng-Jie Jin, H.M. Zhang, Yong-Xian Huang, Jun-Fang Tian, Wei Wang, Mao-Bin Hu, Hao Wang,
and Bin Jia. Experimental and empirical investigations of traﬃc ﬂow instability. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, 94:83 – 98, 2018. ISTTT22.
[39] Jorge A. Laval, Christopher S. Toth, and Yi Zhou. A parsimonious model for the formation of oscillations in
car-following models. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 70:228 – 238, 2014.
[40] Cathy Wu, Aboudy Kreidieh, Kanaad Parvate, Eugene Vinitsky, and Alexandre Bayen. Flow: Architecture and
benchmarking for reinforcement learning in traﬃc control. 10 2017.
[41] Junfang Tian, Rui Jiang, Bin Jia, Ziyou Gao, and Shoufeng Ma. Empirical analysis and simulation of the
concave growth pattern of traﬃc oscillations. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 93:338 – 354,
2016.
[42] Martin Treiber and Arne Kesting. The intelligent driver model with stochasticity -new insights into traﬃc ﬂow
oscillations. Transportation Research Procedia, 23:174 – 187, 2017. Papers Selected for the 22nd International
Symposium on Transportation and Traﬃc Theory Chicago, Illinois, USA, 24-26 July, 2017.
[43] Rui Jiang, Mao-Bin Hu, H.M. Zhang, Zi-You Gao, Bin Jia, and Qing-Song Wu. On some experimental features
of car-following behavior and how to model them. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 80:338 –
354, 2015.
[44] Zhengbing He, Liang Zheng, and Wei Guan. A simple nonparametric car-following model driven by ﬁeld data.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 80:185 – 201, 2015.
31

[45] Vasileia Papathanasopoulou and Constantinos Antoniou. Towards data-driven car-following models. Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 55:496 – 509, 2015.
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Optimization (OPT-i) - Professor Matthew G. Karlaftis Memorial Issue.
[46] Mofan Zhou, Xiaobo Qu, and Xiaopeng Li. A recurrent neural network based microscopic car following model
to predict traﬃc oscillation. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 84:245 – 264, 2017.
[47] Xiuling Huang, Jie Sun, and Jian Sun. A car-following model considering asymmetric driving behavior based
on long short-term memory neural networks. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 95:346 –
362, 2018.
[48] Meixin Zhu, Xuesong Wang, and Yinhai Wang. Human-like autonomous car-following model with deep rein-
forcement learning. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 97:348 – 368, 2018.
[49] P.G. Gipps.
A behavioural car-following model for computer simulation.
Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 15(2):105 – 111, 1981.
[50] Martin Treiber and Arne Kesting. Traﬃc Flow Dynamics. 01 2013.
[51] Raphael E. Stern, Shumo Cui, Maria Laura Delle Monache, Rahul Bhadani, Matt Bunting, Miles Churchill,
Nathaniel Hamilton, Rmani Haulcy, Hannah Pohlmann, Fangyu Wu, and et al. Dissipation of stop-and-go waves
via control of autonomous vehicles: Field experiments. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
89:205221, Apr 2018.
[52] Hesham Rakha and Brent Crowther. Comparison of greenshields, pipes, and van aerde car-following and traﬃc
stream models. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1802:248–262,
2002.
[53] Prakash Ranjitkar, Takashi Nakatsuji, and Motoki Asano. Performance evaluation of microscopic traﬃc ﬂow
models with test track data. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
1876:90–100, 2004.
[54] Aurlien Duret, Christine Buisson, and Nicolas Chiabaut. Estimating individual speed-spacing relationship and
assessing ability of newell’s car-following model to reproduce trajectories.
Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2088:188–197, 2008.
[55] Hwasoo Yeo and Alexander Skabardonis. Parameter estimation for ngsim over-saturated freeway ﬂow algorithm.
In Proceedings of the 10th AATT Conference, 2008. cd-rom.
[56] Xiao-Yun Lu and Alexander. Skabardonis. Freeway shockwave analysis: Exploring ngsim trajectory data. In
Transportation Research Board 86th Annual Meeting, 2007. cd-rom.
[57] Masako Bando, Katsuya Hasebe, Ken Nakanishi, Akihiro Nakayama, Akihiro Shibata, and Y¯uki Sugiyama.
Phenomenological Study of Dynamical Model of Traﬃc Flow. Journal de Physique I, 5(11):1389–1399, 1995.
[58] J. C. Spall. Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous perturbation gradient approximation.
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 37(3):332–341, March 1992.
[59] Inc. LINDO Systems. Lindo api 12.0 user manual, 2018.
[60] R. Fletcher, N. Gould, S. Leyﬀer, P. Toint, and A. Wchter. Global convergence of a trust-region sqp-ﬁlter
algorithm for general nonlinear programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 13(3):635–659, 2002.
[61] Li Li, Xiqun (Micheal) Chen, and Lei Zhang. A global optimization algorithm for trajectory data based car-
following model calibration. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 68:311 – 332, 2016.
[62] D. R. Jones, C. D. Perttunen, and B. E. Stuckman. Lipschitzian optimization without the lipschitz constant.
Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 79(1):157–181, Oct 1993.
[63] Jonathan Calver and Wayne Enright. Numerical methods for computing sensitivities for odes and ddes. Nu-
merical Algorithms, 74(4):1101–1117, Apr 2017.
[64] Y. Cao, S. Li, L. Petzold, and R. Serban. Adjoint sensitivity analysis for diﬀerential-algebraic equations: The
adjoint dae system and its numerical solution. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing, 24(3):1076–1089, 2003.
32

[65] David W. Zingg, Marian Nemec, and Thomas H. Pulliam. A comparative evaluation of genetic and gradient-
based algorithms applied to aerodynamic optimization. European Journal of Computational Mechanics, 17(1-
2):103–126, 2008.
[66] B.M. Chaparro, S. Thuillier, L.F. Menezes, P.Y. Manach, and J.V. Fernandes. Material parameters identiﬁcation:
Gradient-based, genetic and hybrid optimization algorithms. Computational Materials Science, 44(2):339 – 346,
2008.
[67] Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price.
Diﬀerential evolution &ndash; a simple and eﬃcient heuristic for global
optimization over continuous spaces. J. of Global Optimization, 11(4):341–359, December 1997.
[68] Fuchang Gao and Lixing Han. Implementing the nelder-mead simplex algorithm with adaptive parameters.
Computational Optimization and Applications, 51(1):259–277, Jan 2012.
[69] Richard H. Byrd, Peihuang Lu, Jorge Nocedal, and Ciyou Zhu. A limited memory algorithm for bound con-
strained optimization. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 16(5):1190–1208, September 1995.
[70] Ciyou Zhu, Richard H. Byrd, Peihuang Lu, and Jorge Nocedal. Algorithm 778: L-bfgs-b: Fortran subroutines
for large-scale bound-constrained optimization. ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 23(4):550–560, December 1997.
[71] S. Nash. Newton-type minimization via the lanczos method. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 21(4):770–
788, 1984.
[72] E. Birgin, J. Martnez, and M. Raydan. Nonmonotone spectral projected gradient methods on convex sets. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 10(4):1196–1211, 2000.
[73] Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer, New York, NY, USA, 1999.
[74] Athina Tympakianaki, Haris N. Koutsopoulos, and Erik Jenelius. c-spsa: Cluster-wise simultaneous pertur-
bation stochastic approximation algorithm and its application to dynamic origindestination matrix estimation.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 55:231 – 245, 2015. Engineering and Applied Sciences
Optimization (OPT-i) - Professor Matthew G. Karlaftis Memorial Issue.
[75] Constantinos Antoniou, Carlos Lima Azevedo, Lu Lu, Francisco Pereira, and Moshe Ben-Akiva. W-spsa in
practice: Approximation of weight matrices and calibration of traﬃc simulation models. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 59:129 – 146, 2015. Special Issue on International Symposium on Transportation
and Traﬃc Theory.
[76] Ronan Keane and H. Oliver Gao. A formulation of the relaxation phenomenon for lane changing dynamics in
an arbitrary car following model. In submission, 2019.
[77] D. I. Papadimitriou and K. C. Giannakoglou. Direct, adjoint and mixed approaches for the computation of
hessian in airfoil design problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 56(10):1929–1943,
2007.
33