TITLE: A Node-Charge Graph-Based Online Carshare Rebalancing Policy with Capacitated Electric Charging
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1058
---

1 
 
A node-charge graph-based online carshare rebalancing 
policy with capacitated electric charging 
 
Theodoros P. Pantelidis1, Li Li1,2, Tai-Yu Ma3, Joseph Y. J. Chow1*, Saif Eddin G. Jabari2 
1 Department of Civil & Urban Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY, USA 
2 Division of Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
3 Luxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic Research, Luxembourg 
*Corresponding Author Email: joseph.chow@nyu.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Viability of electric car-sharing operations depends on rebalancing algorithms. Earlier methods in 
the literature suggest a trend toward non-myopic algorithms using queueing principles. We 
propose a new rebalancing policy using cost function approximation. The cost function is modeled 
as a p-median relocation problem with minimum cost flow conservation and path-based charging 
station capacities on a static node-charge graph structure. The cost function is NP-complete, so a 
heuristic is proposed that ensures feasible solutions that can be solved in an online system. The 
algorithm is validated in a case study of electric carshare in Brooklyn, New York, with demand 
data shared from BMW ReachNow operations in September 2017 (262 vehicle fleet, 231 pickups 
per day, 303 traffic analysis zones (TAZs)) and charging station location data (18 charging stations 
with 4 port capacities). The proposed non-myopic rebalancing heuristic reduces the cost increase 
compared to myopic rebalancing by 38%. Other managerial insights are further discussed. 
 
 
Accepted for publication in Transportation Science 
 
 
 

2 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Car sharing operations form an essential part of “smart mobility” solutions in congested cities. 
According to Martin and Shaheen (2016), a single carshare vehicle can replace 7 to 11 personal 
vehicles on the road, or between 5 to 20 vehicles by other accounts (Navigant Research, 2017). 
The common practice in such services is to book specific time slots and reserve a vehicle from a 
specific location. The return location is required to be the same for “two-way” systems but is 
relaxed for “one-way” systems. Examples of free-floating systems are the BMW ReachNow car 
sharing system in Brooklyn (until 2018) and Car2Go in New York City, with service areas in 2017 
shown in Figure 1. 
(a) (b) 
Figure 1. Examples of free-floating carshare systems: (a) Car2Go (source: car2go.com) and (b) BMW ReachNow 
(source: reachnow.com). 
 
In large car sharing systems, vehicle rebalancing is one of the primary challenges to ensuring 
efficiency and providing an adequate level of service. Potential customers may end up waiting or 
accessing a farther location, or even balk from using the service, if there is no available vehicle 
within a reasonable proximity (which may involve substantial access, e.g. taking a subway from 
downtown Manhattan to midtown to pick up a car) or no parking or return location available near 
the destination. Rebalancing involves having either the system staff or users (through incentives) 
periodically drop off vehicles at locations that would better match supply to demand (see 
Nourinejad et al., 2015). Inefficient operations may cause systems to be shut down (Krok, 2016). 
Car-sharing companies have further considered electric vehicle (EV) fleets to be more 
sustainable to reduce gasoline consumption. Not only do Zipcar, Car2Go, and ReachNow all 
operate some EVs in their worldwide fleets (car2go in 2019: Stuttgart, Madrid and Amsterdam), 
some startup carsharing businesses rely exclusively on EVs: e.g. Autolib’ and Cité Lib in France; 
BlueIndy, DriveNow in Copenhagen; Carma in San Francisco; and Los Angeles’ Low-Income 

3 
 
Plan for EV car sharing (Lufkin, 2016). With a total fleet of approximately 1,400 EVs, car2go is 
one of the largest providers in the electric vehicle carsharing sector. 
Vehicle rebalancing efficiency is further hampered in an EV environment. EV fleets face the 
added challenge of limited availability of fast charging infrastructure (as of 2019 there are seven 
fast DC public charging stations in Manhattan including Tesla stations (Chargehub, 2019)), which 
still take longer to recharge (~ 30 minutes) than gasoline vehicles. While there is an abundant 
literature on methods to handle carshare rebalancing, research on rebalancing EVs under 
capacitated charging stations is limited. There is no model formulated yet for one-way EV 
carsharing rebalancing that captures all the following: 1) the stochastic dynamic nature of 
rebalancing with stochastic demand; 2) incorporating users’ access cost to vehicles; and 3) 
capacities at EV charging stations. 
The problem is inherently a type of Markov decision process (see Powell, 2011; Chow and 
Sayarshad, 2016; Sayarshad and Chow, 2017) requiring an optimal rebalancing policy. We 
propose a policy based on cost function approximation (CFA) which uses a novel graph structure 
that allows the three challenges to be addressed. The resulting cost function is a p-median 
relocation model that extends the rebalancing model of Sayarshad and Chow (2017). We call this 
method the “node-charge graph” approach as it involves expanding the network to a discretized 
charge level dimension. The approach is similar to Zhang et al. (2019) who employ a “space-time-
battery” graph approach. However, their method faces computational challenges with the 
additional time dimension, especially if the carsharing system involves charging activities in the 
order of minutes while relocation intervals and vehicle reservations are made on the order of hours. 
To be fair though, Zhang et al. (2019) study an offline problem focusing on evaluating system 
equilibration, which differs from the operational objective of this study. We present a more elegant 
modeling framework that eschews the time dimension to allow for online application. 
By using the model from Sayarshad and Chow (2017) as a basis, the online relocation cost 
function can be calibrated to account for the stochastic demand using queue delay approximation. 
Unlike other queue delay-based approaches that assume demand at one node is only assigned to 
the servers at that same node, our delays are directly incorporated into a facility relocation problem 
that more realistically allows for, and minimizes, access from one node to another. The resulting 
model is a cost function for a relocation policy with minimum cost flow constraints as opposed to 
the conventional transportation problem constraints. A novel heuristic is proposed to determine 
the relocation policy in an online setting. We implement the algorithm in a proprietary agent-based 
simulation (see Li et al., 2019) to test its performance over a time horizon against benchmark 
algorithms using demand data from BMW ReachNow carshare operations in Brooklyn in 2017. 
 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature review. Section 3 presents 
the proposed graph structure, model formulation, and proposed heuristic. Section 4 presents 
computational tests to verify the model and heuristic effectiveness. Section 5 presents the agent 
simulation experiment design and case study of the Brooklyn carshare fleet to validate the heuristic 
performance. Section 6 concludes this study. 
 
 
2. Literature review 
 
2.1. Rebalancing literature 
Optimal rebalancing considers trade-offs between vehicle availability for a given random 
demand distribution, access distance, and relocation costs. For EV systems, there are further trade-

4 
 
offs involving charging duration, charging station capacity, and demand distribution over different 
charge levels. 
Early studies for designing car-sharing systems relied on simulation for evaluation (Barth and 
Todd, 1999). More systematic mathematical models to optimize car-sharing fleets have since been 
proposed with rebalancing and related operational challenges, including Fan et al. (2008), Kek et 
al. (2009), Nair and Miller-Hooks (2011), Di Febbraro et al. (2012), and Sayarshad and Chow 
(2017). There are also studies on station location with rebalancing (e.g. Chow and Sayarshad, 
2014), pricing incentives (Clemente et al., 2014; Jorge et al., 2015; Waserhole and Jost, 2016), 
parking reservations (Kaspi et al., 2016), routing personnel (Bruglieri et al., 2014; Nourinejad et 
al., 2015), fleet sizing (Hu and Liu, 2016), and integrated multimodal systems (Ma et al., 2019a), 
among others. 
Less focus has been given to methods for rebalancing EV carshare systems, however. A 
smaller subset of studies emerged in recent years to tackle this heightened challenge. Two general 
methods have been adopted. The first assumes demand is sufficiently deterministic in a 
multiperiod setting (e.g. Xu et al., 2018; Gambella et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). This can be 
problematic for most systems where the demand is not made for repeated commute trips and/or 
the fleet has a sparse spatial distribution. Vehicles are also assumed to be picked up at one location 
and directly dropped off at a destination, which is not typically the case in carsharing as customers 
may run multiple errands in a trip chain or leaving the service coverage area entirely before 
returning to drop off a vehicle. 
The second group of methods assumes stochastic demand, either through stochastic 
programming (Brandstätter et al., 2017), simulation (Boyacı et al., 2015), or with Markovian 
demand (Li et al., 2016). The latter Markovian queueing models appear promising, but earlier EV 
studies either assume a simplistic relocation policy (Li et al., 2016) or, in the case of queueing 
networks (Waserhole and Jost, 2016), require customers to pick up vehicles only at the same 
zone/node. 
Discrete network approaches make use of queueing to handle the uncertainty in stochastic 
demand. However, these approaches have not been used for EV charging settings either. Existing 
approaches include (1) queueing network models like Waserhole and Jost (2016) and Zhang and 
Pavone (2016), which require demand to be served by vehicles only from the same zone; or (2) 
the queueing-based relocation model from Sayarshad and Chow (2017) and Ma et al. (2019a), 
which allows vehicles to cover demand at other zones. None of those consider EV demand and 
charging constraints. It is quite clear that EV car sharing systems present a more complex 
environment in terms of mathematical modeling and decision analysis that current state-of-the-art 
methods do not fully address. 
 
2.2. Relocation for stochastic demand 
Rebalancing policies for carshare should include access costs for customers to allow them to 
enter a system at one node and pick up a vehicle at a different node. This requires the use of facility 
location models for the cost functions. For stochastic demand, facility location can use queue delay 
to anticipate future opportunity costs of a certain location solution. Queue delay is modeled by 
defining each service node as a queue with 𝑠 servers, where service entails usage of the vehicle 
until it is returned to the network (which may be at a different zone). In this case, however, even a 
simplified assumption of a M/M/s stochastic queue at each zone results in a nonlinear objective. 
Since nonlinear integer programming problems are undesirable, researchers have proposed 
alternative methods to handle the queueing. 

5 
 
One such way is the Q-MALP model from Marianov and ReVelle (1996), who showed that 
the queue delay objective can instead be cast as a set of piecewise linear constraints for the intensity 
to be within a specified reliability level 𝜂. Because the intensity parameter can be preprocessed for 
different numbers of servers, it is possible to solve a facility location problem with desired 
queueing-based service reliability as a mixed integer linear programming problem. The model has 
since been modified to handle maximal coverage (Marianov and Serra, 1998), server allocation 
(Marianov and Serra, 2002), and p-median coverage with relocation costs (Sayarshad and Chow, 
2017). 
Queueing-based facility location models handle everything that the “queueing network” 
models can (by restricting access thresholds to the same node), and furthermore allow for inter-
zonal matching of vehicles to demand. However, the relocation component in Sayarshad and Chow 
(2017) is based on a bipartite transportation problem of moving excess servers to locations in 
demand of servers. This is fine for a non-EV carsharing system, but for EV charging the mechanics 
are more complex because charging trips need to consider battery range, and both proximity and 
availability of charging stations (see Jung et al., 2014). The model from Sayarshad and Chow 
(2017) also does not distinguish demand for a minimum charge level less than 100%. For example, 
a customer should be allowed to request a vehicle with 60% charge or more and be allowed to pick 
up a vehicle with 80% charge. 
We address this issue by first proposing a static node-charge expanded network representation 
of the location problem for a CFA policy for EV carshare fleets. Under this representation, a 
network is replicated into multiple charge levels and movement from one charge level up to 
another represents recharging activity. We further propose the first queueing-based facility 
relocation problem with minimum cost flow relocation for the cost function, where a vehicle may 
start at a lower charge level, be repositioned at a charging station, recharge up several charge 
levels, and then be matched to customers at nearby zones. This is non-trivial because the capacity 
is not at the link level, i.e. one car charging at a station from 20% to 40% and another car charging 
from 60% to 80% would occupy different “links” in this graph but be competing for the same 
capacity. This model is formulated as a mixed integer programming problem. For larger cases or 
online operation, we propose a novel heuristic algorithm that ensures the three dimensions of 
feasibility of intermediate solutions: coverage, queueing intensity, and charging station capacity. 
 
 
3. Proposed methodology 
 
3.1. Problem statement 
The rebalancing problem for a fleet of EVs is a Markov decision process (MDP). A central operator 
controls periodic rebalancing of a homogeneous fleet of electric vehicles 𝑓∈𝐹 which are 
randomly picked up and dropped off across a given network 𝐺(𝑁, 𝐴) of zone centroids 𝑁 
connected by bi-directional links 𝐴 over a finite planning horizon 𝑇= {0,1, … , |𝑇|}. A subset of 
these zone centroids is designated as charging stations 𝐽⊂𝑁 with a finite number of chargers 
𝑢𝑗, 𝑗∈𝐽, at which vehicles may recharge or idle when not in service. 
The locations and charge levels of the vehicles are known. Customers arrive to the system, 
book and pick up a desired EV of their choice. When they finish using the vehicle over a duration, 
the vehicle is dropped back into the network. The pickup and drop-off locations and durations of 
booking are random with known distributions. Let 𝑆𝑡= (𝑠𝑐, 𝑠𝑣) denote the system state vector, 
where 𝑡 is a discrete time step from 𝑡= 0 at the beginning of operations. The state vector 𝑠𝑐(𝑡) is 

6 
 
a random matrix that contains all corresponding customer attributes in each row for location of 
pickup and drop-off of a vehicle, pickup and drop-off times, desired battery charge level, and 
returned vehicle charge level. The pickup location and desired battery charge level are realized at 
the pickup time while the drop-off location and returned charge level are realized upon drop-off 
time. 
The state vector of vehicle attributes 𝑠𝑣(𝑡) describes the state of each vehicle in the fleet. Each 
row corresponds to a vehicle 𝑓 and includes a set of time-dependent attributes that indicate the 
status of vehicle 𝑓 (idle, rebalancing, in-service), its current position, and the current battery level. 
An idle vehicle switches to in-service when it is booked by a customer, and switches from idle to 
rebalancing when it is assigned to another location by the operator. An in-service vehicle changes 
to idle when it is returned to the system. A rebalancing vehicle becomes idle when it completes 
the rebalancing assignment. 
The operator only manages recharging and rebalancing of idle vehicles in anticipation of 
future requests. The objective is to minimize the cumulative operating cost (rebalancing and 
recharging) and user cost (access time, wait time). If multiple customers are waiting for a vehicle 
with the required charge level, they are served in first-come-first-served order. The fleet operator 
only makes two sets of decisions: (1) when and where to rebalance idle vehicles, and (2) their 
target charge levels. Once a vehicle starts its rebalancing, it will not be cancelled or rescheduled. 
Let 𝐹𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑒 denote the idle vehicle set at any time step 𝑡. Let 𝑎𝜏 denote the action vector of all 
idle EVs at time step 𝑡, where 𝑎𝑓𝑡 is the action of EV 𝑓. Each idle EV can take one of the following 
actions: 
 
𝑎𝑓𝑡= {
𝑃𝑎𝑠𝑠: maintains the idle status without charging 
𝑅𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒: rebalance to another node.
𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒: Maintains idle status while recharging
 
 
Let 𝑟(𝑆𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) ∈ℝ denote the immediate reward received by taking action vector 𝑎𝑡 in state 𝑆𝑡. 
The policy π is a sequence of decision rules (𝑋0
𝜋, 𝑋1
𝜋, … , 𝑋𝑇
𝜋) where 𝑋𝑡
𝜋 is a function mapping state 
𝑆𝑡 in time step 𝑡 to an action 𝐴𝑡∈𝐴(𝑆𝑡) comprised of each vehicle’s 𝑎𝑓𝑡. We seek to provide the 
fleet operator with a policy 𝜋∗ that minimizes the expected total costs incurred throughout the 
time horizon conditional on the initial state as shown in Eq. (1) (expressed in terms of cost 
minimization instead of the more conventional payoff maximization for consistency). 
 
𝑍(𝜋∗) = 𝔼min
𝜋∈Π [∑𝐶(𝑆𝑡, 𝑋𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡)
𝑡∈𝑇
)| 𝑆0], 
(1) 
 
where Π is the set of all policies. Due to the curse of dimensionality, Eq. (1) cannot be solved 
exactly in practice. Powell (2011) describes four classes of approximation methods to obtain a 
policy: policy approximation, look-ahead, value function approximation, and cost function 
approximation. The last class involves using a parametric cost function to determine the policy as 
shown in Eq. (2), where 𝐶̅𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥|𝜃) is a parametrically (𝜃) modified cost function subject to a 
parametrically modified set of constraints to account for the uncertainty. 
 
𝑋𝜋(𝑆𝑡|𝜃) = arg min
x∈X𝑡(𝜃) 𝐶̅𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥|𝜃) 
(2) 

7 
 
 
The cost function can be further re-written as: 𝐶̅𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥|𝜃) = 𝐶̅𝑑,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) + 𝜃𝐶̅𝑟,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) where 
𝐶̅𝑑,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) is the delay cost and 𝐶̅𝑟,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) is the rebalancing cost. In the context of rebalancing 
idle mobility-on-demand vehicles, Sayarshad and Chow (2017) proposed a relocation policy as a 
cost function approximation, where the relocation cost function is modified to approximate the 
future costs in the system using M/M/s queue delay. We propose a policy that builds on this CFA 
methodology. The cost function is formulated as a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) 
problem with minimum cost flow relocation using the node-charge graph structure in the next 
section. 
 
3.2. Rebalancing and charging cost function approximation policy 
3.2.1 Node-charge graph approach 
We propose a method of solving the MDP problem using CFA as shown in Eq. (2) by 
specifying a relocation cost function within a new graph structure. We adopt a node-charge graph 
approach as illustrated in a one-dimensional network in Figure 2 without loss of generality. 
 
Figure 2. (a) initial graph; (b) expansion to a node-charge graph with coverage illustration in blue arrows; (c) one 
possible rebalancing solution in red arrow; and (d) a second rebalancing solution. 
 
2 
3 
4 
5 
(a) 
(c) 
(d) 
(b) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
20%+ 
40%+ 
60%+ 
80%+ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
20%+ 
40%+ 
60%+ 
80%+ 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
20%+ 
40%+ 
60%+ 
80%+ 
1 

8 
 
Consider a 5-node network lined up in a one-dimensional sequence as shown in Figure 2(a), 
where node 1 and node 3 are charging stations (denoted by gray nodes), i.e. 𝐽= {1,3}. The graph 
is expanded into a node-charge graph representation from 𝑖∈𝑁 to (𝑖, ℎ) ∈(𝑁, 𝐻), where 𝐻 is a 
set of discrete charge levels. Each layer represents the same zones at a certain charge level. 
Unidirectional links are added connecting each charge layer in node 𝑖∈𝐽 going from one charge 
level up to the next higher charge level. These links have costs representing charging cost and time 
for the operator. Figure 2(b) illustrates the expanded graph, where each layer is a different charge 
interval (e.g. 20%+, 40%+, 60%+, 80%+). For example, a charge level of 20%+ refers to a charge 
of at least 20% and less than 40%. 
A vehicle positioned at a node covers all nodes with lower charge as well. This ensures that a 
person seeking a vehicle with at least 40% charge would also be happy booking a vehicle with 
60% charge. For example, a vehicle at node (4, 40%+) can serve nodes 1 to 5 at 40%+ and at 
20%+, as illustrated by the blue arrows in Figure 2(b). 
Access costs for demand are based only on the spatial link costs and not the charging link 
costs. The access cost of demand at (2, 20%+) for the vehicle at (4, 40%+) is just the cost from 
node 2 to node 4. 
The charging stations are capacitated. This capacity is represented not by individual link 
capacities between charging layers within the node-charge graph, but by the sum of all path flows 
through each vertical column. For example, suppose there are two idle vehicles, one at (5, 20%+) 
and one at (2, 60%+). Two feasible rebalancing solutions are shown in Figure 2(c) and 2(d). In 
Figure 2(c), one vehicle is directed towards station 3 to recharge from 60% to 80% before being 
relocated back to node 2, while the second vehicle is sent to station 3 to recharge from 20% to 40% 
before being relocated to node 4. This solution requires a capacity of 2 vehicles at node 3. In Figure 
2(d), only one vehicle is relocated to station 3 to be recharged from 20% to 80% and would then 
be relocated to node 4. This only requires a capacity of 1 vehicle at node 3. The two solutions lead 
to different coverage results and different charging capacity requirements. In addition, the 
relocation involves paths within the entry and exit charge levels for a given charge node, not simply 
direct flow from a surplus node to a sink node as was the case in prior relocation models, e.g. 
Chow and Sayarshad (2017), Nair and Miller-Hooks (2009), and Chow and Regan (2011). This 
implies a minimum cost flow problem with path-based bundle capacities at each charging station 
zone. 
The optimality of these solutions depends on a mix of factors. For example, Figure 2(c) may 
be best if there is high demand near nodes 1, 2, and 3 up to 80%+ charge and there is enough 
capacity at station 3 to allow two vehicles to charge at the same time. The charging cost might be 
very high relative to the spatial relocation and/or access costs/penalties, leading to two short 
charges instead of one longer charge. Alternatively, Figure 2(d) may be best if the high charge 
demand is located closer to nodes 4 and 5, and/or perhaps there is only enough capacity for 1 
vehicle charging at station 3 while the relocation cost to station 1 does not warrant the additional 
charging. 
This graph structure can be set to different discrete charge levels. The number of levels 
determines the computational complexity of the problem. Each additional charge level duplicates 
the network. A model with |𝐻| charge levels has up to 
(|𝐻|)(|𝐻|−1)
2
 different paths per charging 
station node to keep track of (for 10 levels that is 45 paths). 
We assume that charged vehicles will not occupy a charging slot once fully charged. The 
bottom charge level can represent the minimum charge needed to get from any zone to any other 
zone without depleting fully. 

9 
 
 
 
3.2.2 Route-capacitated minimum cost flow relocation 
 
 
Parameters: 
𝑁: 
set of nodes 
𝐻: 
set of charging levels, ℎ= 1,2, …, |𝐻| 
A: 
set of directed arcs in the node-charge graph, 𝐴= {((𝑖, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ))|∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝑁, 𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻} 
𝐵: 
total number of idle vehicles at the start of a rebalancing time interval 
𝑦𝑖𝑔: 
number of idle vehicles at the node-charge (𝑖, 𝑔 ) at the start of a rebalancing time 
interval 
𝐽⊂𝑁: subset of nodes that are charging stations 
θ: 
rebalancing cost parameter 
𝑢𝑗, 𝑗∈𝐽: capacity of charging facilities available 
𝜏𝑖𝑗: user access cost from node 𝑖 to 𝑗 
𝜇𝑗ℎ: service rate parameter at node-charge (𝑗, ℎ) 
𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ𝑚: utilization rate of the 𝑚𝑡ℎ server (vehicle) with reliability threshold 𝜂 at node-charge 
(𝑗, ℎ) 
𝑐𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ: 
cost on an arc of node-charge graph from (𝑖, 𝑔) to (𝑗, ℎ) 
𝑂: 
set of origins of idle vehicles on the node-charge graph 
𝜆𝑖ℎ: 
arrival rate of customers at node 𝑖 with demand for ℎ charge levels or higher; assume 
that customers use up exactly ℎ intervals during their trip; 
𝐶: 
max number of servers at a node-charge 
F: 
set of idle vehicles at the beginning of idle vehicle relocation epoch 
M: 
large positive penalty constant 
𝐴𝑖𝑔
+ : 
set of outgoing arcs originating at a node-charge (𝑖, 𝑔), 𝑖∈𝑁, 𝑔∈𝐻 
𝐴𝑖𝑔
−: 
set of incoming arcs destinated to a node-charge (𝑖, 𝑔), 𝑖∈𝑁, 𝑔∈𝐻 
 
Decision variables: 
𝑊𝑗𝑔𝑗ℎ: rebalancing EV flow on arc ((𝑖, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ)) ∈𝐴 
𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚: 
1 if the m-th vehicle are located at node 𝑗 with charge ℎ, 0 otherwise 
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ: vehicle at node 𝑗 with charge level ℎ serves customer demanding 𝑔∈{1, … , |𝐻|} charge 
or more at node 𝑖 if 𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ= 1, and 0 otherwise 
𝑝𝑗𝑔𝑗ℎ: path flows entering charging node 𝑗∈𝐽 at charge level 𝑔 and exiting at level ℎ> 𝑔 
 
Let 𝐺′(𝑁′, 𝐴) be a directed graph with 𝑁′ being a set of node-charges (𝑖, ℎ), ∀𝑖∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻, 
and 𝐴 a set of directed arcs, 𝐴= {((𝑖, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ))|∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝑁, ∀𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻}. A node-charge (𝑖, ℎ) is 
characterized by demand location 𝑖∈𝑁 and requested minimum charging level (battery level) ℎ∈
𝐻. All demand between two levels ℎ−1 and ℎ sum up to level ℎ. Arcs only cross from one 
charging level up to another at charging station nodes 𝐽 and there is a capacity 𝑢𝑗> 0, 𝑗∈𝐽, applied 
to all flows through that station node regardless of charge level. Charging arcs belong to a subset 
of arcs defined as 𝐴ℏ= {((𝑗, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ))|∀𝑗∈𝐽, ∀ℎ= 𝑔+ 1, 𝑔= 1, … |𝐻−1|}, 𝐴ℏ⊂𝐴. The 
assigned flow on arcs is an integer decision variable. The cost of assigning flow on arcs is the 

10 
 
multiplication of arc flows by their unit costs, measured as rebalancing time/cost or charging 
time/cost on arcs. 
The cost function is shown in Eq. (3) – (18). The parametric modifications corresponding to 
𝜃 in Eq. (2) include the use of the arrival rates in Eq. (3) and constraint (7), whose parameters can 
be updated over time with new information from 𝑆𝑡 (e.g. new customer arrival rates, reservation 
length). 
 
min 𝐶̅𝑡
𝜋= 𝐶̅𝑑,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) + 𝜃𝐶̅𝑟,𝑡
𝜋(𝑆𝑡, 𝑥) 
= ∑∑∑∑𝜆𝑖𝑔𝜏𝑖𝑗𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
𝑔∈𝐻
ℎ∈𝐻
𝑗∈𝑁
𝑖∈𝑁
+ 𝜃
∑
𝑐𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
((𝑖,𝑔),(𝑗,ℎ))∈𝐴
 
(3) 
s.t. 
 
∑
∑
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ∈𝐻,ℎ≥𝑔
𝑗∈𝑁
= 1,
∀𝑖∈𝑁, 𝑔∈𝐻 
(4) 
∑
∑
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ∈𝐻,ℎ<𝑔
𝑗∈𝑁
= 0,
∀𝑖∈𝑁, 𝑔∈𝐻 
(5) 
𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚≤𝑌𝑗ℎ,𝑚−1,
∀𝑗∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻, 𝑚= 2,3, … , 𝐶 
(6) 
∑∑𝜆𝑖𝑔𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
𝑔∈𝐻
𝑖∈𝑁
≤𝜇𝑗ℎ[𝑌𝑗ℎ1𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ1 + ∑𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚(𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ𝑚−𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ,𝑚−1)
𝐶
𝑚=2
] , ∀𝑗∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻 
(7) 
∑∑∑𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚
𝐶
𝑚=1
ℎ∈𝐻
𝑗∈𝑁
= 𝐵 
(8) 
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ≤𝑌𝑗ℎ1 , ∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝑁, 𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻 
(9) 
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ−
(𝑗,ℎ)∈𝐴𝑖𝑔
−
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ≤𝑀𝑌𝑖𝑔1
(𝑗,ℎ)∈𝐴𝑖𝑔
+
, ∀(𝑖, 𝑔) ∈𝑁× 𝐻\𝑂 
(10) 
−(
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ−
(𝑗,ℎ)∈𝐴𝑖𝑔
−
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ) ≤𝑀𝑌𝑖𝑔1
(𝑗,ℎ)∈𝐴𝑖𝑔
+
, ∀(𝑖, 𝑔) ∈𝑁× 𝐻\𝑂 
 
(11) 
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ−
∑
𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
(𝑗,ℎ)∈𝐴𝑖𝑔
+
(𝑖,𝑔)∈𝐴𝑗ℎ
−
+ 𝑦𝑖𝑔= ∑𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚
𝐶
𝑚=1
,
∀𝑗∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻 
(12) 
∑∑𝑝𝑗𝑔′𝑗ℎ′ = 𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ′≥ℎ
𝑔′≤𝑔
∀𝑗∈𝐽, 𝑔∈𝐻, ∀((𝑗, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ)) ∈𝐴 
(13) 

11 
 
∑
∑
𝑝𝑗𝑔𝑗ℎ′ ≤
𝐻
ℎ′=𝑔+1
|𝐻|−1
𝑔=1
𝑢𝑗, ∀𝑗∈𝐽, 𝑔∈𝐻, ∀((𝑗, 𝑔), (𝑗, ℎ)) ∈𝐴 
(14) 
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ∈{0,1}, ∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝑁, 𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻 
(15) 
𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚∈{0,1}, ∀𝑗∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻, 𝑚= 1,2,3, … , 𝐶 
(16) 
 𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ≥0, ∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝑁, 𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻 
(17) 
𝑝𝑗𝑔𝑗ℎ≥0,
∀𝑗∈𝑁, 𝑔, ℎ∈𝐻 
(18) 
 
The objective function minimizes the total access cost of customers (which can include 
generalized costs and costs of scheduling via reservations, etc.) to idle vehicles and total routing 
cost of idle vehicles (i.e. travel time/cost from the current locations of idle vehicles to charging 
stations, charging time/cost and travel time/cost to its respective destinations) on the node-charge 
graph. The rebalancing operations are run at each predefined time interval in order to serve 
customer demand and minimize queueing delay and operating cost as part of the online policy. 
Constraints (4) and (5) require that rebalanced idle vehicles serving randomly arriving 
customers have sufficient charge. Constraint (6) is an order constraint stating a m-th server can be 
present only if there is already a (m-1)-th server at the same location. 
Constraint (7) is the piecewise linear queueing constraint from Marianov and ReVelle (1996) 
representing the intensity requirement, where ∑
∑
𝜆𝑖𝑔𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
𝑔∈𝐻
𝑖∈𝑁
 is arrival rate and 𝜇𝑗ℎ is the 
service rate representing the amount of time a customer takes out a vehicle before returning it to 
the system. [𝑌𝑗ℎ1𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ1 + ∑
𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚(𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ𝑚−𝜌𝜂𝑗ℎ,𝑚−1)
𝐶
𝑚=2
] is a piecewise linear expression that 
captures the desired intensity for a given number of servers. For example, if there are 𝑚 servers, 
it is 
𝜆
𝜇= 𝜌𝑚, where 𝜌𝑚≤𝑚(1 −𝜂), where 𝜂 is the threshold desired (i.e. if 𝜂= 0.1 it means the 
model ensures intensity does not exceed 90% of maximum), and 𝜌𝑚 can be split recursively into 
contributions that each server adds. Given a user-defined intensity threshold 𝜂, m idle vehicles 
(servers) and b customers in a queue, the value of 𝜌𝜂𝑗𝑚 can be obtained exogenously by solving 
for the binding value of 𝜌 in Eq. (19), derived in Marianov and ReVelle (1996). 
 
∑((𝑚−𝑘)𝑚! 𝑚𝑏𝑘!
⁄
)
𝑚−1
𝑘=0
(1 𝜌𝑚+𝑏+1−𝑘
⁄
) ≥1 (1 −𝜂)
⁄
 
(19) 
 
Constraint (8) states the total number of servers is equal to the total number of available idle 
vehicles. Constraint (9) assures that only a location with servers can cover demand nodes. Since 
Eq. (4) allows for nodes to cover lower charge nodes, combining that with Eq. (9) implies that 
coverage extends to lower charge levels. Constraints (10) – (12) are the flow conservation 
constraints of the minimum cost flow problem. 
For the charging station capacity, we need to ensure that the assigned flow on charging arcs 
do not exceed the limit of chargers available at a charging station. As mentioned earlier, this is not 
a link capacity but should be modeled as the sum of all path flows through any of the links 
corresponding to the charging node. This constraint should ensure that, for example, Figure 2(c) 

12 
 
should not occur if 𝑢2 = 1 because technically both vehicle flows are concurrently using that 
charging station. To address this, the link flows 𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ are matched to enumerated path flows in 
constraint (13). There is one set of path flows for each charging station, so there are not many – 
for 4 charging levels there are 6 variables per charging station: e.g. {1-2, 1-3, 1-4, 2-3, 2-4, 3-4} 
where charge level 1 is lower than charge level 2. The path flows are used to ensure that path flow 
capacity is met in constraint (14). This is a significant change in model formulation from prior 
models. 
Lastly, 𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ and 𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚 are binary decision variables (Eq. (15) – (16)). Sayarshad and Chow 
(2017) showed that 𝑌𝑗ℎ𝑚 can generally be relaxed to a continuous variable between [0,1] since the 
piecewise linear constraint will be satisfied, which leads to a much more computationally efficient 
model. Arc flow 𝑊𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ is a non-negative vehicle relocation flow (which will be integer due to the 
Unimodularity Theorem for the minimum cost flow problem), and the path flows 𝑝𝑗𝑔𝑗ℎ are 
continuous non-negative variables (Eq. (17) – (18)). 
When Eq. (7) is relaxed, the model becomes a myopic case that does not anticipate the steady 
state delay in the system of a current decision. When 𝑏→∞ the chance constraint should allow 
for any queue length, and as 𝜂→0 any intensity is allowed. 
As a p-median problem with additional constraints, the cost function is NP-complete (see 
Owen and Daskin, 1998). Existing heuristics for p-median problems like Teitz and Bart (1968) are 
not directly applicable because they violate queueing intensity and capacity feasibility. We propose 
a new heuristic to solve this problem so that it can be applied in an online setting for realistic fleet 
sizes of hundreds of vehicles like that of ReachNow in Brooklyn in 2017. 
 
3.3. Proposed greedy heuristic 
In order to provide a computationally efficient rebalancing system for large networks, we 
propose a heuristic algorithm for solving the cost function as part of the CFA policy. A rebalancing 
system should scale up to a fleet like the BMW ReachNow one in Brooklyn, NY. This target 
network has 303 zone centroids and considers up to 5 charge levels. 
Computational tests on a range of random instances with up to |𝑁| = 1000 and |𝐻| = 4 are 
solved using exact algorithms from commercial software (MATLAB), but run times can exceed 2 
hours (see Section 4.2) with an Intel i5-6300U CPU with 2 cores and 8GB memory. Clearly this 
would not be feasible to run in an online setting with commercial software. 
We propose a heuristic that solves such instances more computationally efficiently. The core 
of the algorithm is based on the greedy heuristic from Teitz and Bart (1968) but modified to 
maintain feasibility with respect to: (a) queueing constraints, (b) capacity, (c) minimum cost flow 
relocation, and (d) demand access savings when accounting for multiple servers. In a p-median 
problem without queuing constraints, each server can satisfy the entire demand from any location. 
In our model, however, a server cannot satisfy demand at higher layers, while demand at layers 
lower or equal to the server’s location can be served up to the RHS amount of Eq. (7). For this 
reason, a node that has an idle car already can still yield potential gains by adding an additional 
server to it. A summary is provided in Algorithm 1, which is designed to run at the start of each 
discrete time interval in an online system as a CFA policy. 
 
New variables definition 
𝑘: iteration step 
𝑆𝑘: savings matrix in iteration k 
𝑁𝑘: set of infeasible relocation points in iteration k 

13 
 
𝐴𝑘: minimum access cost matrix in iteration k 
𝐿𝑓
𝑘: location of vehicle 𝑓 in iteration k 
𝑑1: Total demand assigned to the idle vehicle at (𝑗, ℎ) during the previous iteration 
𝑑2: Total demand that can be assigned to the idle vehicle at (𝑗, ℎ) 
𝑒: number of vehicles that violated charging capacity 
 
Algorithm 1: Proposed greedy heuristic 
1. Initialize parameters: 𝑘= 0, 𝑁𝑘= ∅, 𝑒= 0, 0𝑆|𝑁|,|𝐻|, 0𝐴|𝑁|,|𝐻|, 𝐵= |𝐹| 
2. While 𝑘≤𝐵 do 
3. For every 𝑠𝑖,𝑔∈𝑆𝑘 
4. If (𝑖, 𝑔) ∈𝑁𝑘 or 𝑔𝑘,𝑘< 𝑔 
5. 𝑠𝑖,𝑔: = −∞ 
6. Else If 𝑌𝑗ℎ1 = 0 
7. 𝑠𝑖,𝑔: = ∑
∑
[𝜏𝑖𝑗−𝑎𝑗,ℎ]
+𝜆𝑗ℎ−𝜃𝑐𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ∈𝐻
𝑗∈𝑁
, where 𝑎𝑗,ℎ∈𝐴𝑘−1 
8. Else 
9. 𝑑1: = ∑
𝜆𝑗𝑔𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
𝑗∈𝑁,ℎ∈𝐻
, 
10. 𝑑2: = min{𝑑1 −𝜌𝑗ℎ,𝑚𝜇𝑗ℎ, (𝜌𝑗ℎ,𝑚+1 −𝜌𝑗ℎ,𝑚)𝜇𝑗ℎ} , 
11. 𝑠𝑖,𝑔: =
 𝑑1
𝑑2 𝑠𝑖,𝑔
′ , 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑖,𝑔
′
∈𝑆𝑘−1 
12. End If 
13. End For 
14. If 𝑘= 0 
15. 𝐿𝑓: = arg max
𝑖∈𝑁,𝑔∈𝐺(𝑆𝑘), ∀𝑓∈𝐹 
16. Else 
17. 𝑁𝑀: = 𝑁𝑀∪{(𝑖, 𝑔)|𝐸𝑞. (7) not satisfied} 
18. 𝐿𝑘: = arg
max
𝑖∈𝑁,𝑔∈𝐺′(𝑆𝑘) , where 𝐺′ = { 𝑔0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑒> 0
𝐻, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 
19. End If 
20. 𝑒: = ∑
𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑔𝑘,𝑓−𝑔0,𝑓)
𝑓∈𝐹
−∑
𝑢𝑗
𝑗∈𝐽
 
21. Update 𝐴𝑘: 𝑎𝑗,ℎ= {𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ| ∑
∑
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ∈𝐻,ℎ≥𝑔
𝑗∈𝑁
= 1, ∑
∑
𝑋𝑖𝑔𝑗ℎ
ℎ∈𝐻,ℎ<𝑔
𝑗∈𝑁
= 0, (𝑖, 𝑔) ∈𝐿𝑘} 
22. 𝑘= 𝑘+ 1 
23. End While 
 
The algorithm is initiated with a set of vehicle locations: 𝐿= (𝐿𝑓) 𝑓∈𝐹, where each location 
𝐿𝑓 is expressed by the node-charge tuple (𝑖𝑓
0, 𝑔𝑓
0) ∈(𝑁, 𝐻). The heuristic computes a savings 
matrix 𝑆𝑘 at each iteration k (steps 3 – 13) and makes rebalancing decisions accordingly. The 
accessibility matrix 𝐴𝑘 (step 21) stores the closest distance to an idle vehicle for each network 
node 𝑗∈𝑁, ℎ∈𝐻, but not all nodes may be assigned to their closest idle vehicle due to the 
feasibility constraint (7). 
To address this limitation, we calculate the feasible quantity 𝑑2 that can be assigned at each 
node (step 10). The fraction of quantity unserved 𝑑1/𝑑2 is used to update the savings using 
information from the previous iteration. During the first iteration of the algorithm, given an initial 
vehicle assignment 𝐿0, all vehicles are placed at a single location (step 15) that minimizes total 
access costs. Since 𝑎𝑗,ℎ= 0 ∀ 𝑗, ℎ, the savings minimization objective is equivalent to Eq. (3). 

14 
 
The reasoning behind placing all idle vehicles at a single location is to ensure that the solution 
remains feasible under constraint (7). To ensure that subsequent relocation decisions remain 
feasible, candidate nodes that violate Eq. (7) are included in set 𝑁𝑘 (step 17) and are not considered 
for relocation (step 18). In the case that the initial solution is infeasible, we can conclude that the 
MILP is also infeasible. For discrete time intervals where the MILP is infeasible, constraint (7) is 
relaxed to solve a myopic problem in those cases (which is always feasible). 
Since this problem includes a capacity constraint Eq. (14), we calculate the amount of excess 
capacity (step 20) used to make the relocation decision 𝐿𝐾. For all subsequent relocation decisions 
(step 18), we consider only a subset of nodes 𝐺′ = 𝑔0 until constraint (14) also becomes feasible 
(𝑒= 0). The node-vehicle assignment is performed every time a vehicle location is updated (step 
21). The process ends (step 23) when the iterative procedure has been performed for all 𝐵 idle 
vehicles. The complexity of the algorithm is 𝑂(𝑁2|𝐹|). 
In situations where non-myopic rebalancing is infeasible, the optimization step is repeated 
with relaxed queuing constraint requirements for the CFA policy. 
 
 
4. Model and heuristic analysis 
 
4.1. Cost function verification test 
 
Evaluation of the proposed cost function and greedy heuristic are conducted in two sets of 
replicable experiments. The first is with an illustrative example that serves to verify the mixed 
integer programming model formulation and demonstrate the capabilities to evaluate certain trade-
offs. 
Consider a small network of 24 node-charge nodes corresponding to 6 original zones (labeled 
from 1 to 24 for convenience) extended up to 4 charging demand levels (20%, 40%, 60%, 80%) 
shown in Figure 3. The goal is to test whether the proposed model can effectively rebalance the 
idle vehicles to meet all customer demand under available charging capacity constraints. The travel 
time between nodes is denoted as 𝜏𝑖𝑗 and the charging time (vertical travel distance) as 𝑐𝑖𝑗. Three 
idle vehicles with respective remaining charge levels are located at node-charge 3, 7, and 14. We 
consider 2 charging stations (nodes 2 and 6) with the same capacity 𝑢 per station. We test the 
model under three different capacities: 𝑢= {1,2,3}. Customer arrival rates are arbitrarily generated 
over all node-charges and fixed for the three scenarios. These rates are shown in the numbers over 
each node-charge (e.g. 3.8 customers/hr arrive at node-charge 15 corresponding to node 3 at charge 
level 60%+). Demand varies between different charging levels because the range required for 
specific trips can differ among travelers. 
 

15 
 
 
Figure 3. Test instance used to evaluate model. 
 
This test is implemented using a Dell Latitude E5470 laptop with win64 OS, Intel i5-6300U 
CPU, 2 Cores and 8GB memory. The MATLAB mixed-integer linear programming solver 
(intlinprog) is used to obtain exact solutions. The test instances are publicly available on Zenodo 
(Chow, 2019). 
Figure 4 presents the computational result of rebalancing EV flows for the case of capacity 
𝑢= 3. We see that all vehicles are rebalanced to the highest level 4 at different nodes which 
minimize total access cost of customers. The vehicles are assigned to use the nearest charging links 
to their destinations. The optimal objective value is 𝑍∗= 281.5. 
The results for the other two capacity scenarios are shown in Figure 5. When reducing the 
capacity by 1 unit to 𝑢= 2, the first charging station at node 2 becomes fully capacitated by 
vehicles at node 7 and 14. The vehicle at node 3 moves farther to charge at node 6 and comes up 
to its destination at node 23, as shown in Figure 5(a). The numbers over the links represent the 
assigned flow on links. The obtained 𝑍∗= 281.5 is the same as the preceding case since the 
relocation costs are the same as the prior case while the final assigned locations are identical. 
When further reducing the capacity to 𝑢= 1 per station, there are only two chargers available 
in the system. The solution shows the vehicles at node 7 and node 3 coming up to charge level 
80% as before. However, the vehicle at node 14 is rebalanced on the same level to node 16 without 
recharging further due to the limited capacity. All charging capacity is used with least system cost 
as shown in Figure 5(b). The obtained objective values is now increased to 𝑍∗= 300.25. These 
results verify the model formulation and the trade-offs that it can analyze. 
 
19
20
21
22
23
24
20%
80%
60%
40%
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1
2
3
4
5
6
3.0
5.4
4.5
0.25
5.8
2.3
10.0
6.0
3.8
11.4
11.6
6.7
9.1
0.5
6.3
6.1
9.8
9.4
3.8
2.3
1.2
2.5
1.1
0.3
Initial vehicle location
Charging station
Charging link
Access links
tij=cij=5 minutes
cij=25 minutes
tij =0 minute

16 
 
 
Figure 4. Rebalancing idle vehicle flows and its locations under charging station capacity 𝑢= 3. 
 
 
(a) (b) 
Figure 5. Rebalancing idle vehicle flows under charging station capacity (a) 𝑢= 2 and (b) 𝑢= 1. 
 
 
4.2. Model scalability tests on proposed heuristic 
A second set of experiments is conducted with a set of 5 generated instances ranging in size 
from 10 to 200 nodes, and 5 charging levels (up to 1,000 node-charge nodes) to test the scalability 
of the model using commercial solvers and the proposed heuristic. More charging levels |H| lead 
to increased accuracy in assigning idle vehicles to appropriate node-charges, but with a trade-off 
in computational cost since paths need to be enumerated along the charge levels for a given node. 
With 5 charging levels, it assumes customers differentiate between 50-75% or 25-50% charge 

17 
 
levels, and when they take a vehicle out, they may drive it in increments of 35 miles or so (for a 
140-mile range vehicle). The tests in this section and subsequent ones were implemented on 
MATLAB 2017a with a MacBook Air 2.2 GHZ i-7 8GB RAM with 1600 MHZ DDR3 OS Catalina 
10.15.4. 
Customer demand at each node-charge is randomly generated between [0, 1]. The vehicle fleet 
|F| and number of charging stations are set to increase proportionally with the network size. The 
service parameter 𝜇 is set to represent medium arrival intensity so that constraint (7) will be 
binding. The parameter setting is shown in Table 1. 
The results of the computational experiments are shown in Table 2. The MIP solution times 
increase exponentially with the number of nodes. The MIP performance can be verified in Ma et 
al. (2019b). 
 In online operations, computational savings are important and the heuristic results for 
networks up to 1000 node-charges are particularly promising. The optimality gap falls between 7 
– 35% while the computational time is reduced by 15 – 89% compared to commercial solvers. 
These results suggest that the algorithm is suitable for deployment as an online rebalancing system. 
All generated instances can be found in Zenodo (Chow, 2019). 
 
Table 1. Summary of parameter settings 
Parameter 
Value 
|N| 
10-200 
|H| 
5 
B 
0.4|N| 
𝜆𝑖𝑔 
Random number drawn from [0,1] for each node-charge 
𝜃 
0.02 
𝐶 
3 
𝜌𝑗𝑚 
(0.2236, 0.6416, 1.1576, 1.7345) 
|𝐽| 
0.1|N| 
𝑢𝑗 
|𝐹|/(0.1|𝑁|) 
𝜇 
1.5 × ∑
∑
𝜆𝑖𝑔
𝑔∈𝐻
𝑖∈𝑁
 
 
Table 2. Computational times and optimality gap of the proposed heuristic over generated instances 
N 
H 
# of nodes 
(𝑵 × 𝑯) 
MIP comp. 
time (sec) 
Optimality 
Gap (%) 
Heuristic comp. time (sec) 
(% reduction) 
10 
5 
50 
0.96 
7.61 
0.11 (-89%) 
20 
5 
100 
0.46 
9.63 
0.19 (-59%) 
50 
5 
250 
3.8 
15.45 
1.58 (-58%) 
100 
5 
500 
16.01 
18.49 
10.63 (-34%) 
200 
5 
1000 
144.17 
34.77 
122.78 (-15%) 
 
 
4.3. Additional sensitivity experiments 
To further evaluate our heuristic, we perform sensitivity analysis on four different model 
parameters. For each parameter value, we generate one random instance. Our base-case scenario 
is the 10-node instance of Table 1 (𝑁= 10, 𝐻= 5) with service rate 𝜇= 30.47, objective 
relocation cost factor 𝜃= 0.02, network demand of 20 passengers/hour (∑
∑
𝜆𝑗ℎ
𝑗∈𝐽
=
ℎ∈𝐻
20.313), and 𝐵= 4 idle vehicles. The results are summarized in Figure 6. 
Larger vehicle fleets (Figure 6(b)) or additional charging stations (Figure 6(a)) do not have a 
major impact in solution quality. The model is infeasible if the number of idle vehicles is less than 

18 
 
3 because of the queueing constraint. A potential shortfall of the heuristic is revealed when service 
rate becomes stricter, represented in Figure 6(c) as a ratio of service rate over sum of arrival rates. 
The increased optimality gap suggests that the tighter queueing constraint bound makes it harder 
for the heuristic to match. When the multiplier is below 1.2 the model becomes infeasible. This is 
because the system becomes highly saturated such that the steady state assumption of Eq. (7) is no 
longer satisfied. Note that Figure 6(c) shows the service rate in declining value from left to right. 
The results illustrate that Algorithm 1 is sensitive to the service rate. 
 
 
Figure 6. Heuristic sensitivity to (a) number of charging stations, (b) number of idle vehicle and (c) service rate to 
arrival rate ratio. 
 
5. Simulation-based computational experiments 
 
 
Having verified the cost function and algorithm in a single period, they are further tested as a 
CFA-based MDP policy in an online setting using simulation of customer arrivals, vehicle 
bookings, pickup and return time and locations. Within the simulation of this online environment, 
the rebalancing algorithm is run each time interval to determine rebalancing decisions. Both EV 
and non-EV scenarios are evaluated. For the EV scenarios, locations and numbers of electric 
charging stations are provided exogenously. Two sets of experiments are conducted: the first 
involves online simulation of the same small test network from Figure 3, while a second, large-
scale instance is drawn from real customer arrival data and fleet size in Brooklyn, NY, to validate 
the algorithm. The real data was provided by BMW ReachNow. 
 
Tests are conducted to validate the performance of the algorithm for the non-myopic case 
compared to a myopic setting as well as a benchmark operating policy. Measures of effectiveness 
include customer wait time, rebalancing costs, and number of customers in queue for a vehicle. 
(c) 
(b) 
(a) 

19 
 
 
5.1. Simulation platform for evaluation 
A custom event-based simulation platform with discrete rebalancing intervals was developed 
to evaluate different online system instances, as detailed in Li et al. (2019) and highlighted here. 
The simulator was developed in MATLAB. It is agent-based and includes two kinds of agents: 
customer agents and vehicle agents. The vehicle-to-customer assignment rules determine how the 
customers book the vehicles (in other words, how the vehicles are assigned to customers), and the 
rebalancing strategies determine how vehicles are rebalanced among different nodes. All the 
customer agents and vehicle agents operate in quasi-continuous time (unit time of 1 second) except 
for rebalancing decisions, which are made at the start of each (rebalancing) time interval. The 
event-based simulation with interval-based rebalancing decisions is illustrated in Figure 7, where 
vehicles may be simulated continuously over time in service but every time interval (t, t+1, …) the 
system may direct the idle vehicles to be rebalanced. 
 
 
Figure 7. Illustration of discrete vehicle events over time overlaid with discrete time steps for rebalancing decisions 
(source: Sayarshad and Chow, 2017). 
 
The rebalancing strategy is used to determine how to rebalance vehicles among different 
nodes. A rebalanced vehicle cannot be booked until it reaches its destination and changes its state 
to idle. The assignment rule ensures that customers cannot book a vehicle that is outside the pick-
up distance and set to allow vehicles anywhere in the network to be rebalanced to any other part 
of the network. We can test different rebalancing strategies in the same simulation. 
The parameter inputs depend on the rebalancing strategy. For the proposed policy, we need to 
feed the simulator the average arrival rate and service rate for each node, the location and charge 
level of all available vehicles, the driving distance and driving time between each pair of nodes, 
the location of all charging stations, and the number of chargers at each charging station. The 
output should specify the rebalancing route for all available vehicles, which is a sequence of nodes 
that the rebalanced vehicles should visit. If a vehicle is not assigned for rebalancing, then its route 
is just its current node. 
The simulator is publicly available in Zenodo (Chow, 2019). A screenshot of the simulator 
output (for the Brooklyn study area) is shown in Figure 8. The + is the position of the traffic 
analysis zones (TAZs), while the size of the red square represents the number of available vehicles 
within this TAZ at an arbitrary time interval of 𝑡= 820. 

20 
 
 
Figure 8. A sample screenshot of the simulator for Brooklyn, NY. 
 
 
5.2. Small test instance: exact solutions 
Using the simulator, we generated customer arrivals for the network shown in Figure 3. For 
the small network we set the rebalancing time step to be ∆𝑡= 1 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒. Details of the simulation 
input parameters are shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Input parameters for small instance experiment 
Parameters 
Value 
Number of Nodes 
6 
Layers 
5 
Fleet 
20 
Station Node Locations 
[2,6] 
𝜆𝑖𝑔 
Random number drawn from [0,0.1] for each node-charge 
Station Capacities 
8 
Service constraint 𝜇𝑗ℎ (non-myopic case) 
 5 𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠/ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑟 
Vehicle Average Speed 
60 𝑘𝑝ℎ 
Simulation duration 
5000 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠 
Rebalancing time step interval ∆𝑡 
1 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒 
Number of runs 
10 
 
The simulation results shown in Figure 9 are promising. The piecewise linear queueing 
constraint manages to reduce waiting times by 22% when 𝜂 = 0.85 and 𝑏= 2. The non-myopic 
strategy places idle vehicles strategically in anticipation of future demand. However, the largest 
improvement is observed when applying our algorithm to gasoline-fueled (“regular”) vehicles. In 
this scenario both rebalancing and waiting times are significantly reduced compared to electric 
vehicles. This difference is attributed to the capacity and time constraints of electric car batteries. 

21 
 
Without rebalancing, not even regular vehicles perform adequately. This is shown in Figures 9(a) 
and 9(b), where the case without rebalancing has significantly higher waiting times and customers 
in the queue than any other scenario. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 

22 
 
 
Figure 9. (a) Experienced waiting times, (b) customer queue lengths, (c) rebalance distance per period, averaged 
from 10 runs of each scenario. 
 
Table 4 summarizes the statistics across all the scenarios. Each simulated scenario has a 
duration of 5000 minutes and the results are averaged across 10 runs. The summary quantifies the 
differences between electric fleets and regular vehicles. The calibration of parameters 𝜂 and 𝑏 are 
important in improving the solution quality of the non-myopic model and provide additional levers 
for operators to improve serve quality. In this experiment, we do not include a non-myopic 
rebalancing strategy for regular vehicles since it was already tested in Sayarshad and Chow (2017) 
and shown to reduce total costs by 27%. The test was further replicated in a multimodal setting in 
Ma et al. (2019a). 
 
Table 4. Summary of statistics performance for simulation scenarios 
Scenarios: 
EV 
myopic 
EV 
non-myopic 
𝜂 = 0.80, 𝑏= 2 
EV 
non-myopic 
𝜂 = 0.90, 𝑏= 1 
Non-EV 
with myopic 
rebalancing 
Non-EV 
without rebalancing 
Waiting times 
Mean (min) 
8.289 
6.445 
10.690 
2.215 
279.231 
Waiting times 
Std. dev. 
(min) 
37.460 
25.335 
43.359 
1.176 
508.041 
Customers in 
queue 
Mean 
0.162 
0.121 
0.201 
0.044 
6.097 
Customers in 
queue 
Std. dev. 
0.395 
0.372 
0.469 
0.208 
4.801 
Rebalance 
distance 
Mean (km) 
8.532 
8.271 
7.765 
7.331 
- 
Rebalance 
distance 
Std. dev. (km) 
4.652 
4.691 
4.138 
4.586 
- 
(c) 

23 
 
Algorithm 1 is used in place of the exact algorithm to obtain the cost function approximation 
policy for the same example. The comparison is shown in Table 5. The simulation results illustrate 
that the heuristic has a 58% optimality gap with respect to the realized cumulative costs 
corresponding to the objective (3) while reducing computation time by 46%. The computational 
savings that can be achieved in large networks can significantly offset the solution quality. The 
results that are shown in Tables 4 and 5 represent the average values of 10 simulation runs. 
 
Table 5. Comparison of heuristic-based MDP vs MILP-based MDP 
Performance Metrics 
MILP 
Heuristic (% change in mean) 
Waiting times (min) 
[mean, median, std] 
[6.44, 2, 25.33] 
[10.22, 2, 27.08] (+59%) 
Rebalance distance (km) 
[mean, median, std] 
[8.27, 5, 4.69] 
[11.56, 10, 5.55] (+40%) 
Customers in queue 
[mean, median, std] 
[0.121, 0, 0.372] 
[0.326, 0.1, 0.494] (+169%) 
Computation time (sec) 
671.06 
361.23 (-46%) 
Average total cost 
(Delay + θ*RebDis) 
6.61 
10.45 (+58%) 
 
 
5.3. BMW ReachNow case study data 
We tested the algorithm in the Brooklyn network with the average monthly demand per TAZ 
shown in Figure 10 for 303 TAZs. We use data obtained from the BMW ReachNow car-sharing 
operations in 2017 to simulate passenger arrivals and destinations. Our dataset includes all trips 
for the month of September with an average of 231 car pickups per day. The service duration tends 
to have a much heavier tail than an exponential distribution; for example, the average reservation 
time is 𝑥̅ = 6.5 hours while the median is only 𝑥̃ = 45 mins, as shown in Figure 11. Due to this 
discrepancy, we compute 𝜇 from the median (𝜇=
ln 2
𝑥̃ ) instead of the mean, which is 
approximately 0.92 /hr. Although the median distance traveled per reservation is 4.1 mi, the 
average distance is 38.5 mi suggesting the vehicles are used to make several errands before being 
returned (contrary to the widely held assumption in prior studies that carshare vehicles are simply 
driven from pickup to drop-off). 
As this data shows, even free-floating carsharing clearly should not be modeled as direct trips 
from a pickup location to a drop-off location. From the operator’s side, the per-booking net revenue 
collected from operating the system is $22.60, while the after-tax cost for the average customer 
rises to $27.20. 
To test the heuristic, we assume the fleet of 262 vehicles are electric with 18 charging stations 
and having an average capacity of 4 charging ports, located as shown in Figure 12. The locations 
of these stations are based on Chargehub (2019). The charging facilities already exist to serve 
privately owned electric vehicles. We run the simulation over a period of one month with 
rebalancing decisions made at hourly intervals. We test 8 different scenarios (a – h) and compare 
them using the metrics defined in the small case simulation (waiting time per customer, rebalance 
distances, etc.). 

24 
 
a) Myopic rebalancing for electric vehicles by using our model with the constraint (7) relaxed; 
b) Proposed non-myopic rebalancing strategy using the proposed heuristic; 
c) The proposed strategy with the heuristic operating under the current programmed prototype 
software in simulated real time; 
d) The existing flee-floating BMW car-sharing data with regular vehicles that does not use 
any rebalancing algorithm; 
e) A naïve “ChargerChasing” scenario that assigns vehicles to the closest charging facility 
right after they drop off a passenger, while giving priority to lowest charged vehicles to use 
charging ports; 
f) Unlimited capacity for the initial 18 charging facilities as shown in Figure 10(a); 
g) The addition of 5 charging stations with capacity of 4 ports per facility shown in Figure 
10(b); 
h) Non-EV with myopic rebalancing. 
 
In practice, the algorithm is not solved instantaneously, so vehicles may end up not receiving 
rebalancing commands immediately at the start of a time interval. As a result, lag can occur 
between the rebalance decision and real time locations and availability of the vehicles. In order to 
examine the real-time efficiency of the proposed heuristic under the current programming 
language and software/hardware setting, we run an alternative version of the simulation (scenario 
c) to account for customer arrivals during the heuristic runtime. Instead of treating the optimization 
time as instant (see Figure 7), we allow vehicles to be picked up by customers while the algorithm 
is running. If a vehicle was assigned to be rebalanced upon algorithm completion but it is no longer 
available due to being picked up in real time, then it is skipped by the system. The other seven 
scenarios assume the algorithm is run near instantaneously, representing an ideal setting where the 
algorithm is implemented with more efficient programming language and hardware. 
 
 
Figure 10. Brooklyn traffic analysis zones (NYMTC, 2010) with BMW ReachNow monthly demand. 

25 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Vehicle booking duration histogram 
All facilities are assumed to use fast DC chargers where vehicles can fully recharge in 30 minutes. 
A rebalancing cost parameter of 𝜃= 0.02 is assumed along with relocation, access, and charging 
link costs measured in same units of minutes. The simulation horizon is set to 30 days. Simulation 
time for the event-based simulation is rounded to the nearest minute. Time steps for rebalancing 
are set to ∆𝑡= 1 ℎ. The fleet size is 262 vehicles. There are 5 charge levels assumed. The other 
parameters used in each scenario are listed in Table 6. 
 
 
Figure 12. (a) Existing charging stations and (b) expansion scenario for EV fleet analysis. 
 
The simulation step in Table 6 denotes the most granular level of time to track changes in the 
state of vehicle and passenger arrivals within the simulation environment. The vehicle range 
determines how far passengers can travel with a vehicle before refueling and the maximum charge 
level informs us about the number of clusters that battery percentage is split into. Finally, charge 
(a) 
(b) 

26 
 
time denotes the amount of time it takes for a vehicle to charge from 0% up to 100%. In order to 
model regular fueled vehicles within the same simulation environment, we assume that they have 
a charging time of 1 minute (time it takes in gas station) and that every node is a charging station 
with infinite capacity, thus permitting vehicles to satisfy any demand cluster. Figure 13 illustrates 
the average number of idle vehicles for the current setting of ReachNow operations which do not 
include rebalancing. The heatmap is consistent with demand arrival patterns shown in Figure 10. 
 
Table 6. Parameters used in the seven scenarios for the Brooklyn instance 
Scenarios 
EV_Myopic 
EV 
Non-Myopic 
Non-EV 
No-rebalance 
Charger- 
Chasing 
EV 
Infinite 
Capacity 
Add 
Charging 
Station 
Non-EV 
Myopic 
Vehicle 
range 
200 km 
200 km 
600 km 
200 km 
200 km 
200 km 
600 km 
Charging 
station 
capacity 
4 
4 
∞ 
4 
∞ 
4 
∞ 
No. of 
charging 
stations 
18 
18 
303 
18 
18 
23 
303 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Idle vehicle heatmap of current operations without rebalancing 
 
5.4. Brooklyn case study results 
For these instances, we compare the rebalancing kilometers, average waiting time per 
customer, total delay and customers on the queue at each time period. The results are shown in 
Figure 14. Across all the scenarios, the run time of the proposed heuristic per iteration falls between 
818 sec and 2126 sec, which are well within the simulation interval of 1 hour. All cases tend to 

27 
 
show non-EV being less costly, which makes sense, while ChargerChasing EV case provides a 
good worst case bound among the scenarios. 
Comparing operating strategies, the waiting time histogram in Figure 14(a) illustrates the 
inefficiency of the ChargerChasing heuristic since many customers never get served due to the 
immediate assignment of idle vehicles to charging stations. The current no-rebalancing setting also 
fails to guarantee a minimum service time for users. On the other hand, the non-myopic heuristic 
with 𝜂= 0.85 and 𝛽= 1 results in more evenly distributed waiting times. Figure 14(b) shows the 
distribution of queue length to be weighted more towards zero in the non-myopic EV case than the 
myopic EV case. Figure 14(c) shows the non-myopic EV case having a longer rebalancing time 
than myopic case due to more strategic allocations. However, this additional cost is more than 
offset by the benefit in user cost savings, as indicated in the Total Cost row in Table 7 where non-
myopic EV (37.8% reduction from myopic EV). The performance of the online version of the EV 
non-myopic algorithm (under the current programmed software) is also quite satisfactory (−29% 
from the EV myopic case, compared to −38% with the near instantaneous version of the 
algorithm) and demonstrates the appropriateness of the heuristic rebalancing algorithm in an online 
setting even under the prototype coding in MATLAB used. The non-EV no rebalance scenario has 
the lowest total cost, even more so than the non-EV myopic scenario, which is consistent with 
earlier literature (e.g. Chow and Regan, 2011) that shows myopic strategies can be costly to 
implement. 
 
 
Figure 14(a). Experienced waiting times 
 

28 
 
 
Figure 14(b). Customer queue lengths 
 
Figure 14(c). Rebalance time per period 
Figure 14. Histograms of the performance metrics for the scenarios in the Brooklyn case study. 
 
Other measures are summarized in Table 7. The total cost is given as the sum of realized 
waiting time and rebalance distance (which does not include recharging time) in the simulation, 
weighted by parameter 𝜃= 0.02 as defined in the MILP in Eq. (3) – (18). Computation time 
describes the average duration of the heuristic per rebalancing period. The average runtimes were 
obtained after “warm-starting” the simulation. 
 

29 
 
 
 Table 7. Performance summary of various rebalancing strategies tested in the Brooklyn dataset 
Scenarios 
EV 
Myopic 
EV 
Non-
Myopic 
EV 
Non-Myopic 
(online) 
Charger 
Chasing 
Infinite 
Capacity 
Add 
Charging 
Stations 
Non-EV 
No 
Rebalance 
Non-
EV 
Myopic 
Avg waiting 
time per 
customer (min) 
26.7 
15.5 
18.1 
46.1 
17.1 
11.2 
2.6 
1.7 
Avg queue 
length per 
interval 
4.3 
2.6 
3.0 
7.4 
2.8 
1.9 
0.6 
0.4 
Avg time per 
rebalance (min) 
26.7 
70.0 
39 
10.6 
22.8 
23.4 
- 
22.2 
Rebalance 
number 
7073 
9913 
9807 
6208 
7026 
7218 
- 
7086 
Computation 
time per 
interval (sec) 
1247 
1074 
914 
- 
817 
1201 
- 
1169 
Total cost 
(Delay + 
θ×RebDis) 
190.4 
118.4 
(-38%) 
135.4 
(-29%) 
316.7 
(+66%) 
125.5 
(-34%) 
85.2 
(-55%) 
17.6 
(-91%) 
20.6 
(-89%) 
 
For the other scenarios, adding more capacity to the charging stations for this case study does 
not appear to matter much (and in fact resulted in marginally worse total cost in the simulation 
outcome in Table 7), which suggests the current capacities per charging station suffice. Spatially 
increasing the number of DC fast charging stations by 28% (from 18 to 23) proved much more 
significant in the system performance. These findings demonstrate important managerial insights 
to carshare companies deciding: 
• Whether to adopt an EV fleet for a given existing charging infrastructure (the difference 
in costs are measured); 
• Where to place charging infrastructure to best improve the operation of the system 
(different scenarios can be analyzed); 
• How to operate a rebalancing policy that takes demand uncertainty into account (different 
algorithm parameters can be evaluated). 
 
The heatmaps in Figure 15 provide an insight on the spatial distribution of available vehicles 
for four characteristic scenarios. From the idle vehicle distribution, we can see that the 
ChargerChasing strategy allocates vehicles in specific charging stations that are “conveniently” 
located in midpoint areas of the map. On the opposite spectrum, the scenario that includes the 
addition of charging stations leads to a sparser vehicle distribution. 
 

30 
 
 
Figure 15. Average vehicles available in each TAZ zone heatmap 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
We propose a non-myopic idle vehicle rebalancing policy and greedy heuristic for an electric 
carsharing system that considers capacitated charging station constraints. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first facility relocation model formulation that considers queueing 
constraints applicable to EV charging. We formulate the cost function in each rebalancing time 
interval as a p-median problem embedded with a capacitated minimum cost flow network problem 
on a node-charge graph to jointly determine the relocation and routing decisions of idle vehicles 
under available charging capacity. The formulation on a two-dimensional node-charge graph 
(instead of a more computationally prohibitive node-time-battery graph) allows us to explicitly 
consider a customer’s charging demand profile and optimize rebalancing operations of idle 
vehicles accordingly in an online system. An illustrative example on a small network shows the 
assigned vehicle flow and rebalanced positions of idle vehicles minimize total designed objective 
while optimally utilizing the available charging capacity in the system. 
Figure 15(a). Myopic scenario 
Figure 15(b). Non-Myopic 
Figure 15(c): Additional charging 
stations 
Figure 15(d): ChargerChasing 

31 
 
To address the computational complexities of real car-sharing networks, we propose a greedy 
heuristic algorithm that incorporates queuing constraints and solves the relocation problem in 15 
– 89% of the computational time of commercial solvers for the MILP with only 7 – 35% optimality 
gaps in a single rebalancing decision time period. The online policy is tested on ten randomly 
generated test instances shows computational time reduction of 46% with an average gap of 58%. 
This allows the MDP heuristic to be operated in an online system. 
From the large-scale Brooklyn simulation (262 vehicle fleet, 231 vehicle pickups per day, 303 
TAZs, 5 charge levels), the proposed non-myopic algorithm can mitigate the cost of EV operations 
from a myopic algorithm relative to the non-EV no rebalance strategy by 38%. The online 
implementation of the same algorithm shows only a minor degradation in performance (-29% 
instead of -38%) establishing the heuristic’s applicability in online settings. 
We focused mainly on developing theoretical models for rebalancing electric vehicles as well 
as scalable heuristic algorithms for real-time operations. However, there is still more work to be 
done to evaluate and calibrate these theoretical models to real car-sharing operations. Potential 
stakeholders should carefully assess the benefits of using EV’s against gasoline-fueled vehicles. 
The following list represents future research directions: 
• Include dynamic demand (function of time, price and other factors) 
• Include data-driven (machine learning) algorithms for updating 𝜆 
• More realistic/ commercial simulation environment 
• Use data from larger operations 
• Conduct detailed cost-benefit analysis on the tradeoffs of EV’s and regular vehicles. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This research was supported by the C2SMART University Transportation Center (USDOT 
#69A3551747124). One of the authors was supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund 
(INTER/ MOBILITY/17/ 11588252). This work was also supported in part by the New York 
University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) Center for Interacting Urban Networks (CITIES), funded by 
Tamkeen, through the New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) Research Institute Award 
under Grant CG001, and in part by the Swiss Re Institute through the Quantum CitiesTM Initiative. 
Data was provided by BMW ReachNow car-sharing operations in Brooklyn, New York, USA. 
 
 
References 
 
Barth, M. and Todd, M. (1999). Simulation model performance analysis of a multiple station shared vehicle system. 
Transportation Research Part C 7(4), 237–259. 
Boyacı, B., Zografos, K. G. and Geroliminis, N. (2015). An optimization framework for the development of efficient 
one-way car-sharing systems. European Journal of Operational Research 240(3), 718–733. 
Brandstätter, G., Kahr, M. and Leitner, M. (2017). Determining optimal locations for charging stations of electric 
car-sharing systems under stochastic demand. Transportation Research Part B 104, 17–35. 
Bruglieri, M., Colorni, A. and Luè, A. (2014). The vehicle relocation problem for the one-way electric vehicle 
sharing: an application to the Milan case. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 111, 18–27. 
Chargehub (2019). https://chargehub.com/en/charging-stations-map.html, last accessed Nov 9, 2019. 
Chow, J. Y. J. (2019). BMW project C2SMART, https://zenodo.org/record/3333006. 
Chow, J. Y. J., & Regan, A. C. (2011). Resource location and relocation models with rolling horizon forecasting for 
wildland fire planning. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research, 49(1), 31-43. 

32 
 
Chow, J. Y. J. and Sayarshad, H. R. (2014). Symbiotic network design strategies in the presence of coexisting 
transportation networks. Transportation Research Part B 62, 13–34. 
Chow, J. Y. J., & Sayarshad, H. R. (2016). Reference policies for non-myopic sequential network design and timing 
problems. Networks and Spatial Economics, 16(4), 1183-1209. 
Clemente, M., Fanti, M. P. and Ukovich, W. (2014). Smart management of electric vehicles charging operations: the 
vehicle-to-charging station assignment problem. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 47(3), 918–923. 
Di Febbraro, A., Sacco, N., & Saeednia, M. (2012). One-way carsharing: solving the relocation 
problem. Transportation Research Record, 2319(1), 113-120. 
Fan, W., Machemehl, R. B. and Lownes, N. E. (2008). Carsharing: dynamic decision-making problem for vehicle 
allocation. Transportation Research Record 2063(1), 97–104. 
Gambella, C., Malaguti, E., Masini, F. and Vigo, D. (2018). Optimizing relocation operations in electric car-sharing. 
Omega 81, 234-245. 
Hu, L. and Liu, Y. (2016). Joint design of parking capacities and fleet size for one-way station-based carsharing 
systems with road congestion constraints. Transportation Research Part B 93, 268–299. 
Jorge, D., Molnar, G. and de Almeida Correia, G. H. (2015). Trip pricing of one-way station-based carsharing 
networks with zone and time of day price variations. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 81, 
461–482. 
Jung, J., Chow, J. Y. J., Jayakrishnan, R., Park, J. (2014). Stochastic dynamic itinerary interception refueling 
location problem with queue delay for electric taxi charging stations. Transportation Research Part C 40, 123–
142. 
Kaspi, M., Raviv, T., Tzur, M., & Galili, H. (2016). Regulating vehicle sharing systems through parking reservation 
policies: Analysis and performance bounds. European Journal of Operational Research 251(3), 969-987. 
Kek, A. G., Cheu, R. L., Meng, Q., & Fung, C. H. (2009). A decision support system for vehicle relocation 
operations in carsharing systems. Transportation Research Part E 45(1), 149-158. 
Krok, A. (2016). Car2Stop: Car2Go shuts down services in San Diego. CNET, Nov 21. 
Li, L., Lin, D., Pantelidis, T., Jabari, S.E., Chow, J.Y.J. (2019). An agent-based simulation for shared automated 
electric vehicles with vehicle relocation. Proc. IEEE ITS Conference, Auckland, NZ. 
Li, X., Ma, J., Cui, J., Ghiasi, A., & Zhou, F. (2016). Design framework of large-scale one-way electric vehicle 
sharing systems: A continuum approximation model. Transportation Research Part B 88, 21-45. 
Lufkin, B. (2016). 6 Electric Car-Sharing Programs Better Than a Billion Teslas on the Road. Gizmodo, Mar 31. 
Ma, T. Y., Rasulkhani, S., Chow, J. Y. J., & Klein, S. (2019a). A dynamic ridesharing dispatch and idle vehicle 
repositioning strategy with integrated transit transfers. Transportation Research Part E 128, 417-442. 
Ma, T-Y, Pantelidis, T. P., Chow, J.Y.J. (2019b). Optimal queueing-based rebalancing for one-way electric 
carsharing systems with stochastic demand. In: Proceedings of the 98th Annual Meeting of The Transportation 
Research Board, Paper No. 19-05278, 2019, pp. 1–17. 
Marianov, V. and ReVelle, C. (1996). The Queueing Maximal availability location problem: A model for the siting 
of emergency vehicles. European Journal of Operational Research 93(1), 110–120. 
Marianov, V. and Serra, D. (1998). Probabilistic, maximal covering location & allocation models for congested 
systems. Journal of Regional Science 38(3), 401–424. 
Marianov, V. and Serra, D. (2002). Location–allocation of multiple-server service centers with constrained queues 
or waiting times. Annals of Operations Research 111(1/4), 35–50. 
Martin, E. and Shaheen, S. (2016). Impacts of Car2go on Vehicle Ownership,Modal Shift, Vehicle Miles Travelled, 
and Greenhouse Gas Emissions: An Analysis of Five North American Cities. Transportation Sustainability 
Research Center, UC Berkeley, California. 
Nair, R., & Miller-Hooks, E. (2009). Evaluation of relocation strategies for emergency medical service 
vehicles. Transportation Research Record, 2137(1), 63-73. 
Nair, R., & Miller-Hooks, E. (2011). Fleet management for vehicle sharing operations. Transportation 
Science, 45(4), 524-540. 
Nourinejad, M., Zhu, S., Bahrami, S., & Roorda, M. J. (2015). Vehicle relocation and staff rebalancing in one-way 
carsharing systems. Transportation Research Part E 81, 98-113. 
NYMTC (2010). 2010/2011 Regional Household Travel Survey. New York, US. Transportation Information 
Gateway. https://www.nymtc.org/Portals/0/Pdf/SED/Excel.zip?ver=2016-05-26-130138-000, last accessed 
June, 1, 2017. 
Owen, S. H., & Daskin, M. S. (1998). Strategic facility location: A review. European Journal of operational 
Research 111(3), 423-447. 

33 
 
Powell, W.B., 2011. Approximate Dynamic Programming: Solving the Curses of Dimensionality, second ed. John 
Wiley and Sons, New York. 
Sayarshad, H. R. and Chow, J. Y. J. (2017). Non-myopic relocation of idle mobility-on-demand vehicles as a 
dynamic location-allocation-queueing problem. Transportation Research Part E 106, 60–77. 
Teitz, M. B. and Bart, P. (1968). Heuristic methods for estimating the generalized vertex median of a weighted 
graph. Operations Research 16(5), 955–961. 
Xu, M., Meng, Q. and Liu, Z. (2018). Electric vehicle fleet size and trip pricing for one-way carsharing services 
considering vehicle relocation and personnel assignment. Transportation Research Part B 111, 60–82. 
Waserhole, A. and Jost, V. (2016). Pricing in vehicle sharing systems: optimization in queuing networks with 
product forms. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 5(3), 293–320. 
Zhang, D., Liu, Y., & He, S. (2019). Vehicle assignment and relays for one-way electric car-sharing 
systems. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 120, 125-146. 
Zhang, R. and Pavone, M. (2016). Control of robotic mobility-on-demand systems: A queueing-theoretical 
perspective. The International Journal of Robotics Research 35(1–3), 186–203. 
Zhao, M., Li, X., Yin, J., Cui, J., Yang, L., & An, S. (2018). An integrated framework for electric vehicle 
rebalancing and staff relocation in one-way carsharing systems: Model formulation and Lagrangian relaxation-
based solution approach. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 117, 542-572.