TITLE: Location of Charging Stations in Electric Car Sharing Systems
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0931
---

VU Research Portal
Location of charging stations in electric car sharing systems
Brandstätter, Georg; Leitner, Markus; Ljubic, Ivana
published in
Transportation Science
2020
DOI (link to publisher)
10.1287/TRSC.2019.0931
document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
document license
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
Brandstätter, G., Leitner, M., & Ljubic, I. (2020). Location of charging stations in electric car sharing systems.
Transportation Science, 54(5), 1408-1438. https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2019.0931
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

This article was downloaded by: [145.108.252.212] On: 22 January 2021, At: 04:21
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Transportation Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Location of Charging Stations in Electric Car Sharing
Systems
Georg Brandstätter, Markus Leitner, Ivana Ljubić
To cite this article:
Georg Brandstätter, Markus Leitner, Ivana Ljubić (2020) Location of Charging Stations in Electric Car Sharing Systems.
Transportation Science 54(5):1408-1438. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0931
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-Terms-and-
Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2020, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations research (O.R.)
and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning opportunities for individual
professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use O.R. and analytics tools and methods to
transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE
Vol. 54, No. 5, September–October 2020, pp. 1408–1438
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/trsc
ISSN 0041-1655 (print), ISSN 1526-5447 (online)
Location of Charging Stations in Electric Car Sharing Systems
Georg Brandst¨atter,a Markus Leitner,a,b Ivana Ljubi´cc
a Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; b Department of Supply Chain Analytics,
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, Netherlands; c ESSEC Business School, 95021 Cergy Pontoise, France
Contact: georg.brandstaetter@univie.ac.at,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4500-7148 (GB); m.leitner@vu.nl,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3313-9610 (ML); ivana.ljubic@essec.edu,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4834-6284 (IL)
Received: November 6, 2016
Revised: August 21, 2018; July 4, 2019
Accepted: July 10, 2019
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
June 16, 2020
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0931
Copyright: © 2020 INFORMS
Abstract. Electric vehicles are prime candidates for use within urban car sharing systems,
both from economic and environmental perspectives. However, their relatively short range
necessitates frequent and rather time-consuming recharging throughout the day. Thus,
charging stations must be built throughout the system’s operational area where cars can
be charged between uses. In this work, we introduce and study an optimization problem
that models the task of ﬁnding optimal locations and sizes for charging stations, using
the number of expected trips that can be accepted (or their resulting revenue) as a gauge of
quality. Integer linear programming formulations and construction heuristics are in-
troduced, and the resulting algorithms are tested on grid-graph-based instances, as well as
on real-world instances from Vienna. The results of our computational study show that the
best-performing exact algorithm solves most of the benchmark instances to optimality and
usually provides small optimality gaps for the remaining ones, whereas our heuristics
provide high-quality solutions very quickly. Our algorithms also provide better solutions
than a sequential approach that considers strategic and operational decisions separately.
A cross-validation study analyzes the algorithms’ performance in cases where demand
is uncertain and shows the advantage of combining individual solutions into a single
consensus solution, and a simulation study investigates their behavior in car sharing
systems that provide their customers with more ﬂexibility regarding vehicle selection.
Funding: This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund [Grant P26755-N19], the Joint
Programme Initiative Urban Europe [Grant 847350], the Vienna Science and Technology Fund
[Grant ICT15-014], and a University of Vienna dissertation completion fellowship.
Supplemental Material: The online appendices are available at https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0931.
Keywords:
green logistics • location analysis • electric vehicles • car sharing • charging station location • integer linear programming
1. Introduction
Urbanization is an ongoing process that makes more
and more people move from rural areas to nearby
cities and suburbs. This results in an increased demand
for mobility in these areas, much of which is currently
satisﬁed by privately owned cars powered by internal
combustion engines. At the same time, people are be-
coming more concerned about sustainability and the
effects of pollution on the environment, of which the
aforementioned vehicles are a major cause. Although
public transportation can help (and has helped) to
mitigate some of the negative effects resulting from
such private car ownership, their inﬂexibility inher-
ently limits their usefulness (Jorge and Correia 2013).
Thus, cities need to offer their residents new solutions
for individual transportation that are environmentally
friendly, ﬂexible, and affordable. Car sharing systems
using electric vehicles are one example of such a so-
lution that has recently attracted increasing attention.
Car sharing systems operate on the concept of a
ﬂeet of vehicles that can be rented by customers for
short periods of time. This allows fewer vehicles to
satisfy the mobility demands of more people, thereby
reducing the amount of public space required (Shaheen,
Sperling, and Wagner 1998). Using electric vehicles
allows these systems to operate in an environmentally
friendly manner, as they are very efﬁcient in urban
settings and do not produce tailpipe emissions, which
helps eliminate (if the electricity comes from clean
sources such as hydro, wind, or solar power) or at least
mitigate air pollution by moving it to less densely
populated areas. However, despite recent technolog-
ical advancements, the range and recharge speed of
electric vehicles, especially economically viable ones,
are still fairly limited (Pelletier, Jabali, and Laporte
2016). A Smart electric drive (ED), for instance, has a
range of only around 145 km and requires one whole
hour to be fully recharged, even with 22 kW fast-
charging infrastructure (see, e.g., Daimler AG 2012).
Similarly, the Mitsubishi iMiEV and the Nissan LEAF,
both with a range of around 160 km, require about
30 minutes to recharge their batteries by approxi-
mately 80% (Nissan 2014, Mitsubishi 2017). However,
because the charging characteristics of their batteries
1408

are highly nonlinear, the remaining 20% is charged
more slowly.
Thus, in order to remain operational, these vehicles
must frequently be recharged for relatively long pe-
riods of time when they are not in use, which happens
at charging stations. Such charging stations, however,
are very expensive to build, especially if they allow
faster recharge speeds than common household power
outlets. A study conducted by Gawlik et al. (2013) with
data from Vienna, for instance, suggested that the
cost of a single charging station can range between
€56,500 and €126,500, largely depending on the cost
of the station terminal and the length of the power
supply cable for which trenches must be dug.
To make the best use of available funds, the loca-
tions and capacities of those stations must therefore
be chosen carefully. One obvious criterion for de-
termining the viability of a potential charging station
location is its proximity to customer demand. Likewise,
the amount of nearby demand determines which size
(capacity) would be best for each station. Thus, an im-
portant prerequisite for any optimization approach
aiming to identify optimal locations and capacities of
charging stations is the availability of an appropriate
forecast of the expected demand throughout the oper-
ational area. Important characteristics of such a de-
mand forecast (or a method generating such a forecast)
in the context of electric car sharing are the consid-
eration of (i) the demand variance over the course of
the planning period and (ii) the expected battery
consumptions to facilitate the planning of necessary
recharging breaks of vehicles. In addition, it should
account for the movement of cars between different
stations/parts of the operational area during the
planning period. One way of incorporating these
characteristics is using a forecast of estimated trips as
a demand model. An additional advantage of this
choice (which is taken in this article) is that it allows
one to easily associate estimated revenues to the in-
dividual trips of such a forecast, thus allowing one to
optimize the expected revenue in addition to other
important strategic optimization objectives, such as
cost minimization, while satisfying the complete (or a
certain fraction of the) estimated demand.
In this work, we deﬁne an optimization problem
for ﬁnding optimal locations and sizes for charging
stations within an electric car sharing network’s op-
erational area while using such a trip forecast. We
focus on maximizing the expected revenue or num-
ber of accepted trips while explicitly considering the
charge state of the individual vehicles, that is, en-
suring that their batteries are never depleted when
fulﬁlling the demand.
Although we are mainly concerned with the stra-
tegic decisions related to the placement and sizing
of charging stations, the models and algorithms we
present also optimize decisions at lower levels (e.g.,
ﬂeet sizing, trip selection and their assignment to
vehicles) to improve the quality of the higher-level
decisions. Such integrated optimization approaches
have already been successfully used for other prob-
lems like the production-routing problem (see, e.g.,
Ruokokoski et al. 2010, Absi et al. 2018). In this study,
we show that signiﬁcant improvements of the ex-
pected revenue can be achieved when lower-level
decisions are taken into account, even under the as-
sumption of uncertain customer demand.
1.1. Outline
We summarize previous and related work in the re-
mainder of this section. In Section 2, we formally
deﬁne the optimization problem we want to solve. We
prove in Section 3 that the problem is NP-hard in
general and in two relaxed variants, but also show
that an even more relaxed problem variant can be
solved in polynomial time. Section 4 describes the
integer linear programming (ILP) formulations that
we used to model and solve the problem. Two heu-
ristic methods are introduced in Section 5, where we
also describe our separation procedures for dynam-
ically ﬁnding constraints for the ILP models intro-
duced in Section 4 during branch and cut. In Section 6,
we compare the performance and solution charac-
teristics of our algorithms on grid-graph-based in-
stances, as well as ones based on real-world data from
the city of Vienna. Section 7 describes a sequential
algorithm that considers decisions at the various levels
separately and compares it to the previously described
integrated models where these decisions are optimized
together. We also conduct a cross-validation study on
a second set of real-world instances from Vienna to
analyze the behavior of our algorithms in cases where
demand is uncertain, and describe an algorithm for
computing a consensus solution from the optimal
solutions for the individual deterministic instances.
In Section 8, we then conduct a simulation study to
analyze the behavior of our solutions in a car sharing
system where trip requests are fulﬁlled on a ﬁrst-
come, ﬁrst-served basis and customers are free to
choose any available car and charger for their trip.
Finally, Section 9 contains concluding remarks and an
outline for future work.
1.2. State of the Art
The domains of both car sharing and electric vehicles
have recently attracted increased interest from the
scientiﬁc community. The literature on strategic op-
timization problems arising in the context of their
combined use is still fairly sparse, however. In the
following, we summarize these works and also give
a brief overview on further, related problems. A more
detailed classiﬁcation and overview of (recent) related
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1409

scientiﬁc publications can be found in the survey by
Brandst¨atter et al. (2016).
Boyacı, Zografos, and Geroliminis (2015) describe a
biobjective mixed integer linear programming model
for ﬁnding optimal locations and sizes of charging
stations, as well as the size and initial allocation
of the vehicle ﬂeet for an electric car sharing system.
In addition to these strategic decisions, their model
optimizes the operational aspect of relocating cars
throughout the planning period to mitigate problems
arising from unbalanced demand. The authors then
evaluate their models on real-world instances based on
car sharing data from the Nice region. A major draw-
back of their approach is the fact that the vehicles’
charge state is not considered; instead, necessary
charging pauses must be provided as an input.
Cepolina and Farina (2012) develop a simulated an-
nealing algorithm to optimize the ﬂeet size and al-
location in an electric car sharing system in downtown
Genoa, whereas a simulation study by Barth and Todd
(1999) focuses on analyzing the effects of the trip-to-
vehicle ratio on customer waiting times and the number
of required relocations in a resort in southern Cal-
ifornia. In contrast to our setting, both of these pub-
lications do not consider the locations and sizes of
charging stations within the network.
Several optimization problems closely related to
those arising in the context of electric car sharing systems
have been considered in the scientiﬁc literature. These
include, for instance, problem variants considering the
placement of charging stations for privately owned
electric cars, for which both exact (see Frade et al.
2011; Chen, Kockelman, and Khan 2013; Wang and
Lin 2013; Baouche et al. 2014; Cavadas, Correia, and
Gouveia 2015) and heuristic (see Wang et al. 2010; Ge,
Feng, and Liu 2011; Hess et al. 2012) methods have
been proposed. An integrated model that includes the
optimization of vehicle routes is described by Worley,
Klabjan, and Sweda (2012). However, given that the
trafﬁc patterns of privately owned cars are necessarily
quite different from those of shared cars (because
private cars tend to remain parked for long durations;
see Shaheen, Sperling, and Wagner 1998), the appli-
cability of their solution approaches to car sharing is
not quite clear. Another related problem is that of
ﬁnding good locations for charging stations for electric
taxis, which is studied by Sellmair and Hamacher
(2014), as well as by Asamer et al. (2016). Although
taxi trafﬁc is very similar to one-way car sharing trafﬁc,
the fact that taxis can easily be relocated at any time
again fundamentally changes the underlying model.
The problem of placing stations in a nonelectric car
sharing system is tackled by Correia and Antunes
(2012); Correia, Jorge, and Antunes (2014); and Fassi,
Awasthi, and Viviani (2012). By the nature of that
problem, any constraints related to the remaining
range of a vehicle (represented by car battery levels
for electric cars) are disregarded.
Other strategic optimization problems that can be
of interest for electric car sharing systems include
the design of the system’s area of operation (AoO). This
problem was considered, for instance, by He et al.
(2017), who deﬁne an algorithm based on a mixed-
integer second-order cone programming formulation
and evaluate it on a real-world instance from San Diego.
2. Problem Deﬁnition
The charging station location problem (CSLP) con-
sidered in this article is formally deﬁned on an un-
directed graph &  (9, %) with vertex set 9 and edge
set %, which models the street network of the oper-
ational area. Each edge e ∈% has an associated length
ℓe ≥0. Vertex subset S ⊆9 describes the set of po-
tential locations for charging stations (simply referred
to as “stations” from here on out), where each such
station i ∈S has an associated opening cost Fi ≥0, a
maximum capacity (or size) Ci ∈N, and a cost per
charger Qi ≥0. Furthermore, for each station i ∈S,
node set 1i ⊆9 describes the set of nodes within
walking distance, that is, the set of nodes from/to
which a user would be willing to walk to/from that
station. Based on this, we deﬁne the set of nearby
stations N(v)  {i ∈S | v ∈1i} for each v ∈9.
Parameter H ∈N deﬁnes the number of (identical)
electric cars that are available for purchase. Each car
has an associated acquisition cost of Fc, a uniform
recharge rate per time period of ρ, and a maximum
battery capacity of Bmax. This linear recharge rate rep-
resents a conservative underestimation of the actual
charging behavior of a lithium battery, which starts
off linear and slows down nonlinearly when around
80% of the total battery capacity is reached (see, e.g.,
Montoya et al. 2017). It can easily be calculated by
simply dividing the battery capacity by the actual time
it takes to fully recharge it when assuming realistic
charging behavior. The total expenses for opening charg-
ing stations, building chargers, and purchasing cars are
limited by the budget W.
Finally, K is the set of trips potentially requested
by customers, which represents an estimation of the
demand for car sharing within the operational area
throughout the planning period T  {0, . . . , Tmax}.
Each trip k ∈K has an associated origin ok ∈9, a
destination dk ∈9, a start time sk ∈T, an end time ek ∈
T (where ek > sk), an (overestimated) battery con-
sumption bk ∈{0, . . . , Bmax}, and an expected revenue
pk ∈N. We also deﬁne the duration of a trip as Δk 
ek −sk, as well as its potential start and end stations
N(ok) and N(dk) according to the deﬁnition above. Be-
cause we are considering a station-based car sharing
system, we assume that vehicles are always parked
at a charging station and connected to a charger
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1410
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

between trips. This also serves to ensure that there are
sufﬁcient opportunities for the vehicles to recharge
their batteries. Notice that, particularly in urban areas,
a trip request k ∈K does not imply direct travel from ok
to dk. Instead, it just indicates that customer k wants to
pick up a car close to ok and later return it close to dk
(which may also be equal to ok) after using the rental
car for the desired task(s), for example, to run errands.
An exemplary instance of the CSLP is given in
Figure 1(a).
2.1. Feasible Solutions
A solution of the CSLP is a tuple S′, C′, H′, K′, *′
(
)
consisting of a set of stations S′ ⊆S that are opened, an
assigned capacity (or size) C′
i ∈{0, 1, . . . , Ci} for each
station i ∈S (opened stations in S′ have C′
i > 0), a
number of cars H′ ≤H that are purchased, and a set
of trips K′ ⊆K. For each selected trip k ∈K′, the tri-
ple (car(k), start(k), end(k)) contains its assigned car
car(k) ∈{1, 2, . . . , H′} as well as the chosen start and
endstationsstart(k) ∈S′ ∩N(ok) and end(k) ∈S′ ∩N(dk),
respectively, and the set *′ is deﬁned as *′  {(car(k),
start(k), end(k)) | k ∈K′}.
This information allows us to partition the set of
accepted trips K′ into H′ pairwise disjoint nonempty
trip sequences {K′
1, . . . , K′
H′} (each of which is sorted by
its trips’ start times) corresponding to the assignment
of accepted trips to purchased cars.
In order to be feasible, a solution must ensure that
(a) its strategic expenditures do not exceed the avail-
able budget W; (b) the trips assigned to each car h ∈
{1, 2, . . . , H′} deﬁne a connected route through open
stations of the street network; (c) together, all cars in
the solution never exceed the available station capac-
ities (at each point of time); and (d) the route assigned
to each car is battery-feasible. A solution to the instance
given in Figure 1(a) is given in Figure 1(b).
Formally, a solution is budget-feasible if the expen-
ditures for opening stations, building chargers and
buying cars do not exceed the available budget W, that
is, if the inequality ∑
i∈S′(Fi + QiC′
i) + H′Fc ≤W holds.
To determine whether an assignment of trips to a
car deﬁnes a feasible connected route, we need to look at
each pair of consecutive trips in that car’s trip se-
quence. Therefore, let Kh  (k1, . . . , km)
be the se-
quence of trips assigned to car h in ascending order of
their start time, that is, skj ≤skj+1, 1 ≤j < m. A solution
is route-feasible if the trip sequence Kh of each pur-
chased car h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H′} satisﬁes the following two
criteria: (a) no pair of two consecutive trips may be
temporally overlapping, that is, skj+1 ≥ekj, 1 ≤j < m,
and (b) the end and start stations of each such pair
of consecutive trips must coincide; that is, end(kj) 
start(kj+1), 1 ≤i < m.
A route-feasible solution is furthermore capacity-
feasible if the number of cars that are at a station at any
point in time does not exceed that station’s assigned
capacity C′
i. We consider car h to be (a) at its ﬁrst trip’s
assigned start station start(k1) from the beginning
of the planning horizon 0 until the start of the ﬁrst trip
sk1 (inclusive, in each case); (b) at station end(kj) 
start(kj+1) from ekj until skj+1 (again, inclusive in each
case) between any two consecutive trips kj and kj+1,
1 ≤j < m; and (c) at its last trip’s assigned end station
end(km) from that trip’s end ekm until the end of the
planning period Tmax (again, inclusive in each case).
Finally, a solution is battery-feasible if the charge
state of each car never drops below 0 when per-
forming its assigned trips. To determine whether a
car’s route is battery-feasible, we need to look at its
charge state at the end of each of its assigned trips.
Formally, car h’s charge state at the start of its ﬁrst trip
is deﬁned as Bmax; its charge state bs
kj at the start of
a trip kj, 2 ≤j ≤m, is given as bs
kj  min{Bmax, be
kj−1 +
(skj −ekj−1)ρ} (i.e., its charge state increases by ρ [up
to Bmax] from what it was at the end of the previous
trip for each time period it is parked at a station); and its
charge state be
kj at the end of trip kj, 1 ≤j ≤m, is given
as be
kj  bs
kj −bkj (i.e., its charge state decreases accord-
ing to the trip’s battery consumption). Thus, if be
kj ≥0
for every trip kj in each sequence Kh  (k1, . . . , km),
h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H′}, a solution is battery feasible.
2.2. Time-Expanded Location Graph
As can be observed from the discussion above, it can
be hard to understand solutions to the CSLP without
Figure 1. (Color online) An Example Instance and One of Its
Solutions with Five Stations and Five Trips
Notes. The grid graph in (a) represents the input network & with
solid circles being customer locations and double circles being
potential charging stations. Shaded regions centered at charging
locations represent neighborhood areas covering customers within
the allowed walking distance. There are |S|  5 stations with the
available trips K  {k1, . . . , k5}, denoted by arrows in the input graph.
Trips can be represented as tuple (N(ok), N(dk), sk, ek, bk, pk) for all
k ∈K: ({1}, {2}, 2, 3, 20, 1), ({2}, {1, 3}, 6, 8, 60, 1), ({4, 5}, {2}, 2, 6, 90, 1),
({4}, {3}, 3, 6, 70, 1), and ({3}, {4}, 8, 10, 50, 1). The ﬂeet consists of two
cars (H  2), and the planning time horizon is T  {0, . . . , 12}. The
solution in (b) consists in covering four trips with two cars: The
sequences of trips assigned to the ﬁrst and second cars are K1 
(k1, k2) and K2  (k4, k5), respectively. Trip k3 cannot be selected
because of the limited number of available cars. Dashed arcs are trips
that cannot be selected, and dotted arcs represent walking from/to
the customer location to/from the respective charging station.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1411

explicitly considering the time dimension of the de-
mand. In particular, one cannot easily check for vi-
olation of the stations capacities or whether trips
associated to a single car are temporally overlapping.
To overcome these difﬁculties, we introduce the lo-
cation graph G  (V, A), which will allow us to easily
keep track of the state of stations at each relevant point
in time. These time-expanded graphs, which are also
referred to as time–space networks, have been used in
a variety of problem settings where the underlying
system’s state changes over time (see, e.g., Shu and
Song 2013, Gambella et al. 2018). The vertex set V 
{r} ∪⋃
i∈S Vi of this time-expanded, directed, and acy-
clic graph consists of an artiﬁcial root vertex r and one
vertex it for each station i ∈S and each time t where
a trip may either start or end at station i, that is,
Vi  {it | ∃t ∈T+
i ∪T−
i }. Here, T+
i  {t ∈T : ∃k ∈K : i ∈
N(ok), t  sk} and T−
i  {t ∈T : ∃k ∈K : i ∈N(dk), t  ek}
denote the subsets of time points at which a trip may
start and end at station i, respectively. The arc set A 
AI ∪AW ∪AT comprises three distinct subsets: ini-
tialization arcs from set AI, representing the initial
allocation of cars to stations at the beginning of the
planning period; waiting arcs from set AW, repre-
senting cars being parked (and therefore recharged)
at a station for some time; and trip arcs from set AT,
representing cars performing trips and thereby trav-
eling between stations. The set of initialization arcs
AI  {(r, it)|i ∈S, t  min{T+
i ∪T−
i }} consists of one
arc from the root vertex to the ﬁrst (with respect to
[w.r.t.] time) vertex of each station, whereas the set
of waiting arcs AW  {(it, it′)|it, it′ ∈V, t < t′, ∄it′′ ∈V :
t < t′′ < t′} consists of an arc from each station vertex
to the next (again w.r.t. time) vertex of that station, if
such a vertex exists.
The set of trip arcs AT  ⋃
k∈K AT
k is deﬁned as a
union of arcs induced by the individual trips. To
this end, for each trip k ∈K, we deﬁne the set of trip
arcs induced by that trip as AT
k  {(it, jt′)|i ∈N(ok), j ∈
N(dk), t  sk, t′  ek}, which consists of an arc from
each of that trip’s potential start stations at its start
time to each of its potential end stations at its end
time. Figure 2 shows the location graph G corre-
sponding to the instance shown in Figure 1(a), as well
as the mapping of the solution given in Figure 1(b) into
graph G.
Notice that making the time dimension explicit may
in principle lead to graphs whose size grows (linearly)
with Tmax; that is, such graphs may be of pseudopo-
lynomial size with respect to the input data. Theorem 1
shows that this is not the case for the time-expanded
location graph introduced above. Moreover, this result
implies that increasing the granularity of the plan-
ning period without increasing the number of trips
considered in the demand forecast does not have a
large impact on the size of G and therefore on the
performance of algorithms that use the location graph.
This is also conﬁrmed by the results of our computa-
tional study (see Section 6). In addition, Theorem 1,
whose proof is given in Online Appendix A.1, is cru-
cial for our study of a special, polynomially solvable
case of the CSLP in Section 3.
Theorem 1. The numbers of nodes and arcs of the time-
expanded location graph G  (V, A) associated to an in-
stance of the CSLP can be bounded from above as follows:
• |V|  2(min{|K|, |S| · Tmax}), and |A|  2(|K|) if the
set of potential stations is of constant size for each node
v ∈9, that is, if |N(v)|  2(1) for each v ∈9.
• |V|  2(|S| · min{|K|,Tmax}), and |A|2(|S| · min{|K|,
Tmax}+|S|2|K|) otherwise.
Observe that a trip arc does not necessarily uni-
quely correspond to a single trip only, but can be
induced by multiple trips, as long as these trips start
and end at the same times and share at least one
potential start and end station. Therefore, the for-
mulations and algorithms introduced in the following
will need to distinguish between the different trips an
arc can correspond to when encountering such a trip
arc. Similarly, if a trip k ∈K allows round trips, that
is, returning to the same station i one started from
[or, more formally, if N(ok) ∩N(dk) ̸ ∅], and no
Figure 2. Location Graph of the Instance Given in Figure 1(a)
Notes. Initialization arcs are dotted, waiting arcs are dashed, and trip arcs are solid and labeled with their corresponding trip. The solution given
in Figure 1(b) is highlighted in bold.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1412
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

station vertices exist between isk and iek, algorithms
must distinguish whether the arc (isk, iek) corresponds
to performing that trip or waiting at station i for
that period. This second kind of ambiguity can, in
principle, be prevented by splitting the waiting arc
into two arcs with another station vertex in the
middle.
Another approach for dealing with these two kinds
of ambiguities is allowing multiple parallel arcs
between each pair of vertices, which is how our
implementations handles them.
3. Problem Complexity and Polynomially
Solvable Cases
In this section, we show that the CSLP as deﬁned
in Section 2 is strongly NP-hard. We furthermore
prove that it remains strongly NP-hard for instances
where the budget is not constraining, as well as for
instances where the battery is not constraining. Fi-
nally, we show that for instances where neither the
budget nor the battery is constraining, the problem is
solvable in polynomial time.
First, we deﬁne what we mean by an instance that
is budget- or battery-unconstrained.
Deﬁnition 1. An instance of the CSLP is budget-
unconstrained if every selection S′ ⊆S of opened sta-
tions, every capacity assignment C′
i ∈{1, . . . , Ci}, for all
i ∈S′, and every valid number H′ ≤H of purchased
cars is feasible w.r.t. the given budget W, that is, if W ≥
∑
i∈S Fi + CiQi
(
) + FcH. In that case, because opening
more stations, building more chargers, or buying more
cars can never make a feasible solution infeasible, we
can simply set S′  S and C′
i  Ci, for all i ∈S. An in-
stance that is not budget-unconstrained is budget-
constrained.
Deﬁnition 2. An instance of the CSLP is battery-
unconstrained if any consistent assignment of trips
to cars that respects the assigned station capacities is
also battery feasible. An instance that is not battery-
unconstrained is battery-constrained.
Theorem 2. The CSLP is strongly NP-hard in general and
remains strongly NP-hard for instances that are
• battery-constrained but budget-unconstrained or
• budget-constrained but battery-unconstrained.
For instances that are unconstrained by both battery and
budget, the problem is solvable in polynomial time.
We prove ﬁrst half of this theorem by using Lemmas 1
and 2. The latter part is shown in Lemma 3 in the
next subsection. The proofs of these three lemmas are
provided in Online Appendices A.2, A.3, and A.4,
respectively.
Lemma 1. The CSLP is strongly NP-hard for instances that
are battery-constrained but budget-unconstrained.
Lemma 2. The CSLP is strongly NP-hard for instances that
are budget-constrained but battery-unconstrained.
3.1. Polynomially Solvable Cases
We will now show that one can solve instances of the
CSLP that are both budget- and battery-unconstrained
in polynomial time. This result will be shown by ar-
guing that an optimal solution to such instances can be
obtained by solving a minimum-cost ﬂow problem
(with integral capacities and demands) on the location
ﬂow network that is obtained from the location graph
via a transformation of polynomial size. The result
thus immediately follows from Theorem 1, that is, from
the fact that the size of the location graph is strictly
polynomial w.r.t. the size of a considered instance.
Formally, the location ﬂow network is deﬁned by
the time-expanded, directed, acyclic graph ˜G  ( ˜V, ˜A),
where each arc a ∈˜A has an associated cost ca ∈Z and
capacity ςa ∈N, and each node v ∈˜V has a (positive or
negative) demand bv ∈Z. Its node set ˜V is the union
of station nodes ˜VS and trip nodes ˜VT. Node set ˜VS is
obtained from location graph G by splitting each
vertex v ∈V different from the root node r into two
vertices v, v′ ∈V′ adopting the root node r and adding
a sink node s, that is, ˜VS  {r, s} ∪{it, i′
t | it ∈V}. For
each trip k ∈K, two vertices vk, v′
k are included in the
setof trip nodes, that is, ˜VT  {vk, v′
k | k ∈K}. The supply
of the root r and the demand of the sink s are equal to
the number of cars (br  H, bs  −H), whereas the
demands of all other nodes are equal to zero.
The set of arcs ˜A is obtained as follows: Each pair of
station vertices it, i′
t corresponding to the same node
it in the location graph is connected by an internal
station arc a  (it, i′
t) with zero cost ca and capacity ςa 
Ci equal to the maximum capacity of the corresponding
station. The root r is connected to the sink s by a similar
internal root arc a  (r, s) with zero cost ca and capacity
ςa  H equal to the maximum number of cars avail-
able for purchase. One root arc a  (r, it) with zero arc
cost ca and capacity ςa  H is added to the ﬁrst vertex
(w.r.t. time) of each station, as is a sink arc a′  (it′, s)
from each station’s last vertex to the sink with the same
zero cost ca′ and capacity ςa′  H. Likewise, we add a
new waiting arc a  (i′
t, it′) with cost ca  0 and capacity
ςa  Ci for each original waiting arc (it, it′) ∈AW. For
each trip k ∈K, the corresponding pair of trip nodes
vk, v′
k is connected by an internal trip arc a  (vk, v′
k) with
cost ca  −pk and capacity ςa  1, thus ensuring that
the revenue of each trip (modeled as negative arc cost)
can be earned at most once. For each possible start
node i ∈N(ok) and each possible end node j ∈N(dk) of
trip k ∈K, start and end station arcs (i′
sk, vk) and (v′
k, jek)
with zero costs and capacity one are included. Figure 3
shows the location ﬂow network ˜G corresponding to
the instance described in Figure 1(a), which is ob-
tained from the location graph given in Figure 2.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1413

Lemma 3. The CSLP is solvable in polynomial time for in-
stances that are both budget- and battery-unconstrained.
4. Integer Linear
Programming Formulations
We now describe a generic ILP formulation for the
CSLP, which is given by (1)–(12). For all i ∈S, vari-
ables yi ∈{0, 1} indicate whether station i was opened
or not, whereas variables zi ∈{0, . . . , Ci} indicate the
number of chargers built at that station (i.e., its size or
capacity). Likewise, for all h ∈{1, 2, . . . H}, variables
ah ∈{0, 1} indicate whether car h was purchased or
not. Finally, for each trip k ∈K, variables xk ∈{0, 1}
determine whether that trip has been accepted or not,
and variables xh
k ∈{0, 1} specify whether that trip has
been assigned to car h for each h ∈{1, 2, . . . H}. The
formulation is as follows:
max
∑
k∈K
pkxk
(1)
s.t.
∑
i∈S
(Fiyi + Qizi) +
∑
H
h1
Fcah ≤W ,
(2)
zi ≤Ciyi
∀i ∈S ,
(3)
∑
H
h1
xh
k  xk
∀k ∈K ,
(4)
∑
k∈K:sk≤t,ek>t
xh
k ≤ah
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
∀t ∈
⋃
i∈S
T+
i ,
(5)
(x, y, z, a) ∈+ ,
(6)
(x, y, z, a) ∈@ ,
(7)
yi ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈S ,
(8)
zi ∈{0, . . . , Ci}
∀i ∈S ,
(9)
ah ∈{0, 1}
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H} ,
(10)
xk ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K ,
(11)
xh
k ∈{0, 1}
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀k ∈K .
(12)
The objective function (1) maximizes the total reve-
nue gained from accepting trips, whereas the budget
constraint (2) ensures that the expenditures related to
the opening of stations, the construction of chargers
and the purchase of cars do not exceed the given
budget W. Inequalities (3) ensure that the assigned
capacity of an opened station never exceeds its maxi-
mum capacity, while simultaneously ensuring that no
chargers are built at stations that are not opened.
Equations (4) assign a car to each trip that was ac-
cepted, whereas inequalities (5) ensure that at most
one trip from each set of temporally overlapping
trips can be assigned to a car. They also ensure that
a car needs to be acquired if at least one trip is as-
signed to it. Note that it is not necessary to impose
constraints (5) for all time points in the planning
period. Instead, it is sufﬁcient to consider only those
times t at which new trips may start (see notation T+
i
introduced in Section 2.2).
Abstract constraint (6) considers the set + of all in-
cidence vectors of (x, y, z, a) that correspond to con-
sistent car movements through the station network.
They ensure that the assignment of trips to each car
deﬁnes a feasible connected route that respects sta-
tion capacities (see the introduction). Concrete real-
izations of this constraint will be given in Section 4.1.
In a similar way, constraint (7) considers the set @ of
all incidence vectors of (x, y, z, a) that correspond to
battery-feasible assignments of trips to cars. Thus, it is
ensured that the battery of any car will not be depleted
below its minimum allowed charge state (which we re-
fer to as zero) when that car performs all trips assigned
to it. Concrete realizations of constraint (7) will be
given in Section 4.2.
Finally, constraints (8)–(12) enforce integrality on
the decision variables and ensure that they remain
within their associated bounds.
4.1. Enforcing Consistent Car Movement
In this subsection, we provide two possibilities for
replacing constraint (6) by integer linear programs:
one based on a multicommodity ﬂow formulation
in the location graph and one based on the explicit as-
signment of a start and end station to each accepted trip.
4.1.1. Multicommodity Flow Model. Multicommodity
ﬂows are frequently used to model routing problems
(see, e.g.,Wong 1980, Letchford and Salazar-Gonz´alez
2015). Our multicommodity ﬂow formulation (13)–(18)
uses the location graph introduced in Section 2.2 to
represent the movement of cars through the station
network during the planning period. For each arc a ∈A
and each car h ∈{1, 2, . . . H}, ﬂow variables f h
a ∈{0, 1}
indicate whether that car moves along that arc dur-
ing the planning period. Such movement can be both
spatial and temporal (in case of trip arcs) or only
Figure 3. Flow Graph of the Instance Described in Figure 1(a)
Notes. Arcs are labeled (−revenue, capacity). Internal root, root, and
sink arcs (0, H) are dotted, waiting and internal station arcs (0, Ci) are
dashed, and internal trip arcs (−pk, 1) and start/end station arcs (0, 1)
are solid.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1414
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

temporal (in case of waiting arcs). Flow f h
a on an ini-
tialization arc (r, it) ∈AI models that car h starts at
station i at the start of the planning period.
We use δ−(v) and δ+(v) to indicate the set of arcs
entering and exiting a speciﬁc vertex v. Additionally,
we use f h[A′] as a shorthand notation for the sum
of f h
a variables of some arc subset A′ ⊆A, that is,
f h[A′]  ∑
a∈A′ f h
a . The model reads as follows:
∑
H
h1
f h[δ−(it)] ≤zi
∀i ∈S, ∀t ∈T−
i ∪{t′ | ∃(r, it′) ∈A}
(
),
(13)
f h[δ+(r)]  ah
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H} ,
(14)
f h[δ−(it)] −f h[δ+(it)]  0
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
∀it ∈V, ∃(it, jt′) ∈A : t′ > t,
(15)
f h[δ−(it)] −f h[δ+(it)] ≥0
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
∀i ∈S, t  max (T+
i ∪T−
i
),
(16)
∑
a∈Ak
T
f h
a  xh
k
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀k ∈K,
(17)
f h
a ∈{0, 1}
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀a ∈A .
(18)
Inequalities (13) ensure that at each point in time,
only as many cars enter a station as there are char-
gers available at that station. Note that parked cars
from the previous period “reenter” the station via the
waiting arcs. Because the number of cars parked at a
station can only increase by arriving trips and by
initially allocating cars to that station, it is sufﬁcient to
impose these constraints for each station i ∈S and for
all times t ∈T−
i ∪{t′ | ∃(r, it′) ∈A}. These constraints
also guarantee that no car may enter a station that
has not been opened [because its assigned capacity
must be zero, because of constraints (3)]. Together,
Equations (14)–(16) ensure that for each car pur-
chased, one unit of ﬂow leaves the root and is routed
through the whole network. Inequalities (16) rather
than equations are used for the last node of each station
to account for cars parked at that station until the end
of the planning horizon. The slack of constraints (16)
will correspond to the number of cars parked at a
station i ∈S from time max T+
i ∪T−
i
(
) until time Tmax.
Finally, linking constraints (17) ensure that for each
trip assigned to a speciﬁc car, that car’s corresponding
ﬂow is routed over one of the trip’s travel arcs.
Besides the design variables introduced in the
previous subsection, this compact model requires
additional 2(H · |A|) variables and 2(H · max{|V|, |K|})
constraints to ensure feasibility with respect to con-
sistent car movements.
4.1.2. Connectivity Cut Model. In the following, we
introduce an alternative model to enforce consistent
car movement. It utilizes the following additional
variables to keep track of each car’s location through-
out the planning period: For each trip k ∈K and
each station i ∈N(ok), variable xout
ki
∈{0, 1} indicates
whether trip k starts at station i, whereas variable xin
ki ∈
{0, 1} indicates, for each station i ∈N(dk), whether that
trip ends at station i. Furthermore, for each car h ∈
{1, 2, ..., H} and each station i ∈S, variables aout
hi
∈
{0, 1} deﬁne whether that car starts at that station at
the beginning of the planning period.
A valid model for enforcing consistent car move-
ment is obtained by replacing abstract constraint (6)
by constraints (19)–(30) in the generic ILP formulation
introduced above:
∑
i∈N(ok)
xout
ki
 xk
∀k ∈K,
(19)
∑
i∈N(dk)
xin
ki  xk
∀k ∈K,
(20)
xout
ki
≤yi
∀k ∈K, ∀i ∈N(ok),
(21)
xin
ki ≤yi
∀k ∈K, ∀i ∈N(dk),
(22)
∑
i∈S
aout
hi
 ah
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
(23)
aout
hi
≤yi
∀i ∈S, ∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
(24)
∑
H
h1
aout
hi −
∑
k∈K:sk<t,
i∈N(ok)
xout
ki
+
∑
k∈K:ek≤t,
i∈N(dk)
xin
ki ≤zi
∀i ∈S, ∀t ∈T−
i ∪{ min T−
i ∪T+
i
(
)},
(25)
∑
H
h1
aout
hi −
∑
k∈K:sk<t,
i∈N(ok)
xout
ki
+
∑
k∈K:ek≤t,
i∈N(dk)
xin
ki ≥
∑
k∈K:i∈N(ok),
skt
xout
ki
∀i ∈S, ∀t ∈T+
i ,
(26)
1 −xh
k1
(
)
+ 1 −xh
k2
(
)
+ 1 −xin
k1i1
(
)
+ 1 −xout
k2i2
(
)
+
∑
k∈K:sk≥ek1,
ek≤sk2 ,ok∈N(i1)
xh
k ≥1
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀k1, k2 ∈K,
∀i1 ∈N dk1
(
), ∀i2 ∈N ok2
(
), ek1 ≤sk2, i1 ̸ i2,
(27)
xout
ki
∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, ∀i ∈N(ok),
(28)
xin
ki ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K, ∀i ∈N(dk),
(29)
aout
hi
∈{0, 1}
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀i ∈S.
(30)
Equations (19) and (20) ensure that each selected trip
is assigned a start and end station from its respective
neighborhoods, whereas inequalities (21) and (22) en-
sure that only opened stations may be used as start or
end stations of accepted trips. Likewise, Equation (23)
and inequalities (24) ensure that each car is assigned
an opened station from which it starts. Inequalities (25)
guarantee that the number of cars parked at a sta-
tion at any time never exceeds that station’s assigned
capacity. Note that the left-hand side (LHS) is simply
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1415

the number of cars parked at station i at time t. The
latter is obtained as the sum of cars initially starting at
station i minus the sum of cars leaving station i earlier
than t plus the sum of cars arriving at i not later than t.
These constraints are imposed only for those points in
time at which the number of cars at station i may
increase, that is, at the ﬁrst relevant time point (initial
car allocation) and whenever a trip may arrive. In-
equalities (26) ensure that the number of cars leaving
station i at time t does not exceed the available number
of cars. Observe that the LHS of (26) is identical to the
LHS of the previously explained (25), and that the
right-hand side of (26) is the number of cars starting
a trip from station i at time t. These constraints are
considered for all time points at which the number of
parked cars may decrease, that is, whenever a trip may
start from a station. Constraints (27) are added dy-
namically whenever we ﬁnd a solution with in-
consistent car locations (i.e., a car is assigned two
successive trips k1 and k2, but k2 starts at a station that
is different from the one where k1 ends. In that case,
either (a) one of the trips must not be assigned to that
car (or not performed altogether), (b) the end station
of k1 or the start station of k2 must change, or (c) at least
one more trip that can start at i1 and that lies com-
pletely within the time window between k1 and k2
must be assigned to that car. These constraints could
be strengthened by only considering those trips in
(c) for which a battery- and location-feasible path be-
tween i1 and i2 can exist.
Observe the following connection with the ﬂow-
variables of the multicommodity ﬂow model:
f h
(r,it)  1, for some (r, it) ∈AI
⇔
aout
hi
 1,
(31)
f h
(it,jt′)  1, for some (it, jt′) ∈AT
⇔
xout
ki
 1, xin
kj  1.
(32)
This connectivity cut–based model comprises addi-
tional 2(|K| · |S|) decision variables (under the reasonable
assumptionthatH < |K|) and 2(H · |K|2 · |S|) constraints.
Notice, however, that without constraints (27), only
2(|S| · max{Tmax, |K|}) constraints are required to ini-
tialize the model, whereas the remaining ones are
dynamically separated, which means that the num-
ber of violated connectivity constraints is signiﬁcantly
below its theoretical upper bound. Hence, assuming
that the number of potential stations is rather limited,
this formulation may exhibit a computational ad-
vantage when compared with the ﬂow-based model
because of the size of the underlying linear pro-
gramming (LP) relaxation.
Valid Inequalities. In the following, we introduce a fam-
ily of valid inequalities that can be used to strengthen
the LP relaxation and that can be separated on the ﬂy.
For each trip k ∈K, let N+(k) be deﬁned as the set of
trips ending before sk that, if performed by the same
car, can newly enable that car to perform trip k by
potentially moving from a station that is not one of its
start stations N(ok) to one that is. Formally, this set is
deﬁned as
N+(k)  {k′ ∈K : ek′ ≤sk, N(ok′) \ N(ok) ̸ ∅,
N(dk′) ∩N(ok) ̸ ∅}.
Similarly, for each trip k ∈K, set N−(k) is the set of trips
starting before sk that, if performed by the same car,
make it impossible for that car to perform trip k as an
immediate successor by always going from a station
that is one of its start stations N(ok) to one that is not;
that is, we have
N−(k)  {k′ ∈K : sk′ ≤sk, N(ok′) ⊆N(ok),
N(dk′) ⊆S \ N(ok)}.
Theorem 3. The following inequalities are valid for the
connectivity cut formulation:
xh
k ≤
∑
i∈N(ok)
aout
hi +
∑
k′∈N+(k)
xh
k′ −
∑
k′∈N−(k)
xh
k′
∀k ∈K,
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}.
(33)
Proof. Validity of these constraints follows from the
following argument: Observe that a trip k can be
assigned to a car only if that car is potentially in one
of k’s possible start stations, N(ok), at sk (i.e., the times
it potentially enters them minus the times it certainly
leaves them must be at least one). A car potentially
enters that set of stations if it (a) starts there (ﬁrst
term) or if it (b) performs a trip that can start outside
and end inside (no later than sk; second term). Likewise,
it certainly leaves the set if it performs a trip that
must start inside (no later than sk) and end outside of
it (third term). □
Finally, observe that if |N(ok)|  |N(dk)|  1 for all
trips k ∈K, these constraints alone already ensure con-
nectivity; thus, no connectivity cuts (27) must be added.
4.2. Considering Car Battery Charge States
In this subsection, we propose three possible ILP
formulations to model constraint (7) that ensure fea-
sibility of a solution with respect to battery con-
sumption. Observe that it is sufﬁcient to track each
cars battery state at the beginning and end of all trips
it may possibly perform. We therefore consider the
sets of start and end times of trips T+  ⋃
i∈S T+
i and
T− ⋃
i∈S T−
i , respectively. Furthermore, let TB  {0} ∪
T+ ∪T−be the set of battery relevant time points, and
let π(t)  max{t′ ∈TB | t′ < t} denote the preceding
time point from TB for each t ∈TB \ {0}. We also ob-
serve that TB ∈2(min{|K|, Tmax}), and recall that we
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1416
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

assume that all cars are fully charged in the beginning
(i.e., at time t  0).
4.2.1. Battery Tracking Using Continuous Variables. Our
ﬁrst approach is based on the observation that we
can track each car’s battery state by using continu-
ous variables gh
t ∈[0, Bmax], which indicate the charge
state of car h’s battery at time t. The following con-
straints can be used to replace (7) in this case:
gh
ek −gh
sk ≤−bkxh
k + Δkρ 1 −xh
k
(
)
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀k ∈K,
(34)
gh
t −gh
π(t) ≤ρ(t −π(t))ah
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
∀t ∈TB \ {0},
(35)
gh
0  Bmax
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
(36)
0 ≤gh
t ≤Bmax
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀t ∈TB \ {0}.
(37)
Inequalities (34) ensure that if and only if a trip k is
assigned to a car h (i.e., xh
k  1), that car’s battery is
depleted according to the trip’s associated energy
consumption bk. Otherwise, the constant Δkρ (which
corresponds to the maximum battery charging be-
tween sk and ek) is used to deactivate the constraint.
Inequalities (35) limit the recharging rate of each car
to ρ per unit of time. Equations (36) simply initialize
all cars to have a fully charged battery at the start.
Finally, inequalities (37) ensure that a car’s battery
level never drops below zero or exceeds its maxi-
mum capacity. This model requires 2(H · TB)  2(H ·
min{|K|, Tmax}) variables and 2(H · max{|K|,TB}) 2(H ·
|K|) constraints to guarantee feasibility of the solution
with respect to the battery consumption.
4.2.2. Battery-Infeasible Path Cuts. An alternative ap-
proach that assures feasibility of every assignment of
trips to a car is based on the idea of explicitly forbidding
infeasible assignments. To that end, we add constraints
∑
k∈¯K
xh
k ≤} ¯Kah
∀¯K ⊆K, ∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
(38)
to our model, where } ¯K is the maximum number of
trips from set ¯K that can be performed by any car
without falling below its minimum battery capacity.
Observe that in this case, no additional variables need
to be introduced, but this comes at the price of expo-
nentially many infeasible path constraints that need to
be added dynamically in a branch-and-cut procedure.
4.2.3. Time-Expanded Battery Graph. Finally, in this
third model, we use a similar construction as in
Section 2.2 to keep track of each car’s charge state
throughout the planning period. The directed time-
expanded battery graph GB  (VB, AB) contains nodes
and arcs according to all possible battery states of a
car at each relevant time point of the planning hori-
zon. Nodes of the set VB, denoted by ut, represent a
battery state of u at time t, where u ∈{0, . . . , Bmax} and
t ∈TB. Nodes in VB are connected by arcs that cor-
respond to charging the battery or taking a trip (in
which case the battery is depleted). Arcs a  (ut, vt′) ∈
AB represent a possible change of the battery level
from u at time t to v at time t′.
Because it is not necessary to consider all possible
combinations of u and t, we now deﬁne the time-
expanded battery graph recursively. Thus, let GB(t) 
(VB(t), AB(t)) be the subgraph of GB induced by all
vertices {ut′|t′ ≤t} for each t ∈TB:
VB(0)  Bmax
0
{
},
VB(t)  VB(π(t))
∪{vt | v  min{u + (t −π(t))ρ, Bmax}
uπ(t) ∈VB(π(t))},
∪uek | k ∈K,
u + bk
(
)sk∈VB sk
( ), u ≥0
{
}
,
AB(0)  ∅,
AB(t)  AB(π(t))
∪
uπ(t), vt
(
) | v  min {u + (t −π(t))ρ, Bmax
{
},
uπ(t) ∈VB(π(t))}
∪((u + bk)sk, uek) | k ∈K, (u + bk)sk ∈VB(sk)
{
}.
We denote the set of depletion arcs induced by trip
k by Ak
B  {((u + bk)sk, uek) | (u + bk)sk ∈VB}. Figure 4
shows the battery graph corresponding to the in-
stance given in Figure 1(a). Note that although that
graph may, in principle, grow quite large, its size can
be drastically reduced by rounding up all battery
consumptions to a ﬁxed number of potential con-
sumptions. Although this may result in some optimal
solutions being discarded, the resulting solution is
always feasible for the original problem.1
We keep track of the individual cars’ battery states
by using ﬂow variables gh
a ∈{0, 1}, which are equal to
one if and only if car h’s battery level changes from u
at time t to v at time t′. The notation used for these
Figure 4. Battery Graph of the Instance Given in Figure 1(a)
Note. Charging arcs are dashed, and depletion arcs are solid and
labeled with their corresponding trip.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1417

ﬂow variables mirrors that described in Section 4.1.1.
The resulting model reads as follows:
gh δ+(Bmax
0
)
[
]  ah
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
(39)
gh[δ−(ut)] −gh δ+(ut)
[
]  0
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H},
∀ut ∈VB, ∃ut, v′
t
(
) ∈AB : t′ > t,
(40)
∑
a∈Ak
B
gh
a  xh
k
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀k ∈K,
(41)
gh
a ∈{0, 1}
∀h ∈{1, 2, . . . , H}, ∀a ∈AB.
(42)
Equations (39) and (40) ensure that for each car that
was purchased, one unit of ﬂow leaves the root and is
routed through the whole network. Equations (41)
simply require that for each trip assigned to a car, that
car’s battery is depleted according to the trip’s con-
sumption by routing ﬂow over one of the arcs induced
by it. Because the maximum numbers of nodes and arcs
of GB are each bounded from above by 2(Bmax · TB) 
2(Bmax · min{|K|, Tmax}), this model requires 2(H ·
Bmax · min{|K|,Tmax}) variables and constraints.
5. Algorithms
In this section, we describe our algorithms for sepa-
rating those constraints that are added dynamically
during branch and cut (see Section 5.1) and also detail
two heuristic methods for computing feasible solu-
tion to the CSLP. The ﬁrst heuristic is based on iter-
atively ﬁnding resource-constrained shortest paths
(RCSPs) in the location graph (see Section 5.2), and the
second one is based on ﬁnding a minimum cost ﬂow
in the location ﬂow network (see Section 5.3).
5.1. Constraint Separation
As mentioned above, both formulations for ensuring con-
sistent car movements, the ﬂow-based model and the cut-
basedmodel,areofpolynomialsize.However,itsometimes
pays off to dynamically separate some of the model con-
straints, to keep the size of the underlying linear pro-
gram as small as possible. This is particularly important
for the connectivity cut model, which includes 2(H · |K|2)
cut-set constraints (27) whose separation is detailed in
Section 5.1.1. Concerning the models that ensure bat-
tery-feasible car-to-trip assignments, weexplaininSection
5.1.2 how we separate cuts from the exponentially
large family of infeasible-path constraints (38).
5.1.1. Connectivity Cut Model. Our separation pro-
cedure for constraints (27) distinguishes between
points of the LP relaxation that satisfy the integrality
constraints (in which case we perform the so-called
integer separation described below) or not (in which
case fractional separation is performed).
Integer Separation. In this case, we are given an LP
solution (¯x, ¯y, ¯z, ¯a, ¯xin, ¯xout, ¯aout) that satisﬁes the in-
tegrality conditions of all variables. In order to ﬁnd a
possibly violated inequality (27), we iterate over each
car’s assigned trips in order of their start times [note
that constraints (5) ensure that the trips assigned to a
car by the current solution cannot overlap and have
uniquely deﬁned start and end stations]. Whenever
we ﬁnd two successive trips k1 and k2 that are dis-
connected (i.e., the assigned end station of k1 dif-
fers from the assigned start station of k2), we add the
corresponding connectivity constraint (27).
Fractional Separation. In the fractional case, a ma-
jor difﬁculty in separating the current LP solution
(¯x, ¯y, ¯z, ¯a, ¯xin, ¯xout, ¯aout) arises from the fact that a trip
does not necessarily have a uniquely deﬁned (a) suc-
cessor trip, (b) start station, or (c) end station. We
therefore have to (potentially) consider multiple suc-
cessor trips for each trip.
For a given threshold β0 (we set β0  0.1 in our
computational study) and each car h, we consider
all trips k1 such that ¯xh
k1 ≥2β0. For each such trip k1,
we consider each potentially succeeding trip k2 [i.e.,
every trip where sk2 ≥ek1 and N(dk1) ∩N(ok2) ̸ ∅] for
which the appropriate connectivity constraints may
possibly be violated, that is, if ¯xh
k1 + ¯xh
k2 ≥1. For each
such pair k1, k2, we consider each combination of
potential end station i1 of k1 and start station i2 of k2 for
which the two trips are disconnected, that is, every
(i1, i2) ∈N(dk1) × N(ok2) such that i1 ̸ i2 and for which
the corresponding connectivity constraint may be
violated (i.e., those for which
¯xh
k1 + ¯xh
k2 + ¯xin
k1i1 + ¯xout
k2i2 > 3
holds). Finally, for every such k1, k2, i1, i2, we check
whether
¯xh
k1+ ¯xh
k2+ ¯xin
k1i1+ ¯xout
k2i2 > 3+
∑
k∈K:sk≥ek1,
ek≤sk2,ok∈1i1
¯xh
k,
and if so, a violated constraint (27) is identiﬁed.
5.1.2. Battery-Infeasible Path Cuts. As above, our sep-
aration routine for identifying violated battery-
infeasible path cuts (38) distinguishes whether the
current LP solution is integral or not.
Integer Separation. As in the case of connectivity cuts,
we identify violated inequalities in the case where the
current LP solution is integral by iterating over each
car’s set of assigned trips in ascending order of start
time while additionally keeping track of the associ-
ated charge state. To this end, starting at the initial
battery level of Bmax, we subtract bk from the current
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1418
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

charge state whenever the car performs a trip k and
add ρ(sk2 −ek1) (up to at most Bmax) to it for every
recharging break between two successive trips k1, k2.
A resulting charge state below zero indicates that
the set of trips ¯K performed up to this point is battery
infeasible. In that case, we ﬁrst aim to reduce the size
of trip set ¯K by removing trips from the front of the
sequence as long as the resulting subset is still battery
infeasible and then add the corresponding battery
cut ∑
k∈¯K xh
k ≤| ¯K −1|ah. To avoid computational over-
head when reducing a set of trips, we immediately
clear the current trip sequence whenever a car is fully
recharged, that is, when the charge state reaches Bmax.
Fractional Separation. As mentioned above, the main
difﬁculty of identifying violated inequalities when
some variable values are fractional stems from the fact
that there is typically not a single uniquely deﬁned
successor of each trip. Instead, several trips (assigned
to the car with some value between zero and one) may
succeed a given trip. To consider multiple potential
paths for every car on the one hand and avoid enu-
merating and checking too many such paths, we again
consider a threshold parameter β0. For each car h, we
ﬁrst identify the set of trips ¯K(h) that do not have any
potential predecessor w.r.t. car h and parameter β0 in
the current LP solution, that is, all trips k ∈K(h) with
¯xh
k ≥β0 for some car h such that there does not exist
another trip k′ ∈K with ¯xh
k′ ≥β0 and ek′ ≤sk. For each
car h, set ¯K(h) determines the seeds of all trip se-
quences (paths) that will be checked for possibly vi-
olated battery-infeasible cuts. To this end, all valid
successors w.r.t. car h and parameter β0 of each current
subpath are considered that may possibly yield
a violated constraint. More precisely, for each car
h, we consider the set of paths {(k1, k2, . . . , kn) | k1 ∈
¯K(h), xh
ki ≥β0, ski ≥eki−1, N(dki−1) ∩N(oki) ̸ ∅, 2 ≤i ≤n}
such that ∑l
i1 xh
ki ≥l −1, for all l ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} (be-
cause the constraint cannot possibly be violated
otherwise).
Whenever a (partial) path (k1, k2, . . . , kn−1) is ex-
tended by adding a new trip kn, we check the battery
level before and after performing the trip (which can
be easily calculated, because we always know the
battery level at the end of kn−1). If the charge state is
Bmax at the start of kn, we end the current path and start
a new one consisting only of kn (because the path so far
was not battery infeasible, and any subsequently
found battery-infeasible path would still be infeasible
after dropping k1, . . . , kn−1). If, on the other hand, the
charge state is below zero at the end of kn, we found a
battery-infeasible path and add the corresponding
cut after potentially removing trips from its front, as
described above. If neither of those two conditions
hold, we simply continue following the path until no
more possible successors exist.
5.2. Path-Based Heuristic
As described in Section 2, a feasible solution to the
CSLP comprises a set of battery-feasible paths through
the location graph (or, alternatively, through the
original street network). Thus, one way of heuristi-
cally computing a feasible solution is to iteratively ﬁnd
such paths (with high revenue) and add them to a
current solution while ensuring that it remains budget
and capacity feasible. This idea is the basis of the path-
based heuristic (PH) introduced in this section, whose
pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1
Algorithm 1 (Path-Based Heuristic)
1. (S′, C′, H′, K′, *′)  (∅, 0, 0, ∅, ∅) //initial solution
2. (V′, A′)  (V, A)
3. W′  W
//remaining budget
4. Uit  0, ∀i ∈S, ∀t ∈T+
i ∪T−
i
//cars parked
at station i at time t
5. P  (∅, ∅)
6. repeat
7.
P  RCSP((V′, A′), W′, C′, U)
//ﬁnd path
P  (V(P), A(P)) with cost c(P)
8.
if c(P) < 0 then
// if path P generates ad-
ditional revenue
9.
H′  H′ + 1
10.
W′  W′ −Fc
11.
for it ∈V(P) do
12.
Uit  Uit + 1
13.
if i ∈S \ S′ then
// build station
14.
S′  S′ ∪{i}
15.
W′  W′ −Fi
16.
if C′
i < Uit then
// build charger
17.
C′
i  Uit
18.
W′  W′ −Qi
19.
for k ∈K : ∃(it, jt′) ∈A(P) ∩AT
k do // all
trips in path P
20.
K′  K′ ∪{k}
21.
A′  A′ \ AT
k //remove trip arcs of newly
accepted trips
22.
car(k)  H′, start′(k)  i, end′(k)  j
23.
for it ∈V(P) do // remove incoming arcs
from vertices at maximum capacity
24.
if Uit  Ci then A′  A′ \ δ−(it)
25. until H′  H or W′ < Fc or c(P) ≥0
Algorithm 1 starts from an empty solution in which
no stations are opened, no cars are purchased, and no
trips are accepted. It also keeps track of the remaining
budget W′ (which is initialized to be the budget W)
and the number of cars Uit that enter station i at time t.
Based on the so-far-constructed solution and the re-
maining budget, a route generating most additional
revenue for an additional car is identiﬁed. To this end, a
battery-feasible path P through the location graph is
identiﬁed that maximizes the additionally obtained
revenue, whose inclusion in the solution is budget
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1419

feasible and that does not violate any capacity con-
straints. Interpreting revenues as negative costs on trip
arcs, such a path can be found by identifying an RCSP in
location graph G (see below for a detailed description).
If a path with positive revenue (i.e., negative cost) is
found, the current solution, the remaining budget,
and values Uit are updated accordingly. Trip arcs of
all selected trips are removed in order to ensure that
one cannot assign those trips to another car in a later
iteration. Additionally, we remove all incoming arcs
of nodes it that are already at their maximum capacity
(i.e., those it for which the number of cars parked
there, Uit, is equal to station i’s maximum capacity Ci),
as using such an arc in a later iteration would yield a
violation of the capacity constraints. The latter modiﬁ-
cations ensure that any path from the remaining sub-
graph of G can be added to a partial solution with-
out violating any capacity constraints. The algorithm
terminates if all cars have been used, if the remaining
budget is insufﬁcient for buying another car, or if no
path generating additional revenue was found.
5.2.1. Resource-Constrained Shortest
Path Algorithm
As noted above, the path-based heuristic relies on
ﬁnding battery-feasible paths (generating additional
revenue) through the location graph whose addi-
tional costs will not exceed the remaining budget. We
identify such a path by solving a resource-constrained
shortest path problem on location graph G  (V, A) [or
on a subgraph (V′, A′) obtained from removing cer-
tain arcs, see above] in which we associate costs ca ∈Z
and battery consumption ba ∈Z to each arc a ∈A.
Initialization arcs a ∈AI have zero cost and battery
consumption; that is, ca  ba  0. Waiting arcs a 
(it, it′) ∈AW have cost ca  0 and battery consumption
ba  −(t′ −t)ρ. Note that this negative consumption
corresponds to an increase in charge state, that is,
recharging. Finally, trip arcs have cost and battery
consumption equivalent to the negative revenue and
to the battery consumption of their corresponding
trip, respectively. Thus, for every trip arc a ∈AT
k of any
trip k ∈K, we have ca  −pk and ba  bk.
A dynamic-programming-based labeling algorithm
is used for ﬁnding paths from the root vertex to each
station’s ﬁnal (w.r.t. time) vertex that consume at most
Bmax battery. Although such a path is guaranteed to
be connected and battery-feasible its additional costs
may exceed the remaining budget because the path
may use stations that are not yet opened or for which
an additional charger may need to be installed. Thus,
we also keep track of these aspects in our RCSP al-
gorithm to ensure that the path it ﬁnds can be added
to the preliminary solution.
In our dynamic programming procedure, we also
exploit the fact that G is acyclic by considering the
nodes it ∈V in order of nondecreasing time values t
(which is a topological ordering). Each node it therefore
needs to be considered only once in the algorithm
when extending the labels associated to it by con-
sidering all outgoing arcs.
Besides these modiﬁcations, our labeling algorithm
for solving the RCSP is pretty standard. Each label
ℓ (costℓ, batteryℓ) has associated costs (costℓ) and
charging state (batteryℓ). For each node it, all domi-
nated labels are removed whenever a new label is
added. A label ℓ′ is dominated by another label ℓif
costℓ≤costℓ′ and batteryℓ≥batteryℓ′, with at least
one of the inequalities being strict.
5.3. Flow-Based Heuristic
A potential disadvantage of the path-based heuristic
stems from the fact that it considers only one path in
each iteration, which is then greedily added to the
solution. Thus, it exhibits a rather local view of the
instance. In contrast, the ﬂow-based heuristic (FH),
which we propose as an alternative to the PH, aims to
identify promising vehicle paths from a more global
perspective. Its main idea is to ﬁrst neglect the budget
and battery constraints and compute an optimal solution
to the resulting budget- and battery-unconstrained
instance via a minimum-cost ﬂow algorithm in the
location ﬂow network (see Section 3.1). The PH is then
used to obtain a solution that also respects the budget
and battery constraints.
To this end, FH computes a solution to an instance I
of the CSLP in the following three main steps:
1. Compute an optimal solution (S′′,C′′,H′′,K′′,*′′)
to instance I′ obtained from I by relaxing the battery
and budget constraints.
2. Compute solution (S′, C′, H′, K′, *′) by extract-
ing battery- and budget-feasible car routes generating
additional revenue with the aforementioned RCSP
algorithm, using only those trip arcs AK′′ that were
used by the solution from the ﬁrst step. This is equiv-
alent to applying the PH to a problem instance that
contains no trip arcs except those in AK′′.
3. Apply a version of the PH that starts with so-
lution (S′, C′, H′, K′, *′) (and an appropriately modi-
ﬁed location graph where all trip arcs of already
accepted trips, as well as incoming arcs of full ver-
tices, are removed) to add further routes. This step is
performed only if sufﬁcient budget and at least one
unused car remain after the previous step.
6. Computational Experiments
In our experiments, we consider ﬁve variants of the
ILP models presented in Section 4: the multicommod-
ity ﬂow formulation from Section 4.1.1 with contin-
uous battery tracking (FC), battery-infeasible path
cuts (FP) and the battery graph ﬂow model (FG), and
the connectivity cut formulation from Section 4.1.2
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1420
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

with continuous battery tracking (CC) and battery-
infeasible path cuts (CP). We forwent including a
variant that combines the connectivity cut formulation
with the battery graph ﬂow model, because the latter’s
large size conﬂicts with the former’s goal of keeping
the model small. The results shown in Section 6.2
suggest that the performance of such a model would
not have compared favorably to the other variants any-
way. Table 1 gives a concise overview of these models.
For those models where some constraints are added
dynamically during branch and cut (i.e., FP, CC, CP),
the corresponding constraint separation as described
in Section 5.1 was done for every integral and frac-
tional solution. Also, all valid inequalities (33) are
added statically to the models CC and CP.
Before starting to solve the respective ILP formu-
lations, we solved each instance with both the PH
described in Section 5.2 and the FH from Section 5.3
and provided the best of these two solutions to the ILP
solver as a starting solution. We additionally used the
two heuristics throughout the branch-and-bound
procedure to derive integer-feasible solutions from
the current fractional ones. To this end, we rounded
the values of zi variables, which correspond to the
number of chargers built at each station, to the nearest
integer value and used these rounded values as the
corresponding station’s maximum capacity in our
heuristic algorithms. We then provided the best re-
sulting solution to the ILP solver as the new incum-
bent solution whenever its revenue exceeded the best
currently known. We ensured that the heuristics were
only run once for each set of rounded zi values by
saving their hashes and checking for duplicates.
All algorithms were implemented in C++. The
experiments were performed on a single core of an
Intel Xeon E5-2670v2 processor with 2.5 GHz and that
had both Hyper-Threading and Turbo Boost disabled.
To solve the ILP models in our algorithms, we used
IBM ILOG CPLEX 12.6.3. We limited the number of
threads to one, imposed central processing unit time
limits of three hours for the grid-graph instances and
six hours for the Vienna instances, and limited the
usable memory to 6 GiB. Instances that reached the
memory limit were included in our results as if they
had reached the time limit (i.e., we considered their run
times to be 10,800 and 21,600 seconds, respectively).
Finally, we set the branching priorities of variables
x, y and z to 900, 1,000 and 800, respectively. Other
than that, default values were used for all parameters.
6.1. Benchmark Instances
We used two sets of benchmark instances to test our
algorithms: ones that were generated based on grid
graphs and ones that are based on data from Vienna.
6.1.1. Grid-Graph Instances. Instances of this class
represent a planning period of 24 hours. Their un-
derlying street network is a two-dimensional 50 × 50
grid graph where each vertex is connected to its
upper, lower, left, and right neighbor, if such a neigh-
bor exists, that is, |9|  2,500 and |%|  4,900. The
length ℓe of an edge e ∈% represents the walking time
(in minutes) between its two incident vertices. For
horizontal edges, ℓe  3, whereas for vertical edges,
ℓe  2. The street network thus represents an area
of approximately 96 km2 (12 km × 8 km). A subset
of |S| ∈{10, 25, 50} randomly selected vertices is cho-
sen as potential charging stations. Each such sta-
tion i ∈S is then randomly assigned an opening cost
Fi ∈{9,000, 9,100, . . . , 64,000}, a maximum capacity
Ci ∈{1,2, . . . , 20}, and a per-charger cost Qi ∈{22,000,
22,100, . . . , 32,000}. The neighborhood 1i of each sta-
tion is the set of all vertices that are reachable on
foot within ﬁve minutes (i.e., those vertices whose
Manhattan distance in the grid graph to the station is
at most ﬁve).
Finally, 1,000 random trips are added to the in-
stance ﬁle. The origin ok and destination dk of each trip
k ∈K are randomly selected from the set of vertices
within the neighborhood of at least one station, thus
ensuring that every trip can at least potentially be
accepted. For the other trip parameters, we distin-
guish between short and long trips. The battery con-
sumption bk (in percentage of the car’s battery ca-
pacity) of each trip k ∈K is a randomly chosen integer
from the interval [5, 25] for short trips and from
[25, 75] for long trips. The battery consumption is
assumed to be not directly related to the distance
between origin ok and destination dk to account for the
fact that customers rent vehicles not only to travel
directly between two places within the system’s op-
erational area, but also to, for example, run errands.
Table 1. Overview of the Models That Were Used in Our Computational Experiments
Battery tracking
Continuous
Infeasible path cuts
Battery graph
Car movement
(Section 4.2.1)
(Section 4.2.2)
(Section 4.2.3)
Multicommodity ﬂow (Section 4.1.1)
FC
FP
FG
Connectivity cut (Section 4.1.2)
CC
CP
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1421

Proportional to bk, we set the trip’s duration in
minutes to Δk  ⌈σk · bk⌉, where σk ∈[3, 4.5] is a trip-
speciﬁc random scaling factor. Using this duration, we
chose a random start time sk ∈{0, 1, . . . , 1,440 −Δk},
which also ﬁxes the end time to ek  sk + Δk and the
revenue to pk  30 · Δk cents for each trip. The sets of
potential start and end stations N(ok) and N(dk) are
limited to the (at most) three closest stations within ﬁve
minutes’ walking distance of ok and dk, respectively.
For each number of potential charging stations
|S| ∈{10, 25, 50}, we generated ten different instance
ﬁles: ﬁve long ones with 667 long and 333 short trips
and ﬁve short ones with 667 short and 333 long trips.
To ensure that instances with fewer than 1,000
trips can easily be created from these ﬁles while
maintaining the 2 : 1 ratio of long to short (or short
to long) trips, they are alternately added to long in-
stance ﬁles in a (long, long, short, . . .) sequence and to
short ones in a (short, short, long, . . .) sequence.
6.1.2. Vienna Instances. Our real-world instances are
based on data from the city of Vienna. The street
network is derived from the city’s OpenStreetMap
data. We remove all streets that are inaccessible to
pedestrians, such as motorways, because the street
network is used only for ﬁnding nearby stations that
can be reached on foot. Potential charging stations
are then placed at supermarkets, parking garages,
and subway stations. Each station is randomly assigned
an opening cost Fi ∈{9,000, 9,001, . . . , 64,000}, a ca-
pacity Ci ∈{1, 2, . . . , 10}, and a per-charger cost Qi ∈
{22,000,22,001,...,32,000}. Asfortherandominstances,
their neighborhood is the set of vertices reachable
on foot within ﬁve minutes, assuming a walking
speed of 1.34 m/s.
All trip data are derived from actual taxi trips that took
place over the course of one week in spring 2014. Each
trips’ origin, destination, and start and end times are
taken directly from these taxi trips, whereas the revenue
is set to 30¢ per minute, as for the artiﬁcial instances.
The battery consumption is calculated from the trip’s
duration and actual travel distance, based on a for-
mula similar to the one used by Bektas¸ and Laporte
(2011), and then rounded up to the next percentage
point. As for the artiﬁcial instances, we considered
only the (at most) closest three stations within walk-
ing distance of the origin and destination as poten-
tial start and end stations, respectively. Altogether,
each such instance contains 693 stations and 37,965
trips. We do not remove short trips for which the walk-
ing time from and to stations is a comparably large
proportion of the total travel time. Because taxi trips
are mostly direct point-to-point trips, such elimination
rules could, however, be relevant to further improve the
signiﬁcance of the results obtained on these instances.
6.2. Computational Results on Grid-
Graph Instances
From each of the instance ﬁles described above, we
generated several concrete instances. To create in-
stances of different sizes, we set the set of trips K to be
equal to the ﬁrst 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, or 200 trips, re-
spectively, given in the instance ﬁle. We then parti-
tioned the planning period into 24, 48, or 96 time
Table 2. Average Run Times (Avg. Time; in Seconds), Optimality Gaps (Avg. Gap; in Percentage), Numbers of Solved
Instances (# optimal), and Relative Qualities of the Solutions Found by the PH and FH Compared with the Best Known
Solutions (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph Instances
Avg. time (s)
Avg. gap (%)
#optimal
% best
|S|
|K|
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
PH
FH
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
98.69
98.00
25
0
0
1
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
91.02
88.30
50
15
61
396
392
191
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.02
360
360
356
354
356
88.36
85.38
75
1,275
2,302
6,482
4,065
3,623
0.18
0.47
4.59
1.19
1.20
333
312
182
240
251
82.94
81.20
100
5,223
6,173
10,055
7,568
6,819
2.01
2.83
29.44
3.81
3.69
219
182
40
133
144
82.30
80.19
200
10,479
10,342
10,800
10,554
10,274
12.47
13.68
212.43
19.91
21.64
18
19
0
13
24
81.08
79.65
25
10
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
96.43
97.25
25
0
0
1
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
94.48
94.22
50
6
18
86
44
20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
89.49
88.75
75
504
703
2,907
1,376
1,081
0.06
0.07
0.71
0.25
0.17
352
352
301
329
336
86.39
85.02
100
2,445
3,317
8,048
4,113
4,200
0.42
0.73
11.61
0.94
1.00
301
284
126
243
239
84.06
83.13
200
9,367
9,650
10,772
9,897
9,408
4.71
7.27
132.96
8.42
10.29
67
53
1
39
59
80.93
79.11
50
10
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
98.64
98.37
25
0
1
6
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
96.57
95.34
50
5
11
56
14
21
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
360
360
360
360
360
93.95
92.38
75
279
611
1,424
800
467
0.01
0.04
0.14
0.06
0.02
356
353
329
343
354
91.67
90.29
100
1,096
1,523
4,150
1,721
1,582
0.21
0.27
3.20
0.36
0.33
329
322
255
311
317
88.89
87.83
200
7,895
8,741
10,747
9,234
8,631
2.20
4.34
102.32
4.86
5.55
122
89
8
63
91
81.56
81.20
Notes. Results are grouped by numbers of potential stations and trips, with 360 instances per row. Best values are marked bold.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1422
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

periods (with durations of 60, 30, and 15 minutes,
respectively) and rounded the start and end time of
each trip down and up accordingly. The number of
available cars was set to |K|/2, |K|/5, or |K|/10. These
cars have an acquisition cost of Fc  20,000, a battery
capacity of Bmax  100 (because each trip’s battery
consumption is given in percent of the car’s bat-
tery capacity), and a recharge rate of 20 per hour,
resulting in ρ  20, ρ  10, or ρ  5 depending on the
considered partition of the planning period. For each
such set of parameters, we generated a proportional
instance, where each trip has the associated revenue
pk given in the instance ﬁle, and a uniform one, where
each trip has a revenue of pk  1.
We ﬁrst solved each of these instances with al-
gorithm FC and without a budget limit. Using the
budget W′ required by the resulting solution (after
removing unused cars, stations and chargers during
postprocessing) as a baseline, we set the budget limit
for our instances to W  0.3 · W′ or W  0.6 · W′.
Each of the resulting 6,480 instances was then solved
by each of the ﬁve algorithms considered. A summary
of the obtained performance-related results is given in
Table 2 and Figure 5, whereas Table 3 summarizes
important solution characteristics.
We ﬁrst observe that increasing the number of trips
seems to make the problem harder to solve. Whereas
all instances with only 10 or 25 trips can easily be
solved by each of our algorithms, this is no longer the
case for those with 50 or more trips. These observa-
tions are consistent with our expectations that the
difﬁculty of solving an instance increases with its size.
Speciﬁcally, as the number of trips increases, the num-
ber of feasible car routes can increase signiﬁcantly,
which in turn enlarges the search space that must
be explored during branch and bound.
Somewhat surprisingly, however, increasing the
number of potential charging stations apparently
makes the problem easier to solve, even though this
increases the size of all considered ILP models. We
assume that this is due to the way in which we
generated our grid-graph instance ﬁles: because ev-
ery trip’s origin and destination are placed within the
neighborhood of at least one station, having only
few potential charging stations leads to each of them
being a candidate start or end station for a large num-
ber of trips. Additionally, because the neighborhoods
of these few stations are rather unlikely to overlap,
trips are more likely to have only few start and end
stations (or only one of each). Thus, each strategic
decision related to a station (such as whether to
open it or not, or how many chargers to build there)
can inﬂuence many trips. Additionally, because the
number of cars that can be at a station at any point in
time increases with trip density, it becomes more
likely that a station’s assigned size or maximum ca-
pacity actually becomes constraining. Altogether, this
might explain why despite the model becoming smaller,
it also becomes harder to solve.
Comparing the different variants of our ILP model,
algorithm FC, which uses the multicommodity ﬂow
formulation with continuous battery tracking, shows
the best overall performance. For each of the instance
subsets, it has the lowest average run time, the lowest
average optimality gap after the algorithm ﬁnishes
(due to optimality, time, or memory limit), and the
highest number of instances solved to optimality.
This is probably because of the way we construct the
location graph (see Section 2.2), which keeps its size
to a minimum, we also keep the size of the resulting
ILP model manageable so that it can still be efﬁciently
solved by CPLEX.
Algorithm FP, which instead uses battery-infeasible
path cuts, also shows good performance across the
board, but usually trails behind FC. We assume that
this is a result of the added cuts being relatively
weak (essentially only prohibiting a single infeasi-
ble solution), which reduces the strength of the LP
Figure 5. (Color online) Cumulative Run Time and Gap Charts for Artiﬁcial Instances with |K| ≥50
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1423

relaxation too much to compensate for the reduced
model size. This suggests that mixing two different
strategies for designing ILP models, that is, using
strong compact formulations on one hand and dy-
namically adding cuts to a smaller initial model on the
other hand, does not pay off for these instances.
Interestingly, the relative performance of these two
approaches for ensuring battery feasibility seems
to be somewhat switched for those algorithms using
the connectivity cut formulation. Here, algorithm CP,
which uses battery-infeasible path cuts, on average
often outperforms algorithm CC, which is based on
the continuous battery formulation. Although there
are some instance subsets on which CC shows the
better average performance, this section shows that
CP is consistently able to solve more instances to
optimality within a certain time limit than CC. This
again shows that mixing strategies does not seem to
work well for these instances.
However, all four algorithms discussed so far show
relatively good performance across this ﬁrst set of
benchmark instances. Up to |K|  100, a large majority
of them can be solved to optimality within the given
time limit of three hours, and the average optimality
gaps remain below 4% even for the more difﬁcult sets
of instances (and below 1% for most others). It is only
at around |K|  200 that they reach their limits as
to which instances they can still somewhat reliably
solve. This section also shows that as the instances
become harder to solve, the performance differences
between the algorithms become somewhat smaller.
Algorithm FG, however, which uses the multi-
commodity ﬂow formulation and the battery graph
ﬂow formulation, shows signiﬁcantly poorer perfor-
mance than the aforementioned four algorithms. Al-
though its performance across the different instance sets
follows the same pattern as the other four, it trails them
quite signiﬁcantly with respect to average run time,
average gap, and number of instances solved to opti-
mality. We assume that this is because this model is not
sufﬁciently stronger than the others to counteract its
comparatively large increase in size. Thus, because this
third way of ensuring battery feasibility does not look
promising, we refrain from testing a connectivity cut
model with the battery graph ﬂow formulation.
In addition to comparing the ILP models, we also
analyzed the performance of the two heuristic algo-
rithms, PH and FH. Because their run times were
negligible (usually below 10 ms) for these instances,
we focus our analysis on the resulting solution quality.
For each subset of instances, the average solution
quality of both heuristics is very similar, with the path-
based heuristic usually ﬁnding a slightly better so-
lution on average. Both heuristics also seem to follow
the same difﬁculty pattern as the ILP-based algo-
rithms, ﬁnding higher-quality solutions for those in-
stances that are easier to solve by the exact methods
(i.e., those with a lower number of trips and a higher
number of stations). Their solution quality is also quite
good in general, averaging at around 90% of that of the
best known solution (which is often actually an op-
timal one).
Table 3. Average Number of Stations Opened, Vehicles Purchased, and Trips Accepted by
the Best Solutions Found by Each of the Five Algorithm Variants
Avg. |S′|
Avg. H′
Avg. |K′|
|S|
|K|
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
FC
FP
FG
CC
CP
10
10
4
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
25
6
6
6
6
6
4
4
4
4
4
9
9
9
9
9
50
8
8
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
7
21
21
21
21
21
75
8
8
9
8
9
10
10
9
10
10
35
35
35
35
35
100
9
9
9
9
9
13
13
12
13
13
51
51
48
51
51
200
9
9
10
9
8
19
19
16
18
16
99
98
87
95
81
25
10
4
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
25
9
9
9
9
9
5
5
5
5
5
8
8
8
8
8
50
14
14
14
14
14
8
8
8
8
8
20
20
20
20
20
75
17
17
17
17
17
12
12
12
12
12
31
31
31
31
31
100
19
19
19
19
19
15
15
15
15
15
45
45
44
45
45
200
22
22
23
22
21
27
26
21
26
24
99
97
85
96
90
50
10
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
25
10
10
10
10
10
5
5
5
5
5
8
8
8
8
8
50
19
19
19
19
18
10
10
10
10
10
18
18
18
18
18
75
24
24
24
24
24
14
14
14
14
14
29
29
29
29
29
100
29
29
29
29
29
18
18
17
18
18
40
40
40
40
40
200
37
37
40
37
37
30
30
24
29
29
91
89
79
88
88
Notes. Results are grouped by the number of potential stations |S| and the number of trip requests |K|.
Avg., Average.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1424
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

As Table 3 shows, the solutions found by the ﬁve
different algorithmic variants are quite similar w.r.t.
the number of stations opened, vehicles purchased,
and trips accepted by them. This is, of course, not very
surprising for those instances with |K| ≤75, because
these are solved optimally or with low single-digit
optimality gaps by all ﬁve models. This similarity still
largely holds for instances with |K|  100, although
the numbers of cars and trips in the solutions found
by algorithm FG are sometimes a bit below those of
the other solutions. For instances with |K|  200, these
differences become a bit more pronounced, with
the solutions provided by algorithms FG and CP
diverging most frequently and strongly. Also, the
number of stations opened in FG’s solutions is con-
sistently a bit higher than in the other algorithms’
solutions.
These emerging differences can likely be explained
by the more frequent suboptimality of the identi-
ﬁed solutions and their, on average, larger opti-
mality gaps. These differences, however, do not seem
to directly correlate with the computational perfor-
mance of the respective algorithm. Although it is
mostly model FG (i.e., the one that mostly per-
forms worst) whose solutions deviate from the rest,
variant CP shows the strongest deviation for in-
stances with |S|  10 and |K|  200, where it is able to
solve more instances to optimality than all the other
models.
Generally, we observe that as the number of trip
requests |K| increases, so does the relative amount of
trips that are accepted (i.e., |K′|). For the smallest
instances, this fraction is around 30%, but it steadily
increases to around 50% for instances with 200 trip
requests. The number of vehicles purchased also in-
creases with |K|, but does so more slowly, which re-
sults in an increasing trip-to-car ratio. Likewise, the
number of opened stations slowly increases with the
number of available trip requests, as more and more
stations are needed to cover all the origins and des-
tinations of the trips that our algorithms accept.
Unsurprisingly, the number of opened stations |S′|
also increases with the number of potential stations
|S|, as does the number of purchased vehicles. The
number of accepted trips, however, actually decreases
as more potential stations become available. An expla-
nation for this behavior can be found in how these
instances were constructed. Because all trips’ origins
and destinations were placed within walking dis-
tance of at least one station, those instances with
fewer potential stations simply have a much higher
density of these points within their neighborhoods.
Thus, fewer are needed to cover the same number
of trips.
6.2.1. Analysis of Parameter Impact. We also analyzed
the effects of parameters other than the number of
trips and stations on the performance of our algo-
rithms. As shown above, instances with 10 or 25 trips
are trivial to solve, and those with 50 trips can be
usually solved quite rapidly. Thus, we exclude these
instances from the following analyses, in which we
focus only on the most promising algorithms FC, CC,
and CP, because FP does not seem to improve no-
ticeably upon FC, and because FG, as argued before,
showed rather poor performance. In all box plots in
ﬁgures that plot average gaps, we cut off the graph
around the uppermost whisker to better visualize the
central part of the box plot. The number of outliers in
each category with a gap above the cutoff is printed
above the corresponding plot in parentheses.
We ﬁrst analyze whether using a uniform revenue
for every trip instead of one that is proportional to the
trip’s duration has any impact on the performance of
our algorithms. Figure 6 shows that instances with
uniform revenue are easier to solve than those with
proportional revenue, despite the fact that the former
may introduce additional symmetries into the solu-
tion space.
Next, we analyze whether the number of time
periods into which the planning period is partitioned
inﬂuences the algorithms’ performance. As Figure 7
Figure 6. (Color online) Distributions of Run Times (in Seconds) and Optimality Gaps (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph
Instances with |K| ≥75 Grouped by Revenue Characteristic (Uniform, Proportional) and |K|
Note. Gap plots are cut off at 45%, with the number of outliers in each category printed above its plot in parentheses.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1425

shows, increasing the number of time periods seems
to make the problem easier to solve in many cases,
especially for algorithm FC. This effect is somewhat
less pronounced for algorithms CC and CP, but they
too seem to beneﬁt from a more ﬁne-grained and thus
more realistic model of time. This is a bit surprising,
because one would expect an increase of the size of the
location graph and the number of battery variables for
models FC and CC with increasing granularity of the
planning period. However, as shown in Theorem 1,
the location graph’s size grows at most linearly with
the number of trips |K|. This obviously also holds for
the number of relevant points in time (those at which
trips start or end) at which we need to keep track of
battery state changes. One possible explanation for
why the problem actually becomes easier to solve as
the number of time periods increases is the fact that
previously infeasible car routes can become feasible
when this happens, either because trips that previ-
ously overlapped (because of rounding down and up
the associated start and end times) now no longer do,
or because some additional recharging between trips
has made them newly battery-feasible.
As Figure 8 shows, the average battery consump-
tion of each trip, which for our grid instances is mainly
determined by whether they are long or short instances,
also signiﬁcantly impacts the performance of our
algorithms. Long instances, two-thirds of whose trips
are long with relatively high battery consumption,
between 25% and 75%, are clearly harder to solve
than short instances that instead contain this many
short trips, with battery consumption between 5%
and 25% each. Such a behavior is to be expected, be-
cause an increased battery consumption per trip can
signiﬁcantly increase the number of potential car
routes that are battery-infeasible. This parameter has
an especially strong impact on algorithm CP, prob-
ably because it directly inﬂuences the number of
battery-infeasible path cuts that must be added to the
model.
Another instance parameter that has a signiﬁcant
impact on our algorithms is the number of cars that
are available for purchase. Figure 9 shows that as
the number of available cars in a set of instances in-
creases, so does the difﬁculty of solving those in-
stances. Again, this is to be expected, because many
variables in our ILP models are car-indexed, and
therefore, their number and thus the size of these
models increases linearly with the maximum number
of cars. Furthermore, adding more available cars in-
troduces additional symmetries into our models,
because the ﬂeet is homogeneous.
Figure 7. (Color online) Distributions of Run Times (in Seconds) and Optimality Gaps (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph
Instances with |K| ≥75 Grouped by the Number of Time Slots (One, Two, or Four per Hour), and |K|
Note. Gap plots are cut off at 45%, with the number of outliers in each category printed above its plot in parentheses.
Figure 8. (Color online) Distributions of Run Times (in Seconds) and Optimality Gaps (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph
Instances with |K| ≥75 Grouped by Majority Trip Length (Short or Long) and |K|
Note. Gap plots are cut off at 45%, with the number of outliers in each category printed above its plot in parentheses.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1426
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

The ﬁnal parameter we consider in our analysis
is the available budget. Figure 10 shows that doubling
the budget increases the run time that is required for
solving instances for all three algorithms. Optimality
gaps, on the other hand, actually become smaller as
the available budget increases. These conﬂicting be-
haviors of the two performance indicators can per-
haps be explained by how the budget inﬂuences
the feasibility of candidate solutions. Increasing the
available budget enlarges the set of feasible strategic
decisions (i.e., which stations to open at which size,
how many cars to buy), which can make it easier to
ﬁnd good solutions (resulting in smaller gaps). How-
ever, it also increases the size of the search space that
must be explored by branch and bound, which in turn
increases the time required for doing so.
6.2.2. Symmetry Breaking. Because we assume the
vehicle ﬂeet in our car sharing system to be ho-
mogeneous, the models we presented in Section 4 all
exhibit some symmetries regarding their vehicle-
indexed variables. Speciﬁcally, for every solution
with H′ vehicles, there exist ( H
H′) · H′! equivalent var-
iable assignments that differ only in which of the
vehicles {1, . . . , H} are purchased and how the solu-
tion’s car routes are assigned to them.
In an effort to reduce the number of symmetric
solutions, we introduced constraints
ah ≥ah+1
∀h ∈{1, . . . , H −1}
(43)
to ensure that in every solution, the ﬁrst H′ vehicles
are purchased.
We then conducted additional experiments with
IBM ILOG CPLEX 12.8.0, where we compared the
run-time performance of our models both with and
without these additional symmetry-breaking con-
straints, using the same three-hour time limit as for
our previous experiments. As Figure 11 shows, the
computational performance of our models was mostly
diminished by their inclusion. We assume that this
is due to CPLEX already being well versed in the
handling of such symmetries in the models it is
solving. Based on these results, we decided to conduct
all other experiments without constraints (43).
6.3. Computational Results on Vienna Instances
Because of the large number of potential charging
stations and trips contained in the full instance, we
restricted ourselves to three smaller areas of opera-
tion: area D5, covering Districts 1, 6, 7, 8, and 9; area
D6, which also includes District 5; and area D7, which
additionally includes District 4. As all these districts
Figure 9. (Color online) Distributions of Run Times (in Seconds) and Optimality Gaps (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph
Instances with |K| ≥75 Grouped by the Number of Cars (One Car per 2, 5, or 10 trips) and |K|
Note. Gap plots are cut off at 60%, with the number of outliers in each category printed above its plot in parentheses.
Figure 10. (Color online) Distributions of Run Times (in Seconds) and Optimality Gaps (in Percentage) for Grid-Graph
Instances with |K| ≥75 Grouped by Budget (0.3 · W′ or 0.6 · W′) and |K|
Note. Gap plots are cut off at 70%, with the number of outliers in each category printed above its plot in parentheses.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1427

are relatively densely populated, these areas could
serve as a convenient testing ground for an electric car
sharing system—an idea that is further supported by
the fact that these districts form the centers of areas of
operation of both car2go and DriveNow, the current
main car sharing providers in Vienna. The numbers of
stations and trips in the resulting instances can be
further reduced by including only those stations with
at least one trip potentially starting or ending within
walking distance from the station, as well as only
trips that have at least one possible start and end
station. (As before, we assume a maximum walking
distance of ﬁve minutes and consider only the three
closest stations for determining a trip’s potential start
and end stations.) Table 4 summarizes these data for
each AoO.
The planning period of one week is partitioned into
168, 336 and 672 time periods of length 60, 30, and 15
minutes, respectively. As the number of available
cars, we used 10, 25, and 50. These cars, whose data
are based on the Smart ED car, have an acquisition
cost of Fc  20,000, a battery capacity of Bmax  100
(each trip’s battery consumption is rounded up to the
next full percentage point), and a recharge rate of
100 per hour, resulting in ρ  100, ρ  50, or ρ  25
depending on the number of considered time periods.
We again considered both an instance with the trips’
revenues as described in Section 6.1 and one where
each trip has a uniform revenue of one. Finally, we
used budget values of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 million. In total,
270 different instances of this class were included in
our analysis, where we compared formulations FC,
CC, and CP. As for the grid-graph instances, we also
analyzed the impact of various instance parameters.
An optimal solution for an instance with operational
area D7, a budget limit of 5 million and 10 available
cars is given in Figure 12, and our ﬁndings are sum-
marized in Tables 5–8.
We ﬁrst note that, in general, our observations from
Section 6.2 also hold for this instance set. As before,
the number of trips |K|, which for these instances is
determined by the area of operation, seems to be the
principal factor in determining the difﬁculty of solv-
ing an instance. On a majority of instance subsets,
model FC shows the best overall performance with
respect to average run times, gaps, and the total
number of instances solved to optimality. However,
it is still repeatedly outclassed by model CP, which
shows especially good performance on those instances
with the smallest area of operation, D5. Model CC is
most often the worst performing of the three, but in a
few cases still comes in second or even ﬁrst.
Figure 11. (Color online) Box Plots Showing the Run Times (in Seconds) for the Five Different ILP Model Variants (see Table 1)
with (“Yes”) and without (“No”) Symmetry-Breaking Constraints (43) for Grid-Graph Instances with K  50 and T  96
Note. The number of outliers above 400 seconds is given above each box plot in parentheses.
Table 4. Overview of the Three Operational Areas, and the
Numbers of Stations and Trips They Contained Before and
After Preprocessing, that Were Considered in our
Experiments
Districts
Original
Pre-
processed
AoO
1
4
5
6
7
8
9
|S|
|K|
|S|
|K|
D5
3
7
7
3
3
3
3
110
144
101
108
D6
3
7
3
3
3
3
3
136
257
129
209
D7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
159
589
153
480
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1428
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

For instances with the largest area of operation, D7,
none of the considered algorithms is able to consistently
provide high-quality solutions within the given six-hour
time limit. Only 12 such instances are ever solved
to optimality (all by algorithm FC), all of which have
the lowest number of available cars (i.e., H  10) and
one of the two highest budget limits (i.e., 4 million or
5 million). Average optimality gaps mostly exceed
50%, sometimes even going beyond 100%, except for
instances with low vehicle counts and high budget
limits. Thus, new algorithms would have to be de-
veloped to successfully tackle instances of that size.
When comparing the structure of the best solution
found by each algorithm, we found the average
number of stations opened in each of them to be very
similar. Also, models CC and CP tended to, on average,
purchase similar numbers of vehicles and accept
similar numbers of trips in their solutions. The best
solution found by model FC, however, frequently
differed quite signiﬁcantly from those two with
respect to these two parameters, especially for the
larger instances with areas of operation D6 and
D7—speciﬁcally, it often included many more pur-
chased cars and accepted trips. This behavior is con-
sistent with what we observed for the grid-graph-
based instances, where these parameters also started
to diverge as instances became larger and thus harder
to solve. We assume that this simply results from the
increasing suboptimality of the identiﬁed solutions
that increases their dissimilarity. As the results for
both the grid-graph instances and for AoO D5 show,
the different algorithms mostly remain in agreement
w.r.t. these parameters as long as the instances can
still be solved optimally or with low optimality gaps.
Across the whole Vienna instance set, both the
path- and ﬂow-based heuristics seem to be unable
Figure 12. (Color online) Visualization of One Vienna Instance (with Operational Area D7, W  5 Million, H  10, Tmax  672,
and Proportional Revenue) and Its Optimal Solution
Notes. Panel (a) shows the location of all potential charging stations (circles), as well as the origin (triangles) and destination (squares) of each trip
request. It also highlights the boundaries of the three different operational areas, D5, D6, and D7. Panel (b) shows the locations and sizes
(diamonds for one charger, pentagons for two) of all opened stations and the origins and destinations of all accepted trips. It also visualizes
circular approximations of the neighborhoods covered by each opened station as semitranslucent circles. Note that the actual walking distance
on the street network was used during our experiments.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1429

to ﬁnd solutions of as high quality as for the grid
instances. Compared with each other, however, the
average quality of their solutions relative to the best
known are very similar, although PH still appears to
be the better choice in most cases. Although it may
seem that the heuristic works rather well on the
largest instances D7, this is likely due to the fact that
our algorithms are hardly ever able to solve them to
proven optimality or provide good gaps, resulting in
the best known solution being of rather low quality
(or, in fact, the heuristic solution itself).
Table 5 shows that, as for the grid-graph instances,
increasing the number of time periods does not make
the problem noticeably harder to solve. We refer the
reader to the discussion of Figure 7 for an argument
on why this is the case. Our data also show that model
CP exhibits the best overall performance on the small
D5 instances, whereas model FC is best at solving the
larger ones.
Somewhat in contrast to our previous observations,
however, the data shown in Table 6 suggest that for
this instance set, those instances with revenue pro-
portional to their duration are easier to solve than
those with uniform revenue. We assume that this
difference arises from the different distributions of
trip durations (and thus revenues) in the two instance
sets: in the grid-graph instances, the actual trip du-
rations are spread more sparsely on a much wider
interval, which can lead to individual trips generating
much more revenue than others. Trip durations and
revenues for the Vienna instances, on the other hand,
are much less varied, which leads to a more uniform
trip landscape. However, because the revenues are
not all the same, the resulting ILP models have fewer
inherent symmetries regarding trip selection, which
may explain why these proportional instances are
even easier to solve than actually uniform ones. We
also observed that the number of trips accepted in the
best known solution of uniform instances tends to
exceed the corresponding number of proportional
instances. This comes at little surprise, because for the
latter, our models can prefer to accept fewer trips that
individually generate more revenue, whereas they
simply try to maximize the number of accepted trips
for the former ones.
Table 7 shows the effect of different budget re-
strictions on our algorithms and the solutions they
produce. It seems that increasing W up to a certain
point, which appears to be around 2 million for these
instances, makes the instances harder to solve. How-
ever, increasing it beyond that level reverses this
trend and makes the instances easier to solve once
again. As argued before, we assume that this is due to
the budget’s effects on all strategic decisions. When
only very little money is available, only a few stations
can be opened until the budget limit is reached, which
possibly reduces the depth of the related search tree
that needs to be explored. Similarly, if the available
budget is sufﬁcient to open a large number of stations,
our models can simply open most of them with
many chargers. When the budget is between these
two extremes, however, a large number of strategic
choices may need to be evaluated to determine which
of them are good. Interestingly, model FC seems to
work rather poorly for instances with low budget,
being consistently outperformed by model CP. We
also note that, somewhat obviously, the number of
opened stations, purchased cars and accepted trips
keeps increasing as more budget becomes available.
Our two heuristics also seem to perform notice-
ably worse on instances with small budget values. It
might be possible to remedy these effects some-
what by using the remaining budget as a separate
resource in our RCSP algorithm (which we use for
Table 5. Average Run Times and Optimality Gaps; Numbers of Instances Solved to Optimality; Average Numbers of Stations,
Cars, and Trips in the Best Known Solutions; and the Qualities of Both Heuristic Solutions Relative to Them for All Vienna
Instances
Avg. time (s)
Avg. gap (%)
# optimal
Avg. |S′|
Avg. H′
Avg. |K′|
% best
Tmax
AoO
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
PH
FH
168
D5
7,287
8,657
3,645
0.85
5.73
0.53
24
19
27
36
36
35
19
17
19
69
65
68
78.01
73.35
D6
14,610
16,165
14,673
7.30
35.67
28.55
10
10
12
41
43
42
19
11
12
108
85
88
67.43
63.25
D7
19,121
21,600
21,600
68.45
80.62
80.45
4
0
0
46
46
46
11
7
7
185
146
146
77.37
63.17
336
D5
6,481
7,900
3,747
0.75
6.21
0.90
23
21
27
36
36
35
19
17
18
69
65
68
78.25
73.72
D6
13,776
18,667
14,962
7.64
35.00
27.88
13
5
10
41
43
43
19
12
12
108
86
88
67.94
65.54
D7
18,823
21,600
21,600
111.04
81.26
81.21
4
0
0
47
46
46
10
7
7
182
148
148
81.30
66.99
672
D5
7,184
8,370
4,654
0.63
6.04
2.26
24
21
26
36
36
36
19
17
18
69
65
67
79.80
74.59
D6
14,133
16,886
16,748
8.03
27.31
25.74
12
9
9
41
44
43
19
12
13
107
89
90
66.15
64.74
D7
18,823
21,600
21,600
106.46
89.08
88.89
4
0
0
47
47
47
10
7
7
187
152
152
78.57
65.08
Notes. Results are grouped by the number of time periods Tmax and the area of operation, with 30 instances per row. Avg., Average. Best values
are marked bold.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1430
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

both heuristics) instead of simply cutting off paths
that exceed it.
Finally, Table 8 shows that as for the grid-graph
instances, the problem becomes harder to solve as
more cars are available for purchase. We again refer
the reader to the previous section for a discussion on
how this behavior can be explained. Interestingly, we
also observed that the share of cars that are actually
used in the resulting solution decreases as more cars
become available. This suggests that other factors, like
the available budget W or station capacities Ci, play a
much more important role in limiting the number of
trips that can ﬁnally be accepted. A more in-depth
analysis of how these instance parameters inﬂuence
the performance and resulting solution of our algo-
rithms could be performed with multiobjective var-
iants of our algorithms.
7. The Gain of Integration
As noted in the introduction, the models and algo-
rithms we described in Sections 4 and 5 integrate
decision making at various levels into a single opti-
mization framework. This, of course, increases the
size and complexity of the underlying ILP models and
makes them harder to solve. To analyze the beneﬁt of
our integrated solution approach, we compare it to a
sequential algorithm where the strategic decisions are
optimized ﬁrst and then used as an input to a lower-
level optimization procedure that optimizes tactical and
operational decisions. This sequential algorithm, which
is fully described in Online Appendix B,
1. solves a variant of the maximal covering location
problem in order to decide which stations to open,
2. opens all stations selected by facility location
model at maximum capacity, and then
3. optimizes all remaining decisions by applying
algorithm FC (multicommodity vehicle ﬂow with
continuous battery tracking) with ﬁxed decisions con-
cerning open stations and their sizes.
In addition to studying the gain of integrations, this
section also analyzes the impact of changes in the
anticipated user demand via a cross-validation. To
Table 6. Average Run Times and Optimality Gaps; Numbers of Instances Solved to Optimality; Average Numbers of Stations,
Cars, and Trips in the Best Known Solution; and the Quality of Both Heuristic Solutions Relative to It for All Vienna Instances
Avg. time (s)
Avg. gap (%)
# optimal
Avg. |S′|
Avg. H′
Avg. |K′|
% best
AoO
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
PH
FH
Uniform
D5
6,525
9,285
4,334
1.01
8.93
1.80
36
29
40
36
37
36
19
16
18
71
65
69
76.80
71.50
D6
13,279
19,957 18,710
9.59
41.75
36.33
19
5
9
41
44
43
19
11
12
112
87
89
63.83
61.08
D7
19,057
21,600 21,600
114.23
100.38 100.16
6
0
0
46
46
46
10
7
7
191
153
153
77.24
63.65
Proportional
D5
7,443
7,333
3,697
0.48
3.06
0.66
35
32
40
36
36
35
19
17
18
67
64
66
80.58
76.27
D6
15,067
14,523 12,212
5.71
23.56
18.45
16
19
22
41
42
42
19
12
13
103
87
89
70.52
67.94
D7
18,788
21,600 21,600
76.40
66.93
66.88
6
0
0
47
47
47
11
7
7
178
144
144
80.92
66.51
Notes. Results are grouped by whether trips have uniform or proportional revenue and the area of operation, with 45 instances per row. Avg.,
Average. Best values are marked bold.
Table 7. Average Run Times and Optimality Gaps; Numbers of Instances Solved to Optimality; Average Numbers of Stations,
Cars, and Trips in the Best Known Solution; and the Quality of Both Heuristic Solutions Relative to It for All Vienna Instances
Avg. time (s)
Avg. gap (%)
# optimal
Avg. |S′|
Avg. H′
Avg. |K′|
% best
W
AoO
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
PH
FH
1 million
D5
11,218
940
247
2.14
0.00
0.00
12
18
18
16
16
16
8
8
8
37
37
37
49.94
45.81
D6
20,449
15,440
12,574
18.45
28.01
7.37
3
8
9
17
17
17
8
8
8
48
45
49
35.68
42.59
D7
21,600
21,600
21,600
244.98
170.00
169.41
0
0
0
17
17
17
5
2
2
84
45
45
62.54
46.32
2 million
D5
10,072
12,883
3,656
0.95
14.98
0.00
12
9
18
29
29
29
14
12
14
64
57
64
68.41
61.54
D6
17,318
18,952
19,358
11.46
57.00
58.13
5
3
2
31
32
32
14
7
7
90
62
61
58.18
52.23
D7
21,600
21,600
21,600
108.53
119.72
119.62
0
0
0
33
33
33
7
3
3
144
89
89
67.53
55.88
3 million
D5
6,328
8,825
6,116
0.03
8.88
2.89
17
12
15
38
40
38
21
17
20
77
70
75
84.72
79.14
D6
14,419
18,917
17,579
5.70
49.51
45.44
6
3
5
43
47
46
20
9
10
119
81
85
67.44
63.89
D7
21,600
21,600
21,600
64.37
68.20
68.21
0
0
0
49
49
49
10
6
6
194
152
152
80.37
63.14
4 million
D5
7,219
8,922
7,523
0.61
5.03
3.23
12
11
12
46
46
45
25
21
23
83
77
79
93.63
88.44
D6
11,300
18,008
15,450
2.00
20.58
18.38
9
3
6
53
57
57
23
15
15
136
113
116
82.86
77.25
D7
14,936
21,600
21,600
35.95
39.09
39.09
6
0
0
62
62
62
13
10
10
234
206
206
89.87
75.98
5 million
D5
83
9,973
2,535
0.00
1.08
0.03
18
11
17
52
50
48
27
26
27
84
82
84
96.75
94.49
D6
7,379
14,882
12,344
0.66
8.19
7.61
12
7
9
60
63
61
28
21
21
145
132
133
91.72
86.58
D7
14,876
21,600
21,600
22.74
21.25
21.26
6
0
0
72
72
72
18
15
15
267
251
251
95.10
84.08
Notes. Results are grouped by budget W and the area of operation, with 18 instances per row. Avg., Average. Best values are marked bold.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1431

enable the latter, we use a second set of instances
derived from real-world data from the city of Vienna.
Recall that for our case study of the city of Vienna in
the previous section, we used taxi trip data from one
week as a representative of the expected customer
demand. In the following experiments, which we
conducted with IBM ILOG CPLEX 12.8.0, the trip
request forecasts are now derived from taxi trip data
from four different weeks over the course of a year
and include more trips. All experiments are based on
instances using districts 1, 6, 7, 8, and 9 as operational
areas (i.e., D5), a time granularity of 15 minutes per
time period, a vehicle limit of 10 cars, trip revenues
proportional to their duration, and budget limits of 1
million, 2 million, and 5 million. For each of the four
weeks, we then sampled ﬁve different demand sce-
narios from their respective trip request sets, result-
ing in a total of 60 different instances. These instances
each contain 110 potential locations for charging stations
and between around 180 and 360 trip requests.
Throughout this and the next section, we will refer
to the integrated and sequential algorithms as INT and
SEQ, respectively. For the former, algorithm FC has been
used. We also use INT* and SEQ* to refer to the optimal
(or best known) solutions found by these algorithms.
7.1. Comparison Between the Integrated and
Sequential Approaches
Our ﬁrst set of results comparing the integrated and
sequential approaches are summarized in Figure 13,
which shows cumulative numbers of instances in which
at least a certain revenue improvement over the sequential
algorithm is achieved by the integrated algorithm.
These results show that the revenue obtainable
with the integrated approach can increase by more
than 90% compared with the sequential one. In one
half of all instances we considered, the additional
revenue through integrated optimization is at least
40% of the revenue obtainable in the sequential
algorithm’s best known solution SEQ*, and even in the
worst case, it exceeds 10%. These results clearly in-
dicate that the additional effort of developing and
solving a more complex, integrated model can yield
signiﬁcant improvements concerning the ﬁnal solu-
tion quality for the considered problem.
7.2. Cross-Validation Study
All algorithms considered so far in this article assume
to be given a deterministic demand forecast. Because
this assumption may not hold in practice (i.e., the
real demand may differ from the expected one), this
section analyzes whether the obtained solutions (which
may suffer from overﬁtting) are still reasonable in this
case. To this end, we perform a cross-validation study in
which solutions computed for a given demand fore-
cast are evaluated on alternative demand scenarios.
More precisely, we compute the maximum achiev-
able revenue for particular demands when all stra-
tegic decisions (i.e., stations and their sizes) are ﬁxed
Table 8. Average Run Times and Optimality Gaps; Numbers of Instances Solved to Optimality; Average Numbers of Stations,
Cars, and Trips in the Best Known Solution; and the Quality of Both Heuristic Solutions Relative to It for All Vienna Instances
Avg. time (s)
Avg. gap (%)
# optimal
Avg. |S′|
Avg. H′
Avg. |K′|
% best
H
AoO
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
FC
CC
CP
PH
FH
10
D5
231
70
41
0.00
0.00
0.00
30
30
30
33
32
32
10
10
10
52
52
52
83.06
82.00
D6
5,407
10,834
7,382
0.43
5.20
3.55
26
18
23
39
40
39
10
9
10
86
82
83
72.65
73.16
D7
13,567
21,600
21,600
5.85
66.17
65.47
12
0
0
45
46
46
10
6
6
192
140
140
69.94
59.89
25
D5
6,367
7,181
1,255
0.02
2.87
0.00
29
25
30
38
38
37
20
20
20
74
72
74
77.30
72.25
D6
15,512
19,524
17,401
7.07
34.87
32.38
9
5
8
42
44
44
20
13
14
117
91
94
64.99
63.04
D7
21,600
21,600
21,600
43.12
90.35
90.13
0
0
0
47
47
47
14
8
8
200
153
153
73.46
60.69
50
D5
14,354
17,676
10,750
2.21
15.12
3.69
12
6
20
37
39
37
27
21
25
80
69
77
75.70
67.41
D6
21,600
21,361
21,600
15.46
57.90
46.23
0
1
0
41
45
45
26
12
13
120
87
89
63.89
57.32
D7
21,600
21,600
21,600
236.98
94.44
94.96
0
0
0
47
47
47
9
8
8
162
153
153
93.85
74.65
Notes. Results are grouped by maximum number of cars H and the area of operation, with 30 instances per row. Avg., Average. Best values are
marked bold.
Figure 13. (Color online) Reverse Cumulative Sum Plot
Showing the Number of Instances for Which a Revenue
Improvement of at Least X% Could Be Obtained by the
Integrated Algorithm Compared with the Sequential One
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1432
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

according to an optimal solution with respect to a dif-
ferent scenario.
Ideally, different trip scenarios would be addressed
via an appropriate extension of our formulations to
a two-stage stochastic program. However, the high
computational effort required for solving the de-
terministic problem variant (see Section 6) makes in
unlikely that a corresponding solution method would
be able to solve realistic instances. As some sort of
compromise between solving only single-scenario
instances and a full two-stage stochastic approach,
we propose an algorithm that combines solutions for
individual instances into a single consensus solution.
As will be shown below, this approach, which does
not incur the entire run-time penalty of a two-stage
stochastic model, works reasonably well on our in-
stances. This consensus solution is computed by solv-
ing a restricted two-stage stochastic model where the
minimum and maximum values of all ﬁrst-stage de-
cisions pertaining to stations and their sizes are set to
the smallest and largest values of the corresponding
variables in any of the solutions to the single-scenario
instances that were computed in a ﬁrst step. In ad-
dition, only those trips accepted in a single-scenario
instance are considered in this second phase (see
Online Appendix C for more details).
In our experiments, we considered two different
kinds of cross-validation. First, for each week and
budget value, we evaluated the solution for each
demand scenario on each of the other four demand
scenarios (e.g., evaluating solution INT* for Scenario 1
on Scenarios 2–5), resulting in a total of 240 cross-
scenario evaluation runs. Second, for each week,
budget value, and scenario, we created seven indi-
vidual day-long subinstances (one for each day of the
week) and evaluated their INT* solution on the cor-
responding full week-long instance, resulting in
a total of 420 cross-day evaluation runs. Along the
same lines, we created two different consensus so-
lutions for each of the 60 instances. The ﬁrst method,
which we refer to as CONSS, combines the ﬁve INT*
solutions to the instance’s different demand scenar-
ios, whereas the second method (called CONSD)
combines the seven INT* solutions to the instance’s
day-long subinstances. We refer to the optimal (or, as
before, best known) solutions found by these two
methods as CONSS* and CONSD*, respectively.
Results concerning the cross-scenario evaluation
are summarized in Figures 14(a) and 15(a). We ob-
serve that the cross-validated revenue (i.e., those
achieved after changing the demand scenario) on
average (INT-mean) lies between 40% and 90% of the
revenue obtained when the demand is known be-
forehand. The observed best (INT-max) and worst
(INT-min) cases lie approximately between 20% and
95% of the latter revenue. Recall that the optimal
values in the expected case, which would typically be
below 100%, are not known because the required two-
stage stochastic program could not be solved. Nev-
ertheless, these results indicate that the solutions
obtained by algorithm INT are reasonable, but could
be further improved by assuming that the demand
forecast is subject to uncertainty and incorporating
this aspect into the optimization procedure. Indeed, a
signiﬁcant and consistent improvement is achieved
by the corresponding consensus solution. Even in the
worst case, more than 55% of that instance’s best known
revenue can still be achieved, and in a few instances,
the consensus solution can even match INT*’s revenue.
Overall, this approach seems to offer a good compromise
Figure 14. (Color online) Reverse Cumulative Sum Plot Showing the Numbers of Instances for Which the Worst, Average, and
Best of the Cross-Validated Solutions and Corresponding Cross-Validated Consensus Solution Achieve at Least X% of the
Revenue Achieved by the Best Known Solution to That Instance
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1433

between solution quality and required computational
effort. Figure 15(a) shows that our integrated ap-
proach still mostly outperforms the sequential algo-
rithm w.r.t. the achieved revenue when cross-validation
(w.r.t. different demand scenarios) is concerned. Al-
though there are a few instances where one of the
cross-validated solutions from the sequential algo-
rithm outperforms the corresponding integrated one,
the latter mostly matches or outperforms the former.
In one half of the instances, this gain of integration is
around 40% or better.
Results from the evaluation of individual day-long
subinstances on their corresponding week-long in-
stance largely conﬁrm these ﬁndings, as Figures 14(b)
and 15(b) show. Interestingly, however, the individual
plot lines are signiﬁcantly steeper; that is, the revenue
achievable by the worst, average, and best cross-
validated solutions varies a lot less across all instances.
This might result from the fact that we now evaluated
seven instead of four solutions on each instance,
which increases the achievable revenue range of each
instance, thereby constricting the range that the reve-
nues achievable by the worst and best cross-validated
solution will take across all instances. Again, the
corresponding consensus solutions CONSD* show a
much better cross-validation performance than the
individual day-long INT* solutions, achieving reve-
nues between around 70% and 100% of the corre-
sponding week-long instance’s INT* revenue.
8. Simulation Study
The models and algorithms described in the previous
sections all allow the car sharing operator signiﬁcant
freedom in the trip selection process. Speciﬁcally, the
operator can choose which trip requests are accepted
and, if they are, at which stations they start and end.
In practice, such a system would be implemented by
means of a mobile app where the user would enter the
start and end addresses of their trip request. The
system would then tell the user whether their request
has been accepted and, if so, where to pick up and
drop off the rented car. Thus, we assume that the
customer is indifferent to which pickup and drop-off
stations are selected, as long as they are still within the
allowed walking distance, which allows the operator
to select these stations for them.
Alternatively, in order to provide their customers
with more ﬂexibility, the operator could offer its users
a live view of all available vehicles and chargers and
allow them to choose for themselves whether they
want to undertake a trip, as well as where they want to
start and end it. In this section, we analyze how well
the solutions found by our algorithms (speciﬁcally,
their strategic decisions regarding the placement and
sizing of charging stations) would perform in such
an alternative, user-driven system. To evaluate a so-
lution’s quality (i.e., the revenue that can be obtained
once the strategic decisions are ﬁxed) in such a user-
driven system, we developed a simulation algorithm
that accepts trip requests greedily on a ﬁrst-come,
ﬁrst-served basis. Throughout the simulation run, we
assume that customers always act in their own best
interest. Speciﬁcally, we assume that
1. if both a car with sufﬁcient battery and a free
charger are available within walking distance of the
trip’s origin and destination, respectively, a customer
will always choose to perform their requested trip;
Figure 15. (Color online) Reverse Cumulative Sum Plot Showing the Number of Instances for Which the Integrated Algorithm
Achieves at Least an X% Revenue Improvement over the Sequential Algorithm
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1434
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

2. a customer will always start their trip at their
most preferred station that has a car with sufﬁcient
battery to perform the trip; and
3. a customer will always return the car to their
most preferred station that has a charger available.
In our experiments, we used the stations’ prox-
imity to the customer’s origin and destination as a
preference measure, with customers preferring closer
stations to farther-away ones. A detailed description
of this greedy simulation procedure can be found in
Online Appendix D. Using the previously described
simulation algorithm and the instances described in
Section 7, we evaluated the solutions found by the
sequential and integrated algorithms, as well as the
two consensus solutions (as described in Section 7),
and compared their quality (i.e., achievable revenue)
to that of the optimal (or best known) solution INT*
found by the regular integrated model. Throughout
this section, we will refer to these four different greedily
evaluated solutions as SEQ†, INT†, CONSS†, and
CONSD†, respectively.
First, we evaluated the solutions found by the four
algorithms for each of the 60 instances on the same
instance again. As Figure 16(a) shows, the revenue
that is then achieved by the integrated solution INT†
ranges from around 20% to just over 70% that of the
nonsimulated best known solution INT*, with more
than half of all instances achieving more than 50%.
Such degradation is, of course, not altogether sur-
prising, because (a) the assumed user behavior sig-
niﬁcantly restricts the set of feasible solutions to the
problem, thereby worsening the best attainable ob-
jective value, and (b) the algorithm does not take these
additional restrictions into account during the opti-
mization procedure. However, even if the algorithm
were to account for these restrictions, we would, in
general, not be able to achieve the same revenue as in
the unrestricted case because of argument (a).
Figure 16. (Color online) Reverse Cumulative Sum Plots Showing the Revenue of Greedily Evaluated Solutions vs. the
Revenue of the Optimal (or Best Known) Solution Found by Our Integrated Model
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1435

The sequential algorithm, on the other hand, suffers
from an even worse degradation than the integrated
one. The revenue achievable by its greedily evaluated
solutions SEQ† ranges from less than 10%–55% that of
INT*, with a median below 40%. This suggests that, in
general, the solutions found by our integrated algo-
rithm would fare better in a user-driven car sharing
system, even when their behavior is not explicitly
taken into account in the optimization procedure.
The two greedily evaluated consensus solutions
CONSS† and CONSD† generally provide better so-
lution quality than the corresponding sequential so-
lution SEQ†, but are likewise outperformed by the
integrated solution INT† evaluated on its own sce-
nario. This behavior can likely be explained by the fact
that they must strike a balance between the differ-
ent scenarios for which they represent a consensus,
whereas algorithm INT can optimize purely for the
single scenario under consideration.
During cross-validation, however, the roles of INT†
and the two consensus solutions CONSS† and CONSD†
are reversed, as can be seen in Figure 16, (a) and (c),
respectively. When INT* solutions are greedily eval-
uated on different demand scenarios, their median
quality is approximately 30% that of the second in-
stance’s INT* solution, whereas the corresponding
CONSS†’s median quality is around 40%. A similar
picture can be seen when INT* solutions to each in-
stance’s day-long subinstances are greedily evaluated
on the full week-long instance. Here, the INT† solu-
tions reach a median quality of only around 25%
of that of INT*, whereas the CONSD† solutions still
achieve over 40% in the median.
Overall, these results suggest that the relative or-
dering of the different algorithms with respect to their
attainable solution quality does not change when
their solutions are greedily evaluated according to
expected user behavior instead of optimized from
the operator’s perspective. When only a single sce-
nario is considered, the integrated algorithm INT still
outperforms both the sequential one, SEQ, and both
consensus variants, CONSS and CONSD, as far as
solution quality is concerned. However, once we con-
sider multiple scenarios, the two consensus variants
seem to be better choices than simply using one of
the scenarios’ INT* solutions, even if it generally still
outperforms the corresponding SEQ* solution. This
suggests that the strategic decisions made by both
the integrated and the consensus algorithms are still
rather reasonable in a user-driven setting, even if the
users’ behavior is not explicitly considered during the
optimization procedure. How much more revenue
could be gained by incorporating this into the cor-
responding models and algorithms remains an open
question for future research.
9. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced a new optimization prob-
lem related to the strategic, long-term planning
of an electric car sharing network: the charging sta-
tion location problem. We showed that the problem is
NP-hard and remains so if either the available bud-
get or the battery capacity of cars is not restrictive, but
can be solved in polynomial time if both are non-
restrictive. We propose two integer linear program-
ming formulations that ensure consistent car move-
ments and three formulations to track each car’s
battery level, yielding a total of six ILP formulations
for the CSLP. A main difference from related prob-
lems considered in existing literature is that we ex-
plicitly consider and track each car’s battery level
throughout the planning period. We also described
two construction heuristics that are used to quickly
derive feasible solutions of good quality to serve as a
starting point for our branch-and-cut algorithms.
We evaluated the computational performance of
our heuristics and the ﬁve most promising exact
approaches on two sets of instances: grid-graph in-
stances and real-world instances based on data from
the city of Vienna. Our experiments showed that the
number of potential trips is the principal factor in
determining an instance’s difﬁculty, and we also
analyzed the inﬂuence of further parameters. The best
formulations were able to solve instances with up to
480 trips to proven optimality, while our heuristics
were able to provide high-quality solutions with neg-
ligible run times.
In further experiments, we compared the perfor-
mance of our integrated algorithms that jointly op-
timize decisions at various levels to a second sequential
approach where these decision levels are optimized
separately and showed that they are able to achieve
up to 90% more revenue than the sequential one. We
then analyzed the behavior of our algorithms in cases
where demand is uncertain during a cross-validation
study and showed that combining the optimal solu-
tions from different deterministic instances into a
single consensus solution provides a computationally
tractable way to deal with the uncertainty of demand
forecasts and possible overﬁtting of the determinis-
tic model.
Finally, we designed a greedy simulation proce-
dure to evaluate the solutions found by our algo-
rithms in a setting where trip requests are fulﬁlled on
a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served basis and customers can
freely choose among the available cars and chargers
when performing a trip. This simulation study showed
that under such a trip selection paradigm, the achiev-
able revenue of our solutions can be signiﬁcantly re-
duced, because this additional ﬂexibility provided
to the customers is not being considered during
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1436
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS

optimization. Designing models and algorithms that
incorporate these aspects thus seems like a prom-
ising direction for future research.
Other future work may involve the study of fur-
ther ILP formulations and corresponding exact al-
gorithms, as well as the development of metaheuristic
approaches possibly based on the two heuristics in-
troduced in the current article.
We also want to study problem variants that im-
prove the ﬂexibility of the system’s users and operators.
An example of the former would be a free-ﬂoating
variant, where users may park cars anywhere within
the system’s area of operation, not only at a charging
station where it is connected to a charger. This would
also allow the operator to serve a larger area of opera-
tion with fewer charging stations and chargers as long
as they are able to ensure that vehicles return to them
frequently enough so that they can be recharged
regularly.
For the latter, we want to consider a model where
cars may be relocated between busier and less busy
zones throughout the planning period, either by the
operator’s employees or by users. In a system using
user-based relocation, users would be incentivized to
move cars according to the operator’s preference (e.g.,
moving them to a charging station within a free-ﬂoating
car sharing system if their batteries run low). This can
be achieved by employing ﬂexible pricing mecha-
nisms that can be obtained using bilevel optimization.
Finally, we believe that incorporating uncertainty
explicitly into our models would further increase
their practical applicability. This includes stochastic
variants, for example, using multiple trip scenarios, as
well as ones including some form of robustness, for
example, with respect to the trips’ battery consumption
or the availability of cars and empty chargers at the
opened stations.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank their project partners from the Austrian
Institute of Technology for creating the real-world instances
from Vienna and for their support in visualizing the obtained
results. The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers
and the associate editor for their numerous constructive and
helpful comments. Incorporating their feedback helped the
authors signiﬁcantly improve the quality and presentation
of this paper. The map data used for the instances and vi-
sualizations are copyrighted by OpenStreetMap contributors
and are available at http://www.openstreetmap.org/. The
visualizations in Figure 12 were made using Folium (https://
github.com/python-visualization/folium) and LeaﬂetJS
(https://leaﬂetjs.com/).
Endnote
1 Also note that nonlinear charging functions could be easily consid-
ered when using battery graph GB. Given an initial battery state at
time π(t) and a recharging time of t −π(t), one would simply need to
replace the value (t −π(t))ρ by the corresponding result obtained from
such a general charging function in the above deﬁnitions of VB and AB.
References
Absi N, Archetti C, Dauz`ere-Pér`es S, Feillet D, Speranza MG (2018)
Comparing sequential and integrated approaches for the pro-
duction routing problem. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 269(2):633–646.
Asamer J, Reinthaler M, Ruthmair M, Straub M, Puchinger J (2016)
Optimizing charging station locations for urban taxi providers.
Transportation Res. Part A: Policy Practice 85:233–246.
Baouche F, Billot R, Trigui R, El Faouzi NE (2014) Efﬁcient allocation
of electric vehicles charging stations: Optimization model and
application to a dense urban network. IEEE Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems 6(3):33–43.
Barth M, Todd M (1999) Simulation model performance analysis of a
multiple station shared vehicle system. Transportation Res. Part C:
Emerging Tech. 7(4):237–259.
Bektas¸ T, Laporte G (2011) The pollution-routing problem. Trans-
portation Res. Part B: Methodological 45(8):1232–1250.
Boyacı B, Zografos KG, Geroliminis N (2015) An optimization frame-
work for the development of efﬁcient one-way car-sharing sys-
tems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 240(3):718–733.
Brandst¨atter G, Gambella C, Leitner M, Malaguti E, Masini F,
Puchinger J, Ruthmair M, Vigo D (2016) Overview of optimi-
zation problems in electric car-sharing system design and
management. Dawid H, Doerner KF, Feichtinger G, Kort PM,
Seidl A, eds. Dynamic Perspectives on Managerial Decision Making,
Dynamic Modeling and Econometrics in Economics and Fi-
nance, vol. 22 (Springer, Berlin), 441–471.
Cavadas J, Correia GH, Gouveia J (2015) A MIP model for locating
slow-charging stations for electric vehicles in urban areas ac-
counting for driver tours. Transportation Res. Part E: Logist.
Transportation Rev. 75:188–201.
Cepolina EM, Farina A (2012) A new shared vehicle system for
urban areas. Transportation Res. Part C: Emerging Tech. 21(1):
230–243.
Chen TD, Kockelman KM, Khan M (2013) Locating electric vehicle
charging stations: Parking-based assignment method for Seattle,
Washington. Transportation Res. Record 2385(1):28–36.
Correia GH, Antunes AP (2012) Optimization approach to depot
location and trip selection in one-way carsharing systems. Trans-
portation Res. Part E: Logist. Transportation Rev. 48(1):233–247.
Correia GH, Jorge DR, Antunes DM (2014) The added value of
accounting for users’ ﬂexibility and information on the potential
of a station-based one-way car-sharing system: An application
in Lisbon, Portugal. J. Intelligent Transportation Systems 18(3):
299–308.
Daimler AG (2012) Smart ED booklet. Accessed August 21, 2018,
https://www.smart.com/content/dam/smart/EN/PDF/smart
_electric_drive_Broschuere_en_INT.indd.pdf.
Fassi AE, Awasthi A, Viviani M (2012) Evaluation of carsharing
network’s growth strategies through discrete event simulation.
Expert Systems Appl. 39(8):6692–6705.
Frade I, Ribeiro A, Gonçalves G, Antunes AP (2011) Optimal location
of charging stations for electric vehicles in a neighborhood in
Lisbon, Portugal. Transportation Res. Record 2252(1):91–98.
Gambella C, Malaguti E, Masini F, Vigo D (2018) Optimizing relocation
operations in electric car-sharing. Omega 81:234–245.
Gawlik W, Litzlbauer M, Schuster A, Koller H, Reinthaler M, Norman N,
Waldbauer M, Bolzer A, Leitner M (2013) ZENEM—Zukünftige
Energienetze mit Elektromobilit¨at. Accessed August 21, 2018,
https://www.ea.tuwien.ac.at/ﬁleadmin/t/ea/projekte/ZENEM/
ZENEM_829953_publ_Endbericht_ﬁnal_130919.pdf.
Ge S, Feng L, Liu H (2011) The planning of electric vehicle charging
station based on grid partition method. Internat. Conf. Electrical
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS
1437

Control Engrg. (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Piscataway, NJ), 2726–2730.
He L, Mak HY, Rong Y, Shen ZJM (2017) Service region design for
urban electric vehicle sharing systems. Manufacturing Service
Oper. Management 19(2):309–327.
Hess A, Malandrino F, Reinhardt MB, Casetti C, Hummel KA,
Barcel´o-Ordinas JM (2012) Optimal deployment of charging
stations for electric vehicular networks. Fiore M, Rosenberg C,
eds. Proc. First Workshop Urban Networking (Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York), 1–6.
Jorge D, Correia GH (2013) Carsharing systems demand estimation
and deﬁned operations: a literature review. Eur. J. Transportation
Infrastructure Res. 13(3):201–220.
Letchford AN, Salazar-Gonz´alez JJ (2015) Stronger multi-commodity
ﬂow formulations of the capacitated vehicle routing problem.
Eur. J. Oper. Res. 244(3):730–738.
Mitsubishi (2017) iMiEV: Mitsubishi innovative electric vehicle.
Accessed August 21, 2018, https://www.mitsubishi-motors.com/
en/showroom/i-miev/catalog/pdf/17_5my_i_miev_g_exp.pdf.
Montoya A, Guéret C, Mendoza JE, Villegas JG (2017) The electric
vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging function.
Transportation Res. Part B: Methodological 103:87–110.
Nissan (2014) 2014 LEAF owner’s manual. Accessed August 21,
2018, https://owners.nissanusa.com/content/techpub/Manuals
AndGuides/LEAF/2014/2014-LEAF-owner-manual.pdf.
Pelletier S, Jabali O, Laporte G (2016) 50th anniversary invited arti-
cle—Goods distribution with electric vehicles: Review and re-
search perspectives. Transportation Sci. 50(1):3–22.
Ruokokoski M, Solyali O, Cordeau JF, Jans R, Süral H (2010) Efﬁcient
formulations and a branch-and-cut algorithm for a production-
routing problem. Technical report G-2010-66, Group for Re-
search in Decision Analysis, Montreal.
Sellmair R, Hamacher T (2014) Optimization of charging infra-
structure for electric taxis. Transportation Res. Record 2416(1):
82–91.
Shaheen S, Sperling D, Wagner C (1998) Carsharing in Europe and
North America: Past, present and future. Transportation Quart.
52(3):35–52.
Shu J, Song M (2013) Dynamic container deployment: two-stage
robust model, complexity, and computational results. INFORMS
J. Comput. 26(1):135–149.
Wang H, Huang Q, Zhang C, Xia A (2010) A novel approach for the
layout of electric vehicle charging station. Proc. Internat. Conf.
Apperceiving Comput. Intelligence Anal. (Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, NJ), 64–70.
Wang YW, Lin CC (2013) Locating multiple types of recharging
stations for battery-powered electric vehicle transport. Trans-
portation Res. Part E: Logist. Transportation Rev. 58:76–87.
Wong RT (1980) Integer programming formulations of the traveling
salesman problem. Proc. IEEE Internat. Conf. Circuits Comput.
(Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway,
NJ), 149–152.
Worley O, Klabjan D, Sweda TM (2012) Simultaneous vehicle routing
and charging station siting for commercial electric vehicles. IEEE
Internat. Electric Vehicle Conf. (Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers, Piscataway, NJ), 772–774.
Brandst¨atter, Leitner, and Ljubi´c: Charging Station Location in E-car Sharing
1438
Transportation Science, 2020, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1408–1438, © 2020 INFORMS