TITLE: A Chance-Constrained Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem with Stochastic Demands
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2022.1162
---

A Chance-Constrained Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem
with Stochastic Demands
Citation for published version (APA):
Sluijk, N., Florio, A., Kinable, J., Dellaert, N. P., & van Woensel, T. (2023). A Chance-Constrained Two-Echelon
Vehicle Routing Problem with Stochastic Demands. Transportation Science, 57(1), 252-272.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2022.1162
DOI:
10.1287/trsc.2022.1162
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/2023
Document Version:
Author’s version before peer-review
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Submitted to Transportation Science
manuscript (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
A Chance-Constrained Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing
Problem with Stochastic Demands
Natasja Sluijk, Alexandre M. Florio
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
n.sluijk@tue.nl, a.de.macedo.ﬂorio@tue.nl
Joris Kinable
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
Supply Chain Optimization Technologies, Amazon, USA
j.kinable@tue.nl
Nico Dellaert, Tom Van Woensel
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
n.p.dellaert@tue.nl, t.v.woensel@tue.nl
Two-echelon distribution systems are often considered in city logistics to maintain economies of scale and
satisfy the emission zone requirements in the cities. In this work, we formulate the two-echelon vehicle routing
problem with stochastic demands as a chance-constrained stochastic optimization problem, where the total
demand of the customers in each second-echelon route should ﬁt within the vehicle capacity with a high
probability. We propose two eﬃcient solution procedures based on column generation. Key to the eﬃciency of
these procedures is the underlying labeling algorithm to generate new columns. We propose a novel labeling
algorithm based on simultaneous construction of second-echelon routes and a labeling algorithm that builds
second-echelon routes sequentially. To further enhance the performance of the solution procedure, we use
statistical inference techniques to ensure that the chance constraints are met. We reduce the number of
customer combinations for which the chance constraint needs to be veriﬁed by imposing feasibility bounds
on the stochastic customer demands. With these bounds, the runtimes of the labeling algorithms are reduced
signiﬁcantly. Finally, we show the value of the stochastic formulation in terms of improved solution cost and
guaranteed feasibility of second-echelon routes.
Key words : Correlated demands; Feasibility bounds; Column generation; Multi-label
1.
Introduction
The retail e-commerce sales worldwide amounted to 3.53 trillion US dollars in 2019 and are pro-
jected to grow to 6.54 trillion US dollars in 2022 (Statista 2020). At the same time, the last mile
is becoming increasingly congested, and sustainability is receiving more attention (Agatz, Fleis-
1

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
2
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
chmann, and Van Nunen 2008). An increasing number of European Union cities are enforcing
low emission zones to ensure a less polluted environment and are preparing for a complete phase-
out of internal combustion engines and/or zero-emission mobility areas (Lurkin, Hambuckers, and
Van Woensel 2021, Transport Environment 2018, TLN 2021). Thus, there is a need for a sustainable
distribution chain that satisﬁes the restricted emission zones of cities while maintaining economies
of scale. This can be achieved by dividing the transportation chain into two echelons. Instead of
directly transporting goods from depots to customers, large trucks deliver to satellite locations just
outside of the cities. Here, goods are unloaded from the trucks and loaded into smaller vehicles that
bring the goods to their ﬁnal destinations. Such a distribution system is a practical example of a
two-echelon vehicle routing problem (2E-VRP), where we operate large trucks on the ﬁrst echelon
to achieve economies of scale, and smaller vehicles on the second echelon to satisfy the emission
zone requirements, e.g., with low emission vehicles or electric vehicles with limited range.
The deterministic 2E-VRP is a well-studied problem (Cuda, Guastaroba, and Speranza 2015). In
reality, however, various parameters of the problem may be uncertain, e.g., travel times, customer
demands, and/or customer presence. Although many papers consider stochastic variants of the
classical single-echelon vehicle routing problem (Oyola, Arntzen, and Woodruﬀ2018), only two
papers deal with stochastic variants of the 2E-VRP. Both Liu et al. (2017) and Wang, Lan, and
Zhao (2017) consider stochastic customer demands and capture the uncertainty with a recourse
action, in which the vehicle performs a replenishment trip to a satellite and/or depot whenever a
customer’s demand exceeds the remaining vehicle capacity.
In this paper, we consider the two-echelon vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands
(2E-VRPSD). Instead of assuming a restocking policy, we capture demand stochasticity with a
probabilistic capacity constraint on the second-echelon vehicle capacity. We require with high
probability that the total demand of customers in a second-echelon route does not exceed the
second-echelon vehicle capacity. In this way, we reduce the need for inventory coordination at
satellites and potentially expensive replenishment trips from customers to the depot over a two-
echelon network.
In summary, this paper brings the following contributions:
• We formulate the 2E-VRPSD as a chance-constrained stochastic optimization problem and
propose two eﬃcient solution procedures based on column generation. Key to the eﬃciency
of these procedures is the underlying labeling algorithms to generate new columns.
• Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel labeling algorithm based on simultaneous construction of
second-echelon routes and a labeling algorithm that builds second-echelon routes sequentially.
To further enhance the performance of the solution procedure, we use statistical inference
techniques to verify that the probabilistic capacity constraint is satisﬁed.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
3
• Additionally, feasibility bounds on the stochastic customer demands are imposed to reduce
the number of customer combinations for which the chance constraint needs to be veriﬁed.
Our experiments show that with these bounds the labeling algorithm’s runtimes are reduced
by a factor of up to 1.9.
• Finally, a set of results shows the value of working with the stochastic demand formulation in
terms of improved solution cost and guaranteed feasibility of second-echelon routes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the relevant literature is dis-
cussed, followed by the problem deﬁnition in Section 3. In Section 4, we propose two labeling
algorithms to solve the column generation subproblem. In Section 5, we introduce several meth-
ods for evaluating the chance constraints and the notion of feasibility bounds. In Section 6, we
present and discuss the results obtained on instances with independent and correlated demand
distributions. Finally, in Section 7, we draw concluding remarks and provide perspectives for future
research.
2.
Literature Review
The two-echelon vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands is a combination of the vehicle
routing problem with stochastic demands and the two-echelon vehicle routing problem. In the
following, we discuss the relevant literature of both domains.
2.1.
Vehicle Routing Problems with Stochastic Demands
The vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands (VRPSD) is the most studied variant of
stochastic vehicle routing problems (Oyola, Arntzen, and Woodruﬀ2017). The stochasticity is
often captured with a recourse policy or chance constraints. When considering recourse policies,
the problem is formulated as a two-stage stochastic program and the aim is to minimize the ﬁrst
stage routing costs and second stage expected recourse costs. Three main recourse policies are
frequently considered. With the detour-to-depot policy, also referred to as the classical recourse
policy, the vehicle returns to the depot to resupply if it runs out of capacity and continues the
planned route from the last visited customer (Dror, Laporte, and Trudeau 1989). The optimal
restocking policy allows preventive returns to the depot if a failure at a later customer is likely to
occur and the expected cost of replenishing at the current customer is less than the expected cost of
replenishing at a later customer (Salavati-Khoshghalb et al. 2019a, Florio, Hartl, and Minner 2020,
Louveaux and Salazar-Gonz´alez 2018). Motivated by the use of ﬁxed operational rules in practice,
Salavati-Khoshghalb et al. (2019b) propose a rule-based policy, where the optimal restocking policy
is replaced by some preset rules that establish customer-speciﬁc thresholds according to which the
preventive return trips are governed. Finally, the reoptimization policy reoptimizes the route after

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
4
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
the current customer demand is revealed, including possible replenishment trips (Secomandi and
Margot 2009).
Stochasticity in customer demand can also be captured with chance constraints. Chance con-
straints ensure that the probability of the customers’ total demand not exceeding the vehicle
capacity is above a certain threshold. Noorizadegan and Chen (2018) develop a branch-and-price
algorithm to solve the VRPSD with chance constraints. They assume independent Poisson dis-
tributed demands and provide dominance rules based on distribution parameters that can be
applied to independent demand distributions with the additive property. Dinh, Fukasawa, and
Luedtke (2018) replace the independence assumption by the condition that it must be possible to
compute a quantile of the sum of the customer demands in a subset of customers and solve the
model with a branch-cut-and-price algorithm.
An overview of solution methods for stochastic vehicle routing problems can be found in Oyola,
Arntzen, and Woodruﬀ(2018). Most of them are only applicable to instances with independent
demand distributions. In practice, customer demands may be correlated, given the many factors
that could induce correlation, including weather, events, and sales (Gendreau, Jabali, and Rei
2016). The methodology we propose in this paper can also be used to handle realistic situations
where customer demand is modeled with dependent, correlated, or data-driven distributions.
2.2.
Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problems
The ﬁrst application of a 2E-VRP was introduced by Jacobsen and Madsen (1980). Nearly two
decades later, a formal description of the problem appeared in Crainic, Ricciardi, and Storchi
(2004). Diﬀerent variations of the 2E-VRP have been considered, including the 2E-VRP with time
windows (Dellaert et al. 2019); electric vehicles (Breunig et al. 2019); covering options (Enthoven
et al. 2020); swap containers (M¨uhlbauer and Fontaine 2021); delivery options (Zhou et al. 2018);
simultaneous pickup and delivery (Belgin, Karaoglan, and Altiparmak 2018); multiple commodities
(Dellaert et al. 2021); grey zone customers (Anderluh et al. 2021); and satellite synchronization
and multiple trips (Grangier et al. 2016). An extensive overview of various 2E-VRP applications
as well as common solution approaches is provided in Cuda, Guastaroba, and Speranza (2015).
Recently, Marques et al. (2020) proposed a branch-cut-and-price algorithm for the single-depot
2E-VRP, including a route-based formulation that does not require explicit variables to cover the
product ﬂow at satellites, a new family of valid inequalities, and a new branching strategy on
the number of ﬁrst-echelon vehicles visiting a subset of satellites. Currently, this is the best exact
solution method for the 2E-VRP.
Dellaert et al. (2019) consider the 2E-VRP with time windows and multiple depots and propose
two path-based formulations. In the ﬁrst formulation, paths are deﬁned over both ﬁrst- and second-
echelon routes, whereas in the second formulation, the ﬁrst- and second-echelon paths are decom-
posed. Branch-and-price-based algorithms are developed for both formulations. New instances are

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
5
proposed for the setting with multiple depots and time windows. Instances with up to 100 customers
and ﬁve satellites are solved to optimality.
Heuristic approaches have been developed to obtain acceptable solutions in a short amount of
time, including math-based heuristics (Perboli, Tadei, and Vigo 2011), large neighborhood search
(Kitjacharoenchai, Min, and Lee 2020, Wang, Shao, and Zhou 2017), adaptive large neighborhood
search (Breunig et al. 2016, Grangier et al. 2016, Jie et al. 2019, Li et al. 2020, Enthoven et al.
2020), variable neighborhood descent (Belgin, Karaoglan, and Altiparmak 2018), greedy random-
ized adaptive search procedure (Zeng et al. 2014, Anderluh, Hemmelmayr, and Nolz 2017), and
population-based heuristics (Zhou et al. 2018).
While the literature on the deterministic 2E-VRP is vast, only two papers consider the 2E-
VRPSD. Liu et al. (2017) design a simulation-based tabu-search algorithm to solve the 2E-VRPSD.
Given the two-echelon structure, the removal and insertion of both satellites and customers are
considered. The authors consider two attribute sets for the tabu list, one containing combinations of
satellites and ﬁrst-echelon vehicles and the other containing combinations of customers, satellites,
and second-echelon vehicles. The cost of a neighborhood move is estimated with Monte Carlo
simulation.
Wang, Lan, and Zhao (2017) develop a genetic algorithm to solve the 2E-VRPSD, where a
chromosome represents the second-echelon routes that are part of a complete solution. A decoding
method is proposed to translate a chromosome to a complete solution, including ﬁrst-echelon routes.
Mutation operators related to two decisions are incorporated: the selection of satellites and second-
echelon routes. Exact methods and discrete approximation methods are considered for calculating
the expected route failure cost.
Thus, so far, only heuristic methods have been considered for the 2E-VRPSD. As well known, a
drawback of heuristics is that they do not guarantee the optimality of the solution. In this paper,
we solve the 2E-VRPSD with a column generation-based algorithm, which provides us with lower
bounds on the solution values, thereby enabling us to compute optimality gaps. As opposed to
considering a recourse policy and requiring independent demand distributions as in Wang, Lan,
and Zhao (2017) and Liu et al. (2017), we capture the stochasticity with chance constraints and
do not pose any assumption on the demand distributions.
3.
Problem Deﬁnition
The chance-constrained 2E-VRPSD is deﬁned on an undirected weighted graph G = (V,E) with
vertex set V = D ∪S ∪C, representing the set of depots, satellites and customers, respectively.
The edge set E is partitioned into two sets, one for each echelon. Set E1 = {(i,j)|i ∈D ∪S,j ∈
S,i ̸= j} consists of the edges that can be traversed by ﬁrst-echelon (FE) vehicles. Similarly, set

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
6
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
E2 = {(i,j)|i ∈S ∪C,j ∈C,i ̸= j} contains the connections that can be used by the second-echelon
(SE) vehicles. The weight ce of edge e ∈E is equal to the transportation cost (e.g. distance) of
traversing edge e. For each echelon we have an unlimited homogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles. The FE
and SE vehicles have a capacity of QFE and QSE, respectively, where QFE > QSE.
At the satellites, goods are unloaded from the FE vehicles and directly loaded into the SE
vehicles, without any intermediate storage. To avoid the complex synchronization needed when
an SE vehicle has to wait for multiple FE vehicles, we do not allow deliveries from diﬀerent FE
vehicles to the same SE vehicle. A satellite can be visited by multiple FE vehicles, as long as they
supply diﬀerent SE vehicles. A formal deﬁnition of an FE route is given in Deﬁnition 1.
Definition 1 (First-echelon route). A
ﬁrst-echelon
route
is
a
sequence
f
=
(n0,n1,...,nm,nm+1) where m ≥1, n0 = nm+1 ∈D, ni ∈S for all i ∈{1,...,m}, and ni ̸= nj for all
i,j ∈{1,...,m}, i ̸= j.
Analogous to an FE route, an SE route starts and ends at a satellite and visits one or more
customers. The demand ξi of each customer i ∈C is a non-negative integer random variable with
mean µi and variance σ2
i . Probabilistic capacity constraints are imposed on the SE routes. An SE
route is considered to be capacity-feasible if the total demand of the customers visited in the route
does not exceed the vehicle capacity QSE with a high probability of at least η. We formalize as
follows:
Definition 2 (Second-echelon route). A valid second-echelon route is a sequence r =
(n0,n1,...,nm,nm+1), where m ≥1, n0 = nm+1 ∈S, ni ∈C, ni ̸= nj for all i,j ∈{1,...,m}, i ̸= j,
and
P
 X
i∈C′
ξi ≤QSE
!
≥η,
(1)
with C′ = {n1,...,nm}.
Without loss of generality, let ¯Q be a value such that Constraint (1) does not hold for any
customer combination C′ ⊂C with P
i∈C′ µi > ¯Q. In Section 5.3, the process of obtaining ¯Q is
described. We do not place any restrictions on the demand distributions. In particular, the demand
of diﬀerent customers can be statistically dependent.
To formally deﬁne the chance-constrained 2E-VRPSD through a mathematical model, similar
to Dellaert et al. (2019), we introduce the notion of a tour-tree. A tour-tree is composed of a single
FE route and all SE routes supplied by the FE route.
Definition 3 (Tour-tree). A tour-tree is a sequence t = (n0,(n1,R1),...,(nm,Rm),nm+1),
with m ≥1, n0 = nm+1 ∈D, nk ∈S for k ∈{1,...,m}, and Rk representing the set of SE routes
starting at satellite nk.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
7
i
ii
iii
iv
a
b
c
d
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Depot
Satellite
Customer
First-echelon route
Second-echelon route
Figure 1
2E-VRPSD instance and a potential solution
From Deﬁnition 3 it follows that any solution to the 2E-VRPSD can be expressed in terms of
a ﬁnite set of tour-trees. The objective of the 2E-VRPSD is to ﬁnd a set of tour-trees of mini-
mum total cost such that all customers are visited and the vehicle capacities are satisﬁed with
high probability. Figure 1 shows an example of a solution for an 2E-VRPSD instance consist-
ing of the following tour-trees: (ii,(b,(b,1,b)),(d,(d,8,9,10,d)),ii), (iii,(c,((c,7,c), (c,6,5,c))),iii), and
(iv,(d,(d,3,4,d)),(c,(c,2,c)),iv).
We assume that each SE route leaves the satellite with full capacity, therefore an FE route can
supply at most θ =
j
QFE
QSE
k
SE routes. We denote the set of edges that are traversed in tour-tree t
by E(t) and deﬁne its corresponding transportation costs as ct = P
e∈E(t) ce. Let T denote the set
of all feasible tour-trees and ait be a binary parameter equal to 1 if customer i ∈C is visited in
tour-tree t. Using binary variables xt,t ∈T, the 2E-VRPSD can now be formulated as the following
set-partitioning problem:
(MP)
minimize
X
t∈T
ctxt,
subject to
X
t∈T
aitxt = 1,
i ∈C,
(2)
xt ∈{0,1},
t ∈T.
The objective function minimizes the total cost of the selected tour-trees. Constraints (2) specify
that each customer i ∈C is covered by exactly one tour-tree.
Problem MP assumes a set of feasible tour-trees, which grows exponentially with the number of
customers in the problem instance, and cannot be solved directly for most 2E-VRPSD instances.
Instead, we consider the linear relaxation of MP, hereafter referred to as RMP, and solve it with
column generation.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
8
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
To obtain tighter lower bounds, we impose the following bound on the minimum number of
tour-trees in any feasible 2E-VRPSD solution:
X
t∈T
xt ≥
&P
i∈C µc
θ ¯Q
'
.
(3)
4.
Column Generation for the 2E-VRPSD
The column generation procedure iteratively solves a restricted version of RMP, in which the set of
tour-trees T is replaced by a limited subset T ′ ⊂T. At each iteration, a pricing problem is solved
to generate new columns (tour-trees) with negative reduced cost, which are consecutively added to
T ′. The procedure terminates when no more columns with negative reduced cost can be identiﬁed.
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. In Section 4.1, we formally deﬁne the
pricing problem. In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, we propose two labeling algorithms for solving the pricing
problem. The ﬁrst labeling algorithm is based on simultaneous labeling of SE routes, whereas the
second algorithm constructs SE routes sequentially. Finally, in Section 4.4, we discuss the use of
completion bounds to control the growth of the labels.
4.1.
Pricing Problem
To formally deﬁne the pricing problem, let λi, i ∈C, and δ be the dual values corresponding to
Constraints (2) and (3), respectively. The pricing problem can be formulated as a variant of the
elementary shortest path problem with resource constraints (ESPPRC; Feillet et al. 2004) with
capacity constraints for both FE and SE vehicles. The reduced cost c′
t of a tour-tree t is given by:
c′
t = ct −
X
i∈C
aitλi −δ.
The objective of the pricing problem is to ﬁnd a tour-tree t such that c′
t < 0. The ESPPRC is
often solved with a labeling algorithm, where labels represent partial paths in graph G. The eﬃ-
ciency of a labeling algorithm depends on its ability to prune non-promising paths. Two techniques
that are often considered to control the growth of labels are completion bounds and dominance
rules. A completion bound is a lower bound on the reduced cost of all routes that can be obtained
as extensions of the current label (Costa, Contardo, and Desaulniers 2019). Dominance rules are
imposed on the available resources of a label to detect and remove redundant labels. One resource
that is often used in the dominance rules is the remaining vehicle capacity. However, due to the
stochastic nature of the customer demands, it is no longer possible to use this resource for control-
ling the growth of the labels. Additionally, eﬃcient approaches for verifying the chance constraint
are required. In the following, we focus on developing methodology that addresses these challenges
and eﬃciently solves the RMP. Once an optimal solution to the RMP is obtained, we use the
resulting tour-trees in T ′ to compute an upper bound to MP by solving problem MP directly for
T ′ instead of T.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
9
4.2.
Multi-label Algorithm
Each label in the multi-label algorithm represents a partial tour-tree and consists of multiple partial
SE routes, hence the name multi-label. With this structure, it is possible to start a new SE route
while another SE route in the same tour-tree is still being formed. In contrast, existing labeling
algorithms for constructing a tour-tree for the 2E-VRP consider SE routes consecutively, i.e., a
new SE route can only be started after the previous SE route has been completed. The multi-label
approach’s main beneﬁt is that we can enforce completion bounds on the remaining SE vehicle
capacities rather than the remaining FE vehicle capacity. This enables us to implement the multi-
label algorithm without dominance rules, making it ﬁt for dependent, correlated, or data-driven
demand distributions.
The multi-label algorithm starts with generating all possible permutations of the satellites that
could be visited in an FE route. Each satellite represents the start of a diﬀerent SE route. As
stated before, we assume that each FE route can supply at most θ SE routes, and, as such, each
permutation consists of at most θ satellites. Moreover, following Baldacci et al. (2013), we assume
that the number of satellites |S| is limited. For reasonable values of |S| and θ, we can enumerate
all possible |S|θ permutations. We refer to a permutation as a conﬁguration:
Definition 4 (Configuration). A conﬁguration is a sequence Π = (n1,n2,...,nk) where ni ∈
S for all i ∈{1,...,k} with k ≤θ.
The main diﬀerences between the deﬁnitions of a conﬁguration and a tour-tree are the absence
of depots and the satellites’ multiplicity. For example, the conﬁgurations of the tour-trees depicted
in Figure 1 are {b,d}, {c,c}, and {d,c}.
For each conﬁguration, we use the depot that minimizes the total FE routing costs. Next, we
create a multi-label for each conﬁguration. The attributes of a multi-label L are given in Table
1, where we have general attributes related to the tour-tree and speciﬁc attributes for each partial
SE route (path) Lk, k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}. Next to the common attributes of a label, we also store
attributes ¯µk, ¯σ2
k, and mk, k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}, to expedite the process of checking the chance
constraint and adherence to the symmetry breaking rules, which are further detailed in Section
4.2.
In each iteration of the multi-label algorithm, we randomly select the next multi-label L to be
extended. For each path Lk, k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}, we iteratively select a customer i ∈C and check
whether the extension of path Lk to customer i is feasible. An extension is feasible if the customer is
not yet visited, it does not present a case of symmetry that is forbidden by the symmetry breaking
rules, and the probabilistic capacity constraint is satisﬁed. The veriﬁcation of the probabilistic
capacity constraint is discussed in Section 5. If feasible, path Lk is extended to customer i, resulting

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
10
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 1
Attributes of a Multi-label L
Attribute
Description
Π
Conﬁguration
φ
Total reduced cost
Ψ
Set of customers visited
πk
k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Starting satellite of path k
nk,
k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Last node visited by path k
φSE
k , k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Total reduced cost of path k
¯µk,
k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Sum of the customer mean demands in path k
¯σ2
k,
k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Sum of the customer demand variances in path k
mk,
k ∈{1,...,|Π|} Number of customers visited in path k
in a new multi-label L ′. To obtain this multi-label, we copy all attributes of multi-label L , since
only the general attributes and the attributes related to path L ′
k require updating:
L ′ = L ,
L ′(φ) = L (φ) + cL (nk),i −λi,
L ′(Ψ) = L (Ψ) ∪{i},
L ′(nk) = i,
L ′(φSE
k ) = L (φSE
k ) + cL (nk),i −λi,
L ′(¯µk) = L (¯µk) + µi,
L ′(¯σ2
k) = L (¯σ2
k) + σ2
i ,
L ′(mk) = L (mk) + 1.
After extending multi-label L to L ′, we transform the partial tour-tree represented by L ′ into a
complete tour-tree, by returning each path to its starting satellite, and evaluate the corresponding
total reduced cost:
φt = L ′(φ) +
|L ′(Π)|
X
k=1
cL ′(nk),L ′(πk) −δ.
(4)
If the total reduced cost is negative, the corresponding tour-tree is added to the master problem.
Symmetry breaking rules. The multi-label algorithm, when left untreated, is likely to produce
a large number of symmetrical tour-trees, e.g. a pair of tour-trees with mirrored SE routes. To
reduce the occurrences of symmetry in the multi-label algorithm, we incorporate several symmetry
breaking rules. In the following, we provide examples of three types of symmetry. After each
example, we introduce a rule to eliminate the possibility of this symmetry occurring. For notational
convenience, we deﬁne α(Lk) and ζ(Lk) to be the ﬁrst and last customer visited in path Lk,
respectively, for k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}. To express the various symmetry breaking rules, we impose

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
11
L1:
L2:
s
1
s
2
Multi-label L
L ′
1:
L ′
2:
s
2
s
1
Multi-label L ′
Figure 2
Two multi-labels containing the same information but in opposite paths.
L1:
L2:
si
1
3
sj
2
4
Multi-label L
L ′
1:
L ′
2:
si
1
3
sj
2
4
Multi-label L ′
Figure 3
Two multi-labels with paths starting from, possibly diﬀerent, satellites si and sj, resulting in the same
multi-label when the dashed extension is performed.
some arbitrary ordering on the elements of C, e.g., by assigning each customer a unique number.
We write i ≺j to denote that customer i precedes customer j in this ordering.
The ﬁrst example is given in Figure 2, where two multi-labels, with paths starting from the same
satellite, are given. In the ﬁrst iteration of the multi-label algorithm, customer 1 is added to L1
and L ′
2. In the second iteration, customer 2 is added to L2 and L ′
1. This results in two multi-labels
containing the same information but in opposite paths. This case of symmetry can be avoided by
enforcing that the ﬁrst customers of paths starting from the same satellite should be in increasing
order. Formally:
Rule 1. If L (πk) = L (πk+1), then α(Lk) ≺α(Lk+1) must hold, for all k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)| −1}.
Symmetry can also be present when adding the kth customer to a path, with k > 1. For example,
in Figure 3, two multi-labels with paths starting from, possibly diﬀerent, satellites si and sj are
given. Before performing the extension indicated by the dashed line, the multi-labels represent
diﬀerent tour-trees. However, identical multi-labels are obtained when adding customer 4 to L2
and customer 3 to L ′
1.
To prevent this symmetry in the multi-labels, we only allow the extension of a path if all subse-
quent paths visit at most one customer. Formally:
Rule 2. Path Lk is only extended if paths Lj visit at most one customer, i.e. L (mj) ≤1, for
all j ∈{k + 1,...,|L (Π)|}.
This rule does not eliminate the possibility of having multi-labels with paths visiting multiple
customers. It only restricts the order in which they are being created, i.e. we obtain a multi-label
with paths visiting multiple customers by ﬁrst extending the ﬁrst path to multiple customers,

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
12
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
L1:
L2:
si
1
2
sj
3
4
Multi-label L
L ′
1:
L ′
2:
si
2
1
sj
3
4
Multi-label L ′
Figure 4
Two multi-labels containing the same customers in the ﬁrst paths, but in opposite order.
then the second path, etc. Once we have extended the second path, Rule 2 does not allow further
extension of the ﬁrst path. However, there will be other multi-labels with the desired extension of
the ﬁrst path. For example, in Figure 3, we cannot perform the extension indicated by the dashed
line of multi-label L ′, but the desired multi-label can be obtained from multi-label L .
The last symmetry rule concerns the orientation of customers in paths that can no longer be
extended. In Figure 4, paths L1 and L ′
1 can no longer be extended once the dashed extensions of
paths L2 and L ′
2 are performed. Both L1 and L ′
1 visit the same sequence of customers, but in the
opposite order, i.e., they represent the same SE route.
In general, if a path (s,n0,...,nm), with s ∈S, m > 0 and ni ∈C for i ∈{0,...,m}, is feasible,
then the reverse path, (s,nm,...,n0), is also feasible, therefore both paths will be constructed. To
eliminate this symmetry, we only allow the addition of the k-th customer, k > 1, to a path if for all
preceding paths it holds that the ﬁrst and last customers are visited in increasing order. Formally:
Rule 3. Path Lk is only extended if α(Lj) ≺ζ(Lj) for all j ∈{1,...,k −1}.
4.3.
Two-Echelon One-Path Algorithm
To establish a benchmark for the multi-label algorithm, we develop an alternative pricing algorithm
where the SE routes are built sequentially. We refer to this alternative approach as the Two-
Echelon One Path (2E-1P) algorithm. The 2E-1P algorithm is inspired by one of the algorithms
proposed by Dellaert et al. (2019). In contrast to the multi-label algorithm (Section 4.2), which
generates elementary paths where customers can only be visited once, in the 2E-1P algorithm we
relax this requirement and allow ng-paths (Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti 2011) instead. In an
ng-path, customer i ∈C can be revisited if, between this visit and the previous visit to customer i,
a customer j ∈C is visited for which it holds that i is not in the neighborhood Nj of j, where Nj
consists of the k nearest customers to customer j, 0 ≤k ≤|C|. In this way, cycles contain customers
that are far away from each other. The customers to which the current label cannot be extended
without violating the ng-restriction are stored in an ng-set. An overview of the attributes of a label
L in the 2E-1P algorithm is given in Table 2.
In each iteration of the 2E-1P algorithm, we randomly select the next label L to be extended
and iteratively consider a node i ∈V for extension. Let Fj denote the cumulative density function

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
13
Table 2
Components of Label L in the 2E-1P Algorithm
Notation Description
d
Starting depot of the tour-tree
s
Last visited satellite
n
Last visited node
p
Second to last visited node
Γ
ng-set
U
Set of usable satellites
φ
Total reduced cost
r
Number of ﬁnished SE routes
¯µ
Sum of customer mean demands in current SE route
¯σ2
Sum of customer demand variances in current SE route
F
Cumulative joint density function of the customer demands in current SE route
(CDF) of customer demand ξj, j ∈C, and (L(F) ∗Fj) the CDF that we obtain after convoluting
L(F) with Fj. An extension is feasible if one of the following three conditions holds:
(1)
i ∈C ∧(L(F) ∗Fi)(QSE) ≥η ∧i /∈L(Γ) ∧{L(n) ∈C ∨{L(n) ∈S ∧L(p) ∈S ∪D}},
(2)
i ∈S ∧{L(n) ∈D ∨{L(n) ∈C ∧L(s) = i} ∨{L(n) ∈S ∧L(p) ∈C ∧i ∈L(U)}},
(3)
i ∈D ∧L(d) = i ∧{L(n) ∈S ∧L(p) ∈C}.
If feasible, label L is extended to node i, resulting in a new label L′. The updated attributes of
label L′ are obtained as follows:
L′(d) =L(d),
L′(s) =
(
i,
if i ∈S,
L(s),
otherwise,
L′(n) =i,
L′(p) =L(n),
L′(Γ) =
(
(L(Γ) ∩Ni) ∪{i},
if i ∈C,
L(Γ),
otherwise,
L′(U) =
(
L(U) \ {L(s)},
if i ∈S,L(s) ̸= i,
L(U),
otherwise,
L′(φ) =
(
L(φ) + cL(n),i −λi, if i ∈C,
L(φ) + cL(n),i,
otherwise,
L′(r) =
(
L(r) + 1,
if i ∈S,L(n) ∈C,
L(r),
otherwise,
L′(¯µ) =
(
L(¯µ) + µi,
if i ∈C,
0,
otherwise,
L′(¯σ2) =
(
L(¯σ2) + σ2
i ,
if i ∈C,
0,
otherwise,

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
14
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
L′(F) =





undeﬁned,
if i ∈D ∪S,
Fi,
if i ∈C and L(n) ∈S,
L(F) ∗Fi,
otherwise.
Note that the convolution of two CDFs is only possible with independent demand distributions.
As a result, the 2E-1P algorithm can only be applied to instances with independent demand
distributions.
To reduce the number of labels created in each iteration of the labeling procedure, we apply the
following dominance rule:
Definition 5 (Exact dominance). Label L1 dominates label L2 if and only if
(i) L1(d) = L2(d),
(ii) L1(s) = L2(s),
(iii) L1(n) = L2(n),
(iv) L1(Γ) ⊆L2(Γ),
(v) L2(U) ⊆L1(U),
(vi) L1(φ) ≤L2(φ),
(vii) L1(r) ≤L2(r),
(viii) L1(F(x)) ≤L2(F(x))
∀x ∈{0,...,QSE},
where one of the requirements (iv)-(viii) has to hold strictly.
Deﬁnition 5 states that if L1 and L2 represent two partial tour-trees with the same last visited
node, extending L1 should always result in a tour-tree with lower or equal reduced cost. Conditions
(i) - (iii) ensure that both labels start from the same depot and have the same last visited satellite
and customer. Condition (iv) requires that the set of customers to which L1 cannot be extended
is a subset of the set of customers to which L2 cannot be extended. Condition (v) ensures that
the set of satellites that can be visited from L1 contains the satellites that can be visited from L2.
Condition (vi) assures that L1 has a smaller or equal reduced cost than L2. Condition (vii) requires
that L1 contains at most the same number of SE routes as L2, which, given the assumption that SE
vehicles leave the satellites with full capacity, is a suﬃcient condition on the FE vehicle capacity.
Finally, Condition (viii) ensures that the CDF of L1 has a lower or equal value than the CDF of
L2 for all values of x ∈{0,...,QSE}.
Comparing CDFs for all x ∈{0,...,QSE} is a costly operation. Therefore, we also consider a
heuristic dominance rule, where instead of enforcing Condition (viii), we enforce Conditions (ix)-
(x). Formally:
Definition 6 (Heuristic dominance). Label L1 dominates label L2 if
(i) - (vii),
(ix) L1(¯µ) ≤L2(¯µ),

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
15
(x) L1(¯σ2) ≤L2(¯σ2),
where one of the requirements (iv) - (vii), (ix) - (x) has to hold strictly.
When searching for new columns, we ﬁrst consider the heuristic dominance rule, which is easier to
evaluate, but also more aggressive, than the exact dominance rule. As a consequence, it sometimes
falsely claims that one label dominates another label. Therefore, if no columns with negative
reduced cost are found when solving the pricing problem with the heuristic dominance rule in the
2E-1P algorithm, we solve the pricing problem again using the exact dominance rule in the labeling
algorithm.
Acceleration technique for checking dominance. To enable faster processing of the exact
and heuristic dominance rules, we group the labels on the last node visited and ng-set. In each
iteration of the labeling procedure, we start with processing dominance among the labels to be
extended. First, we perform dominance checks within ng-sets, that is, we iterate over all labels
with the same last node visited and the same ng-set and process dominance. Next, we check for
dominance among ng-sets by comparing all labels with last node n ∈S ∪C and ng-set Γ to labels
with last node n and ng-set Γ′ such that Γ′ ⊂Γ.
4.4.
Completion Bounds
In both pricing algorithms, we control the growth of the labels by computing a lower bound on the
reduced cost that can be obtained when considering all possible extensions from a label (completion
bound). If this bound is non-negative, the label can be safely discarded. We consider completion
bounds based on the resource-constrained shortest path (RCSP; Feillet et al. 2004). Let ψ(i,j,q)
be the value of the resource-constrained shortest path in graph G = (V,E) from node i to node j
with a capacity of q, with G as deﬁned in Section 3. The cost of an edge (i,j) ∈E equals:
dij =
(
cij −λj,
if j ∈C,
cij,
otherwise,
(5)
where λj, j ∈C, are the dual values obtained from Constraint (2). Visiting a node i ∈C consumes
µi units of q. In the following, we formulate the completion bounds for the labels in each of the
pricing algorithms.
To derive the completion bound CB(L ) on multi-label L , we ﬁrst compute the RCSP-bound for
each path Lk, k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}. Next, we combine the RCSP-bounds of the paths in a multi-
label to evaluate the completion bound on the multi-label. Speciﬁcally, in (4) we substitute the
costs of ﬁnishing a path with its RCSP-bound to obtain the completion bound on L , that is:
CB(L ) = L (φ) +
|L (Π)|
X
k=1
ψ
 L (nk),L (πk), ¯Q −L (¯µk)

−δ,

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
16
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
where ¯Q is used as the upper bound on the SE vehicle capacity.
Suppose now that path Lk has a positive completion bound, speciﬁcally,
L (φk) + ψ
 L (nk),L (πk), ¯Q −L (¯µk)

> 0,
for some k ∈{1,...,|L (Π)|}. Creating a multi-label without path Lk would result in a multi-label
with lower reduced cost. Therefore, if any of the paths have a positive completion bound, the
multi-label is eliminated. In this way, non-promising multi-labels can be discarded at an early stage
of the pricing algorithm.
The completion bound CB(L) for a label L in the 2E-1P algorithm can be derived in a similar way,
using the remaining FE vehicle capacity rather than the remaining SE vehicle capacity. Through
¯Q and the assumption that each FE route can supply at most θ SE routes, we derive that an FE
vehicle can satisfy a total mean demand of at most θ ¯Q. The completion bound on a label L can
now be computed as follows:
CB(L) = L(φ) + ψ
 L(n),L(d),θ · ¯Q −L(r) · ¯Q −L(¯µ)

−δ.
Each time the pricing algorithm is invoked, we pre-compute the RCSP-bounds for every i ∈C,
j ∈S, and q ∈{0,..., ¯Q} in case of the multi-label algorithm, and for every i ∈S ∪C, j ∈D and
q ∈{0,...,θ ¯Q} in case of the 2E-1P algorithm. In this way, the RCSP bounds can be retrieved in
constant time during the labeling procedures.
5.
Evaluating Probabilistic Capacity Constraints
Whenever we extend an SE route to another customer, we assess whether the resulting partial SE
route satisﬁes the probabilistic capacity constraint (Constraint (1)). We consider two methods for
verifying feasibility. The ﬁrst one is by convolution of the probability distributions of the customers
visited in an SE route and verifying feasibility from the convoluted distribution (Section 5.1).
Alternatively, instead of computing this probability exactly, we could also approximate it with
statistical inference tests (Section 5.2). The beneﬁt of using statistical inference, over convoluting
the distributions, is that (in)feasibility can be conﬁrmed much faster if a customer combination
is clearly (in)feasible. Nevertheless, even with statistical inference, checking feasibility remains a
costly operation, thus, from a computational point of view, it should be done as infrequent as
possible. For this purpose, we introduce the notion of feasibility bounds in Section 5.3.
5.1.
Convolutions of Probability Distributions
When the customer demands are independent random variables, their corresponding probability
distributions can be convoluted to obtain a probability distribution of the sum of the original

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
17
random variables. In general, if we have random non-negative integer variables X and Y , the
distribution of the sum Z = X + Y can be obtained by:
P(Z = z) =
z
X
k=0
P(x = k)P(y = z −k).
Let C′ ⊂C denote the set of customers in some (partial) SE route for which we want to verify
feasibility. We convolute the demand distributions of the customers in C′ iteratively, from 0 to
QSE, since the focus is on computing the probability that the total demand of the customers does
not exceed the SE vehicle capacity (feasibility probability). The complexity of this algorithm is
O(|C′| · (QSE)
2), thus linear in the number of customers in C′.
5.2.
Statistical Inference with Monte Carlo Sampling
In statistical inference, scenario generation is used to estimate the probability ˆη that the total
demand of the customers in an SE route does not exceed the SE vehicle capacity. The method
consists of iteratively generating a set of scenarios and computing a conﬁdence interval [a,b] around
the feasibility probability, i.e., a ≤ˆη ≤b (Florio et al. 2021). We use the Agresti-Coull interval to
estimate this interval (Brown, Cai, and DasGupta 2001).
We consider ﬁve standard deviations when deﬁning the interval, which translates to a probability
of 0.9999994 that the interval contains ˆη. If η < a (η > b), we conclude that the route is feasible
(infeasible). If η ∈[a,b], no conclusions can be drawn and additional scenarios must be generated
to further decrease the size of the [a,b] interval. Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure.
Algorithm 1 Statistical Inference with Monte Carlo Sampling
Input: set of customers C′, a limit on the maximum number of scenario evaluations N
x ←0
▷Number of feasible scenarios
for n = 1 to N do
[d]i∈C′ ←randomly generated demand vector
if P
i∈C′ di ≤QSE then
x ←x + 1
[a,b] ←Agresti-Coull(x,n)
▷Estimate interval [a,b] such that P
 P
i∈C′ ξi ≤QSE
∈[a,b]
if η < a then return True
else if η > b then return False
return inconclusive
▷Not possible to infer feasibility after N scenario evaluations
Occasionally, it happens that Algorithm 1 terminates with an inconclusive result. Although it is
possible to continue the algorithm for larger values of N, we apply the following two-phase procedure

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
18
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
for checking feasibility. First, we consider the statistical inference test with Monte Carlo sampling.
If this returns inconclusive, the action to be taken depends on the demand distributions of the
customers. In the case of independent demand distributions, we convolute the demand distributions
as explained in Section 5.1 to compute the exact value of ˆη. Otherwise, we resort to computing
the single point estimate (SPE) ˆη = x/N as our best guess for ˆη, possibly leading to incorrect
classiﬁcation of (in)feasibility. However, if so, the value will be close to η and its impact on the
solution quality will be negligible.
5.3.
Feasibility Bounds
Regardless of the method, verifying compliance with Constraint (1) is computationally costly.
To improve the eﬃciency of feasibility checks, we introduce the idea of feasibility bounds, which
enable us to assert compliance with the probabilistic capacity constraint in constant time for most
customer combinations. For brevity, we deﬁne µ(C′) = P
i∈C′ µi to be the total expected demand of
the customers in C′ ⊂C. First, we compute lower and upper bounds, µ and ¯µ, expressed in terms
of the expected customer demand. For µ it must hold that Constraint (1) is satisﬁed for all C′ ⊂C
with µ(C′) < µ. Similarly, for ¯µ it must hold that Constraint (1) is violated for all C′ ⊂C with
µ(C′) > ¯µ. Then, whenever we need to assert whether a set of customers C′ in some (partial) route
satisﬁes the chance constraint, we can simply conduct a comparison against the two feasibility
bounds as follows. If µ(C′) < µ, it is guaranteed that the set of customers C′ satisﬁes Constraint
(1). Similarly, if µ(C′) > ¯µ, the probability that the total demand of the customers in C′ is larger
than the vehicle capacity QSE exceeds η, resulting in a violation of Constraint (1). Finally, only
in the event that µ ≤µ(C′) ≤¯µ, compliance with the chance constraint must be veriﬁed with the
two-phase procedure explained in Section 5.2.
To obtain the value for the lower bound µ, starting with µ∗= 0, we search for a customer
combination C′ with µ(C′) = µ∗that violates the chance constraint. If no such combination exists,
we increase µ∗by one and continue to do so until we reach a value µ∗for which there exists an
infeasible customer combination C′ with µ(C′) = µ∗. We set the lower bound µ = µ∗. Next, we
initialize µ∗with the total mean demand of the customers in the instance, and decrease µ∗until we
obtain a value µ∗for which there exists a customer combination C′, µ(C′) = µ∗, that satisﬁes the
chance constraint, and set the upper bound ¯µ = µ∗. This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2.
The problem of identifying (in)feasible customer combinations for a given value of µ∗(Lines 4
and 9 in Algorithm 2) can be formulated as an integer programming problem. Let Ωbe a set of
scenarios with demand realization ξω
i for customer i ∈C in scenario ω ∈Ω. Let xi be a binary
decision variable that takes the value 1 if customer i ∈C is selected. Binary decision variables yω
are set to 1 if the selected customers violate the vehicle capacity QSE in scenario ω ∈Ω, and 0

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
19
Algorithm 2 Feasibility Bounds on the Expected Customer Demand
1: Input: Set of customers C
2: µ∗, µ, ¯µ = 0, -1, -1
3: while µ = −1 do
▷Obtain lower bound µ
4:
if findInfeasibleCC(µ∗) then
5:
µ = µ∗
6:
µ∗= µ∗+ 1
7: µ∗= P
i∈C µi
8: while ¯µ = −1 do
▷Obtain upper bound ¯µ
9:
if findFeasibleCC(µ∗) then
10:
¯µ = µ∗
11:
µ∗= µ∗−1
otherwise. The following model is used to determine whether there exists an infeasible customer
combination C∗⊂C with µ(C∗) = µ∗:
minimize
1 −1
|Ω|
X
ω∈Ω
yω,
subject to
X
i∈C
ξω
i xi ≥QSE −M(1 −yω),
ω ∈Ω,
(6)
X
i∈C
µixi = µ∗,
(7)
xi ∈{0,1},
i ∈C,
(8)
yω ∈{0,1},
ω ∈Ω.
(9)
The objective is to minimize the SPE of the feasibility probability over all customer combinations
C∗⊂C with µ(C∗) = µ∗. If the objective value is smaller than η, there exists a combination C∗
with µ(C∗) = µ∗that violates the chance constraint. Constraints (6) link the xc and yω variables.
If the total demand of the selected customers in scenario ω ∈Ωexceeds the vehicle capacity, yω is
set to 1. Constraint (7) restricts the combinations of customers C∗to those for which µ(C∗) = µ∗
holds. Constraints (8) - (9) set the domains of the decision variables.
Similarly, we use the following model to determine whether there exists a customer combination
C∗⊂C with µ(C∗) = µ∗that satisﬁes Constraint (1):
maximize
1 −1
|Ω|
X
ω∈Ω
yω,
subject to
X
i∈C
ξω
c xi ≤QSE + Myω,
ω ∈Ω,
(7) −(9).

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
20
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
If the objective value is larger than η, there exists a customer combination that satisﬁes the chance
constraint.
When solving the integer programming formulations with a standard solver, it is no longer
possible to invoke any of the feasibility tests described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. Additionally, the
size of Ωhas a direct impact on the preciseness of the SPE. Therefore, instead of solving this
formulation, we proceed with an eﬃcient search technique that enables us to use the feasibility
tests.
For a given value of µ∗, we retrieve all customer combinations C∗with µ(C∗) = µ∗by solv-
ing a perfect subset sum problem with dynamic programming and store the obtained customer
combinations in set ˜C. Next, we iterate over the customer combinations in ˜C and invoke the
two-phase procedure to verify compliance with Constraint (1) (Section 5.2). When searching for
a(n) (in)feasible customer combination in ˜C, we terminate the search once we identify such a
combination and omit evaluating any remaining customer combination in ˜C.
Thus far, we discussed bounds expressed in terms of the expected customer demand. With these
bounds, we reduce the set of customer combinations for which the probabilistic capacity constraint
needs to be veriﬁed to customer combinations C′ ⊂C with µ ≤µ(C′) ≤¯µ. Further reduction of the
size of this set is achieved by imposing additional bounds expressed in terms of the total variance
of customer demands. For brevity, we deﬁne σ2(C′) = P
i∈C′ σ2
i to be the total variance of the
demands of the customers in C′ ⊂C. For each value µ ∈{µ,..., ¯µ}, we derive lower and upper
bounds, σ2(µ) and ¯σ2(µ), in a similar way as the bounds on the total expected customer demand.
For a given value of µ, we set σ2(µ) to the lowest value of σ2∗for which there exists an infeasible
customer combination C′ with µ(C′) = µ and σ2(C′) = σ2∗. Similarly, ¯σ2(µ) is set to the highest
value of σ2∗for which there exists a customer combination C′, with µ(C′) = µ and σ2(C′) = σ2∗,
that satisﬁes the chance constraint. The procedure is summarized in Appendix A.
The feasibility bounds are computed during a pre-processing phase, prior to the start of the col-
umn generation procedure. The value of the upper bound on the total expected customer demand
discussed in Section 3 is set to the upper feasibility bound on the mean customer demand, ¯Q = ¯µ.
The feasibility bounds do not require any assumption on the demand distributions of the cus-
tomers, thus can also be computed on instances with correlated, dependent or data-driven demand
distributions.
6.
Computational Results
We test the algorithms on instances proposed by Dellaert et al. (2019). These instances represent a
circular urban area and are generated for diﬀerent combinations of depots, satellites and customers.
For each combination, we have ﬁve instances. Each instance is named “Cbw-x,y,z” where w, x, y, z

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
21
represent the index, number of depots, number of satellites, and number of customers, respectively.
For example, “Cb2-2,3,30” denotes the second instance generated with two depots, three satellites,
and 30 customers. The instances with 100 customers are reduced to 75 customers by eliminating
the last 25 customers. The expected demand of each customer is equal to the integer demand value
in the original instance. We set the FE and SE capacities to QFE = 150 and QSE = 50.
In Section 6.1, we present the results on instances with independent demand distributions. Cor-
related customer demands are considered in Section 6.2. All experiments are performed on a single
thread of an Intel® Xeon E5-2696 (2.4 GHz) CPU with 18GB of memory. The (R)MP is solved
using IBM® CPLEX® version 12.10. Finally, a time limit of two hours, including pre-processing
time, is imposed on each run of the algorithm.
6.1.
Independent Demands
We consider under-dispersed, neutral, and over-dispersed uncertain demands by iteratively assign-
ing one of the following demand distributions to each customer: binomial with a variance-to-mean
ratio of 0.5; Poisson with a variance-to-mean ratio of 1; or negative binomial with a variance-to-
mean ratio of 1.5, 2 or 3.
When verifying the chance constraint, we ﬁrst consider statistical inference (Section 5.2) with a
maximum of N = 10,000 scenarios, since, for many customer combinations, performing statistical
inference is much quicker than using the convolution procedure outlined in Section 5.1. For rela-
tively few customer combinations the statistical inference test returns inconclusive (< 0.05% of the
cases, on average), and we resort to convoluting the customer demand distributions instead.
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. In Section 6.1.1, we compare the per-
formances of both labeling procedures. In Section 6.1.2, we analyze the impact of the feasibility
bounds on the runtime. The characteristics of the solutions are discussed in Section 6.1.3. Finally,
in Section 6.1.4, we consider solving diﬀerent deterministic versions of the problem using the
expected customer demands and show that this always results in worse solutions in terms of cost
and feasibility of SE routes compared to solving the stochastic formulation.
6.1.1.
Performance comparison of multi-label and 2E-1P algorithms. In this section,
we compare the performance of the two labeling procedures. The chance constraint level is set to
η = 0.95. A summary of the results is presented in Table 3, where columns “#”, “Gap”, “Col.”
and “CPU” indicate, respectively, the number of instances that could be solved with the allotted
runtime and memory, the average optimality gap, the average number of columns generated, and
the average runtime in seconds. Recall that once an optimal solution to RMP is obtained, we
compute an upper bound on the MP by solving MP directly with the set of tour-trees generated by
the pricing problem. In terms of lower bounds, the bounds computed with the multi-label algorithm

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
22
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 3
Independent Demands - Summarized Results
Multi-label
Two-Echelon One-Path
Setting
# Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
#
Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
15 customers
(2,3)
5
3.64
427
3
5
4.50
636
4
(3,5)
5
4.70
682
6
5
6.05
960
16
(6,4)
5
3.40
742
3
5
3.61
1112
8
Overall
15
3.91
617
4
15
4.72
903
9
30 customers
(2,3)
5
4.73
1584
43
5
4.39
1805
35
(3,5)
5
2.17
1666
55
5
2.69
2236
44
(6,4)
5
3.65
1649
24
5
3.11
2541
51
Overall
15
3.52
1633
41
15
3.39
2194
43
50 customers
(2,3)
5
2.79
3190
871
5
2.79
3792
339
(3,5)
5
4.19
3194
626
5
3.07
3992
292
(6,4)
5
3.23
3338
205
5
3.2
4702
232
Overall
15
3.40
3241
567
15
3.02
4162
288
75 customers
(2,3)
0
-
-
-
4
2.30
5433
1778
(3,5)
4
2.92a
6322
2889
4
2.66
6204
1741
(6,4)
3
2.54a
6765
1396
4
2.31
7432
1970
Overall
7
2.76a
6512
2249
12
2.43
6356
1830
a Average is taken over the solved instances
are at least as strong as the bounds computed with 2E-1P algorithm, since the former algorithm
computes elementary routes, whereas the latter algorithm produces ng-routes. When computing
optimality gaps, we compare the upper bounds to the best lower bound. Detailed results on a
per-instance basis can be found in Appendix B.
Using the multi-label algorithm, we solve the RMP to optimality for 52 out of the 60 instances.
The remaining eight instances ran out of memory. Stronger completion bounds are required to
solve these instances. With the 2E-1P algorithm, we obtain optimal solutions to the RMP on 57
instances. The remaining two instances ran out of time. The 2E-1P algorithm returns lower bounds
that are, on average, 1.2% weaker than the lower bounds returned by the multi-label algorithm.
Figure 5 shows the optimality gaps computed with both labeling procedures. The x and y
coordinates of a data-point in the graph equal, respectively, the optimality gaps obtained with the
multi-label and 2E-1P algorithms on a unique instance. When both procedures return the same
gap, the corresponding data-point is plotted on the diagonal line. If a point falls above (below) the
diagonal, a smaller optimality gap is obtained with the multi-label algorithm (2E-1P algorithm).
The graph shows that optimality gaps between 0 and 11% are obtained. Moreover, none of the
algorithms are better for a particular instance size. Finally, regardless of the labeling procedure,
the average optimality gap is less than 4%.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
23
0
2
4
6
8
10
Multi-label
0
2
4
6
8
10
Two-Echelon One-Path
15 customers
30 customers
50 customers
75 customers
Figure 5
Comparison of optimality gaps
Table 4
Runtime (in seconds) of Multi-label Algorithm
with(out) Feasibility Bounds (FB)
|C|
Without FB
With FB
Speed up factorb
15
3.5
3.7
0.89
30
54.1
40.8
1.33
50
938.7
576.2
1.57
75a
4287.7
2248.8
1.87
a Average taken over the instances on which we obtain
optimal solutions to the RMP, b Average over the speed
up factors per instance.
On average, the multi-label algorithm requires shorter computation times on instances with 15
and 30 customers. As the number of customers in the instance grows, it becomes more important
to eﬃciently control the growth of the labels at an early stage of the labeling algorithm, which is
achieved with dominance rules.
6.1.2.
Impact of the feasibility bounds. We compute feasibility bounds in terms of the
total mean and variance of the customer demands to reduce the computation time spent on verifying
the probabilistic capacity constraint during the labeling algorithms. In this section, we study the
impact of the feasibility bounds by comparing the runtimes required to solve the RMP with the
multi-label algorithm and with or without the feasibility bounds. In the latter case, we derive the
feasibility bounds to obtain a value for ¯Q, but do not use the feasibility bounds when verifying the
chance constraint. In this way, the same truncated vehicle capacity ¯Q is used for the computation
of the completion bound in both algorithms and the diﬀerence in the runtimes can be attributed
to the additional time spent on verifying the probabilistic capacity constraint. Table 4 shows the
corresponding runtimes, averaged over the diﬀerent instance sizes. It can be observed that the
impact of the feasibility bounds on the runtime increases with the number of customers in the
instance.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
24
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 5
Structural Characteristics of 2E-VRPSD Solutions
|C| = 15
|C| = 30
|C| = 50
|C| = 75
# tour-trees
2.9
4.9
7.5
11.4
# SE routes
7.3
13.5
21.8
32.6
# SE routes in a tour-tree
2.5
2.8
2.9
2.9
# customers in a tour-tree
5.3
6.2
6.7
6.6
# customers in an SE route
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.3
Table 6
Number of Depots and Satellites Used in the Solution
|C| = 15
|C| = 30
|C| = 50
|C| = 75
(2,3)a
(3,5)a
(6,4)a
(2,3)
(3,5)
(6,4)
(2,3)
(3,5)
(6,4)
(2,3)
(3,5)
(6,4)
Number of depots
1.8
2.2
2.8
1.8
3.0
3.8
2.0
2.8
3.8
2.0
3.0
3.3
Number of satellites
2.2
2.6
3.0
2.4
4.6
3.8
3.0
5.0
3.8
3.0
5.0
4.0
a Number of depots and satellites available
6.1.3.
Characteristics of 2E-VRPSD solutions. Table 5 provides an overview of charac-
teristics of the 2E-VRPSD solutions, where the averages are computed for each instance size. We
report the average number of tour-trees (FE routes), number of SE routes, number of SE routes
in a tour-tree, number of customers in a tour-tree, and number of customers in an SE route. Both
the average number of tour-trees and the average number of SE routes increase proportionally to
the number of customers in the instance.
The average number of depots and satellites used in the solution are given in Table 6 for diﬀerent
combinations of depots, satellites and customers. The number of satellites used increases with the
number of customers in the instances. For the instances with 75 customers, it holds that all satellites
are used. The additional satellites that are included in the solutions to the larger instances might
require visits from FE vehicles starting from diﬀerent, additional, depots than those already used
in the solutions to the smaller instances, explaining the corresponding increase in the number of
depots used.
6.1.4.
Value of the stochastic formulation. As an alternative to solving the 2E-VRPSD,
one could solve a simpler, non-stochastic version of the problem using expected customer demands.
To try to achieve some level of protection against exceeding the vehicle capacity, some portion
of the SE vehicle capacity can be reserved to serve as a safety buﬀer. More precisely, instead of
solving 2E-VRPSD with Constraint (1), we could solve the problem with the following modiﬁed
capacity constraint:
X
i∈C′
µi ≤QSE −s,
(10)
where parameter s, 0 ≤s < QSE, determines the amount of SE vehicle capacity to reserve. We refer
to this version of the problem as the truncated expected value problem (TEVP). Clearly, larger

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
25
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Average infeasibility probability
800
850
900
950
1000
Average objective value
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
Truncated second-echelon vehicle capacity
Chance constraint level
Figure 6
Pareto frontiers showing the value of the stochastic formulation
values of s lower the probability of exceeding the vehicle capacity, but at the same time increase
the number of SE routes in a solution since fewer customers can be serviced in the same route.
In Figure 6, we compare TEVP with our stochastic version of the problem to demonstrate the
value of the stochastic formulation. In this experiment, we solve all problem instances with 30
and 50 customers, with both formulations for diﬀerent values of η and s, using the multi-label
algorithm. For each SE route in the solution corresponding to the upper bound, we compute the
probability that the total demand of the customers in the SE route exceeds the vehicle capacity
(infeasibility probability) through convoluting the customer demand distributions (Section 5.1).
For given values of s or η, we plot the average route infeasibility (averaged over all routes in all
solutions) against the average solution value.
As can be observed from Figure 6, when we reserve 10 units of capacity (s = 10, bottom right
blue data-point), the probability of having insuﬃcient vehicle capacity exceeds 5%; when 40% of
the vehicle capacity is reserved (s = 20, top left blue data-point), the probability of exceeding the
vehicle capacity drops to about 0.3%. In contrast, a similar level of protection is achieved with the
stochastic formulation for η = 0.99, but at 4.96% lower cost on average. In fact, it can be observed
that the entire chance constraint frontier is below the TEVP frontier for reasonable values of η
and s, conﬁrming the superiority of the stochastic formulation over TEVP.
6.2.
Correlated Demands
Thus far, only problem instances with independent customer demands are considered. In practice,
however, customer demands are often correlated, due to a wide range of external factors that
may induce correlations, such as weather, events, and sales (Gendreau, Jabali, and Rei 2016). In

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
26
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 7
Mixed Correlation
Group A Group B
Group A
positive
negative
Group B
negative
positive
this section, we consider the same instances as described earlier, and only change the demand
distributions for the customers. We investigate the impact of demand correlations on our solution
approaches and the 2E-VRPSD solutions. In particular, when demands are positively correlated,
we anticipate that the number of SE routes required will increase, since fewer customers can be
combined in the same SE route without violating the probabilistic capacity constraint. Conversely,
we expect denser SE routes in the solutions on the instances with negatively correlated demands.
When including customers in a route that are negatively correlated, the variance of the total
demand of the customers in the route decreases. This creates room for cost-eﬀective routes visiting
more customers or customers with a higher total expected customer demand than allowed if no
correlation was present, without violating the chance constraint.
We examine two levels of correlation: weak (ρ = 0.3) and strong (ρ = 0.7) and two types of
correlation: positive and mixed. The generation of mixed correlation requires the partition of the
customers into two groups. Table 7 shows that mixed correlation implies that the demand of a
customer is positively correlated with the demand of customers in the same group, and negatively
correlated with the demand of customers in the other group. An example of the diﬀerent correlations
in an instance with 30 customers is given in Figure 7.
The two-phase procedure introduced in Section 5.2 is used to determine whether an SE route
meets the probabilistic capacity constraint. Both phases require the generation of demand scenar-
ios where customer demands are randomly sampled from their underlying demand distributions.
For the experiments involving customers with correlated demand, instead of explicitly deﬁning
correlated demand distributions per customer, we bypass this step and directly generate correlated
demand scenarios using the procedure outlined below.
For each customer i ∈C, we generate Poisson distributed demand scenarios and apply a multi-
plicative transformation to obtain correlated demand scenarios. Let dω
i be the Poisson generated
demand realization of customer i ∈C in scenario ω. Let αω be the correlation parameter in sce-
nario ω, which is uniformly distributed on the interval [a,b], with [a,b] = [0.7,1.3] if ρ = 0.3, and
[a,b] = [0.2,1.8] if ρ = 0.7. The positively correlated demand scenarios are generated as follows:
ξω
i = αω · dω
i .
(11)
In the case of mixed correlation, we use Equation (11) to generate the demands of the customers
in group A and Equation (12) to generate the demands of the customers in group B:
ξω
i = ((1 −αω) + 1) · dω
i .
(12)

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
27
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
Positive correlations
Weak correlation ( =0.3)
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
Strong correlation ( =0.7)
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
Mixed correlations
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Figure 7
Pearson correlation coeﬃcients between each pair of customers obtained on one instance for the
diﬀerent settings
Table 8
Correlated Demand - Summarized Results
Percentage change relative to the independent case
Correlated setting Objective value
Number of SE routes
CPU (s)
Positive
ρ = 0.3
9.41
12.51
-28.94
ρ = 0.7
41.82
55.78
-54.83
Mixed
ρ = 0.3
2.90
2.21
-8.47
ρ = 0.7
10.78
9.86
16.03
As stated in Section 4.3, the dominance rules in the 2E-1P algorithm are only valid for inde-
pendent demand distributions. Therefore, in the remainder of this section, we only consider the
multi-label algorithm when solving the instances with correlated demand.
In Table 8, we compare the results obtained with the diﬀerent correlations to the results obtained
on instances with independent Poisson distributed demands (independent case). We report the
average increase in objective value (percentage), average increase in the number of SE routes
(percentage), and average change in runtime (percentage). The averages are computed over the
instances with 30 and 50 customers. Detailed results on a per-instance basis can be found in
Appendix C.
On average, higher objective values are observed for all four correlation categories. A similar
increase can be witnessed in the number of SE routes needed. Comparing the diﬀerent correlations,

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
28
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 9
Correlated Demand - SE Route Information
No correlation
Positive correlation
Mixed correlation
ρ = 0
ρ = 0.3
ρ = 0.7
ρ = 0.3
ρ = 0.7
Average percentage of mixed SE routes
65.38
59.04
48.51
79.68
93.28
Average number of customers in an SE route
2.47
2.22
1.57
2.42
2.25
we conclude that about the same increase in the objective value and number of SE routes is
obtained with weak positively correlated demands and strong mixed correlated demands. Finally,
with mixed correlation, the number of feasible customer combinations increases, leading to more
possibilities in the labeling algorithm, which explains the longer runtimes.
As a ﬁnal experiment, to investigate our earlier expectation that with mixed correlation we
have denser SE routes visiting customers from both groups, we study the characteristics of the SE
routes in the solutions obtained with the diﬀerent settings. Next to deriving the average number
of customers in an SE route, we compute the average percentage of routes containing customers
from both groups (mixed routes) as a percentage of the SE routes visiting more than one customer.
These percentages can also be derived on the instances with positive or no correlation under the
assumption that the groups exist for those instances as well. Table 9 shows the resulting values for
the diﬀerent settings. As expected, with mixed correlation we have a higher percentage of mixed
routes. The average number of customers in an SE route is less with mixed correlation than without
any correlation, but higher when compared to the instances with positive correlation.
7.
Conclusions
Two-echelon distribution systems are often considered in city logistics to maintain economies of
scale and satisfy the cities’ emission zone requirements. In this paper, we formulate the 2E-VRPSD
as a chance-constrained stochastic optimization problem and consider two solution procedures
based on column generation. We propose the multi-label algorithm as a novel labeling algorithm
based on simultaneous labeling of SE routes. Additionally, we implement the Two-Echelon One-
Path algorithm where SE routes are constructed sequentially. We use statistical inference techniques
to speed up feasibility check operations. When these are inconclusive, we consider the convolution
of probability distributions in the case of independent demand distributions and resort to single
point estimates when demands are correlated. To reduce the computational eﬀorts on validating
the chance constraint, we introduce the notion of feasibility bounds and apply them to the sum of
the means and variances of the customer demands.
Computational experiments are performed on instances with independent demand distributions
and on instances with correlated demand distributions. We compute linear bounds on instances
with independent demand distributions and up to 75 customers within a time limit of two hours.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
29
Regardless of the labeling procedure, the average optimality gap is less than 4%. We demonstrate
that solving the 2E-VRPSD always results in better solutions in terms of objective value and
feasibility of SE routes compared to solving the expected value 2E-VRP with some truncated SE
vehicle capacity. For example, we achieve a similar protection level at 4.96% lower cost on average if
we solve the 2E-VRPSD with a chance constraint level of η = 0.99 instead of the expected value 2E-
VRP with 60% of the original SE vehicle capacity. Finally, we show that with the use of feasibility
bounds, the labeling algorithms’ runtimes are reduced signiﬁcantly.
We demonstrate that the multi-label algorithm and feasibility bounds can also be used to solve
instances with correlated demand distributions. Next to solving instances with positively correlated
demands, we also consider instances with positively and negatively correlated demands. The latter
set of instances shows that up to 93% of the SE routes include customers with negatively correlated
demands. This is not surprising because, by including customers in a negatively correlated route,
the variance of the total demand of the customers in a route decreases, creating room for additional
customers or allowing customer combinations with a higher total expected mean compared to the
case without correlation.
Future research on the chance-constrained two-echelon vehicle routing problem with stochastic
demands is recommended to relax the assumption that an SE vehicle leaves a satellite with full
capacity. In this paper, we applied the feasibility bounds to stochastic demands. Further imple-
mentation of the feasibility bounds to other uncertain parameters is another promising research
direction.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by The Dutch Research Council (NWO) DAREFUL project under grant 629.002.211
and carried out on the Dutch national e-infrastructure with the support of SURF Cooperative.
Appendix
A.
Feasibility Bounds Expressed in Terms of the Total Variance of the Customer
Demands
Algorithm 3 summarizes the procedure of obtaining values for the feasibility bounds expressed in terms of
the total variance of customer demands.
B.
Independent Demand - Detailed Results
Tables 10-13 show the solutions derived on all instances. The number of instances that could be solved with
the allotted runtime and memory (#), the lower bound (LB), the upper bound (UB), the average optimality
gap (Gap), the average number of columns generated (Col.) and the average running times in seconds (CPU)
are given. Recall that once an optimal solution to RMP is obtained, we compute an upper bound on the

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
30
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Algorithm 3 Feasibility Bounds on the Variance of the Customer Demands
1: Input: Set ˜C of customer combinations C′ ⊂C satisfying µ(C′) = µ
2: σ2∗, σ2, ¯σ2 = 0, -1, -1
3: while µ = −1 do
▷Obtain lower bound σ2(µ)
4:
if findInfeasibleCCvar(µ, σ2∗) then
5:
σ2 = σ2∗
6:
σ2∗= σ2∗+ 1
7: σ2∗= maxC′∈˜
C
P
i∈C′ σ2
i
8: while ¯σ2 = −1 do
▷Obtain upper bound ¯σ2(µ)
9:
if findFeasibleCCvar(µ∗, σ2∗) then
10:
¯σ2 = σ2∗
11:
σ2∗= σ2∗−1
MP by solving MP directly with the set of tour-trees generated by the pricing problem. In terms of lower
bounds, the bounds derived with the multi-label algorithm are, per deﬁnition, at least as strong as the
bounds derived with 2E-1P algorithm, since the former algorithm computes elementary routes, whereas the
latter algorithm produces ng-routes. When computing optimality gaps, we compare the upper bounds to the
best lower bound, that is, we consider the lower bound returned by the multi-label algorithm if it solved the
RMP to optimality, otherwise, we compute the optimality gap with respect to the lower bound returned by
the 2E-1P algorithm.
C.
Correlated Demand - Detailed Results
Tables 14-15 show the solutions obtained when solving the instances with independent Poisson distributed
demands, positively correlated demand and mixed correlated demand. For each setting and instance, the
lower bound (LB), upper bound (UB), optimality gap in percentages (Gap) and runtime in seconds (CPU)
are given.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
31
Table 10
Independent Demand - 15 Customers
Multi-label
Two-Echelon One-Path
Instances
LB
UB Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
LB
UB
Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
Cb1-2,3,15 458.57 486.66
6.12
604
3
455.46
495.13
7.97
621
3
Cb2-2,3,15 313.67 329.68
5.10
322
2
312.79
337.59
7.63
542
3
Cb3-2,3,15 410.87 422.01
2.71
317
2
410.87
423.80
3.15
641
3
Cb4-2,3,15 401.06 418.10
4.25
436
4
391.27
416.16
3.76
679
6
Cb5-2,3,15 339.45 339.45
0.00
455
2
335.91
339.45
0.00
699
5
Average
3.64
427
3
4.50
636
4
Cb1-3,5,15 363.98 380.51
4.54
663
5
345.00
380.51
4.54
922
8
Cb2-3,5,15 426.28 457.58
7.34
651
5
421.25
471.60
10.63
966
6
Cb3-3,5,15 374.98 381.54
1.75
692
4
369.16
381.54
1.75
800
5
Cb4-3,5,15 315.76 329.64
4.40
709
9
296.68
341.32
8.10
1205
53
Cb5-3,5,15 366.69 386.66
5.45
696
4
358.04
385.94
5.25
907
6
Average
4.70
682
6
6.05
960
16
Cb1-6,4,15 360.75 365.89
1.43
788
3
347.28
365.89
1.43
1082
8
Cb2-6,4,15 416.35 416.35
0.00
719
3
403.44
416.35
0.00
969
4
Cb3-6,4,15 384.37 387.08
0.70
731
3
370.02
388.81
1.15
1164
12
Cb4-6,4,15 317.67 337.14
6.13
701
2
301.04
341.62
7.54
1239
6
Cb5-6,4,15 312.54 339.82
8.73
769
4
306.39
337.31
7.93
1108
9
Average
3.40
742
3
3.61
1112
8
Average
3.91
617
4
4.72
903
9
Table 11
Independent Demand - 30 Customers
Multi-label
Two-Echelon One-Path
Instances
LB
UB Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
LB
UB
Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
Cb1-2,3,30 737.16 766.79
4.02
1678
72
736.29
760.53
3.17
1619
30
Cb2-2,3,30 634.18 667.21
5.21
1489
27
633.85
664.26
4.74
1943
40
Cb3-2,3,30 858.76 879.36
2.40
1741
50
851.27
889.11
3.53
1522
33
Cb4-2,3,30 685.81 700.36
2.12
1479
23
685.66
701.24
2.25
1485
19
Cb5-2,3,30 663.38 729.05
9.90
1534
45
643.46
718.10
8.25
2455
52
Average
4.73
1584
43
4.39
1805
35
Cb1-3,5,30 583.63 602.53
3.24
1310
35
575.67
600.74
2.93
2217
28
Cb2-3,5,30 651.18 657.05
0.90
1728
49
638.84
658.29
1.09
2267
42
Cb3-3,5,30 612.31 630.67
3.00
1666
45
593.61
632.72
3.33
2400
42
Cb4-3,5,30 601.53 623.97
3.73
1941
96
599.90
637.64
6.00
2153
80
Cb5-3,5,30 726.72 726.72
0.00
1683
48
715.24
727.21
0.07
2144
30
Average
2.17
1666
55
2.69
2236
44
Cb1-6,4,30 685.40 700.62
2.22
1545
22
671.60
694.36
1.31
2619
44
Cb2-6,4,30 607.26 619.88
2.08
1735
27
594.90
624.23
2.79
2492
85
Cb3-6,4,30 613.71 643.52
4.86
1625
19
611.41
627.77
2.29
2438
33
Cb4-6,4,30 556.80 573.23
2.95
1565
24
547.47
573.23
2.95
2886
60
Cb5-6,4,30 592.02 628.38
6.14
1774
29
588.92
628.70
6.20
2270
33
Average
3.65
1649
24
3.11
2541
51
Average
3.52
1633
41
3.39
2194
43

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
32
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 12
Independent Demand - 50 Customers
Multi-label
Two-Echelon One-Path
Instances
LB
UB Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
LB
UB
Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
Cb1-2,3,50 1118.91 1142.66
2.12
2704
571
1116.37
1148.87
2.68
3915
169
Cb2-2,3,50 1162.73 1204.72
3.61
3457
2365
1162.73
1203.88
3.54
4346
677
Cb3-2,3,50 1181.54 1213.39
2.70
3493
472
1180.81
1207.49
2.20
3468
257
Cb4-2,3,50 1161.60 1186.72
2.16
3406
561
1160.20
1193.02
2.71
3651
380
Cb5-2,3,50 1045.38 1080.56
3.37
2892
386
1043.71
1075.12
2.85
3580
211
Average
2.79
3190
871
2.79
3792
339
Cb1-3,5,50
943.36
992.68
5.23
3510
1743
938.11
980.70
3.96
4913
485
Cb2-3,5,50
989.95 1019.03
2.94
2892
270
987.24
1012.51
2.28
3927
240
Cb3-3,5,50 1043.17 1059.35
1.55
3483
362
1034.70
1059.27
1.54
3421
104
Cb4-3,5,50
915.57
959.56
4.80
3266
329
908.40
935.37
2.16
3924
142
Cb5-3,5,50
855.88
911.00
6.44
2820
427
848.93
902.03
5.39
3773
492
Average
3.49
3192
749
2.93
3892
315
Cb1-6,4,50
930.40
968.00
4.04
3388
242
930.21
957.87
2.95
5333
236
Cb2-6,4,50 1064.19 1099.09
3.28
3372
208
1059.67
1092.13
2.63
3939
152
Cb3-6,4,50
963.06
970.29
0.75
3940
184
959.74
998.31
3.66
4983
235
Cb4-6,4,50
873.25
902.81
3.39
2872
149
868.74
900.70
3.14
4808
228
Cb5-6,4,50
944.09
988.20
4.67
3116
241
943.88
978.21
3.61
4445
308
Average
3.23
3338
205
3.20
4702
232
Average
3.40
3241
567
3.02
4162
288
Table 13
Independent Demand - 75 Customers
Multi-label
Two-Echelon One-Path
Instances
LB
UB Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
LB
UB
Gap(%)
Col.
CPU(s)
Cb1-2,3,75
-
-
-
-
-
-
1453.36
-
6636
7200
Cb2-2,3,75
-
-
-
-
-
1617.50
1656.35
2.40
5041
2077
Cb3-2,3,75
-
-
-
-
-
1620.37
1644.94
1.52
5929
1205
Cb4-2,3,75
-
-
-
-
-
1827.09
1903.60
4.19
5004
2813
Cb5-2,3,75
-
-
-
-
-
1649.08
1667.11
1.09
5759
1019
Average
-
-
-
2.30
5433
1778
Cb1-3,5,75 1499.90 1573.69
4.92
6043
3372
1493.86
1566.65
4.45
6168
2132
Cb2-3,5,75 1420.05 1470.57
3.56
5678
3521
1418.37
1462.55
2.99
6199
1552
Cb3-3,5,75
-
-
-
-
-
-
1471.92
-
6930
7200
Cb4-3,5,75 1639.09 1662.21
1.41
6422
2396
1634.75
1660.02
1.28
6033
1333
Cb5-3,5,75 1687.13 1717.71
1.81
7147
2267
1687.13
1719.74
1.93
6416
1948
Average
2.92
6322
2889
2.66
6204
1741
Cb1-6,4,75
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Cb2-6,4,75
-
-
-
-
-
1445.72
1503.08
3.97
7278
2315
Cb3-6,4,75 1545.06 1580.49
2.29
6106
1474
1544.13
1558.97
0.90
7509
2591
Cb4-6,4,75 1564.76 1611.71
3.00
6855
1702
1562.19
1608.66
2.81
6729
722
Cb5-6,4,75 1485.96 1520.62
2.33
7335
1011
1485.36
1509.52
1.59
8210
2252
Average
2.54
6765
1396
2.31
7432
1970
Average
2.76
6512
2249
2.43
6356
1830

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
33
Table 14
Correlated Demand - Mixed Correlation
No correlation (ρ = 0)
Positive correlation ρ = 0.3
Positive correlation ρ = 0.7
Instance
LB
UB Gapa
CPUb
LB
UB
Gap
CPU
LB
UB
Gap
CPU
Cb1-2,3,30
686.30
709.98
3.45
23
760.81
768.67
1.03
18
983.01
1006.05
2.34
9
Cb2-2,3,30
619.93
654.05
5.50
28
680.92
703.71
3.35
19
883.49
908.30
2.81
11
Cb3-2,3,30
843.54
862.69
2.27
21
927.91
945.29
1.87
17
1161.97
1171.69
0.84
11
Cb4-2,3,30
654.55
676.43
3.34
21
743.32
755.81
1.68
19
955.21
970.50
1.60
10
Cb5-2,3,30
648.55
655.18
1.02
50
687.89
735.84
6.97
19
873.81
911.14
4.27
12
Cb1-3,5,30
567.63
581.80
2.50
37
613.66
645.22
5.14
36
775.17
807.33
4.15
23
Cb2-3,5,30
627.79
631.89
0.65
47
662.04
662.04
0
43
791.59
816.38
3.13
24
Cb3-3,5,30
579.89
610.23
5.23
45
647.30
653.57
0.97
34
811.81
817.23
0.67
25
Cb4-3,5,30
594.99
627.39
5.45
54
624.35
652.06
4.44
52
806.92
806.92
0
27
Cb5-3,5,30
691.76
694.09
0.34
68
756.53
780.70
3.19
38
971.91
1003.24
3.22
25
Cb1-6,4,30
653.97
662.70
1.34
28
684.03
692.56
1.25
24
881.26
897.00
1.79
13
Cb2-6,4,30
603.46
622.74
3.19
42
620.05
624.13
0.66
23
771.82
808.16
4.71
15
Cb3-6,4,30
582.78
605.82
3.95
27
641.03
647.21
0.96
21
844.11
858.36
1.69
13
Cb4-6,4,30
544.89
557.59
2.33
27
590.02
606.72
2.83
21
740.14
763.79
3.20
13
Cb5-6,4,30
569.39
595.87
4.65
25
619.76
653.53
5.45
31
844.00
848.04
0.48
15
Cb1-2,3,50 1064.64 1118.78
5.09
165
1169.62
1219.78
4.29
90
1559.06
1593.02
2.18
63
Cb2-2,3,50 1099.00 1149.13
4.56
389
1238.41
1295.36
4.60
151
1642.23
1642.23
0
73
Cb3-2,3,50 1087.00 1121.61
3.18
164
1243.58
1273.34
2.39
82
1629.57
1654.47
1.53
59
Cb4-2,3,50 1144.37 1175.38
2.71
206
1236.27
1324.67
7.15
102
1640.62
1655.31
0.90
69
Cb5-2,3,50
989.78 1041.52
5.23
158
1095.37
1132.82
3.42
96
1434.36
1472.34
2.65
65
Cb1-3,5,50
897.94
951.07
5.92
504
1008.64
1029.54
2.07
245
1299.50
1328.75
2.25
180
Cb2-3,5,50
939.12
949.13
1.07
375
1032.29
1063.95
3.07
210
1336.36
1361.81
1.90
152
Cb3-3,5,50
981.64 1036.87
5.63
260
1099.03
1144.10
4.10
216
1481.27
1503.96
1.53
160
Cb4-3,5,50
888.85
922.68
3.81
315
972.34
1016.06
4.50
208
1237.03
1248.66
0.94
147
Cb5-3,5,50
812.21
834.80
2.78
315
896.74
940.72
4.90
287
1175.49
1204.06
2.43
175
Cb1-6,4,50
904.02
937.96
3.75
213
992.68
1029.86
3.75
117
1289.56
1293.56
0.31
84
Cb2-6,4,50 1019.43 1057.57
3.74
119
1123.27
1141.25
1.60
106
1498.71
1499.76
0.07
81
Cb3-6,4,50
928.70
964.47
3.85
202
1023.93
1058.17
3.34
127
1317.85
1340.76
1.74
91
Cb4-6,4,50
812.65
866.18
6.59
186
883.97
948.25
7.27
119
1212.27
1230.52
1.51
84
Cb5-6,4,50
896.63
939.03
4.73
157
980.65
1007.56
2.74
115
1285.30
1310.58
1.97
89
a Gap is given in percentages, b Runtime is given in seconds.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
34
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Table 15
Correlated Demand - No Correlation and Positive Correlation
Mixed correlation (ρ = 0.3)
Mixed correlation ρ = 0.7
Instance
LB
UB
Gapa
CPUb
LB
UB
Gap
CPU
Cb1-2,3,30
706.90
732.85
3.67
20
770.51
798.66
3.65
50
Cb2-2,3,30
627.36
656.51
4.65
20
684.53
705.47
3.06
32
Cb3-2,3,30
870.61
884.51
1.60
18
966.32
966.32
0
20
Cb4-2,3,30
700.07
716.02
2.28
24
767.57
773.63
0.79
19
Cb5-2,3,30
660.65
677.74
2.59
35
701.25
729.54
4.03
35
Cb1-3,5,30
589.63
602.04
2.10
45
633.40
645.42
1.90
44
Cb2-3,5,30
644.12
644.44
0.05
45
674.96
674.96
0
44
Cb3-3,5,30
603.66
631.99
4.69
42
634.78
638.98
0.66
39
Cb4-3,5,30
603.26
632.26
4.81
47
642.41
650.58
1.27
100
Cb5-3,5,30
720.07
720.57
0.07
53
760.82
767.24
0.84
50
Cb1-6,4,30
654.52
662.76
1.26
24
695.69
695.69
0
27
Cb2-6,4,30
605.17
613.23
1.33
31
638.62
655.97
2.72
36
Cb3-6,4,30
618.62
642.73
3.90
25
671.60
683.54
1.78
26
Cb4-6,4,30
546.43
559.44
2.38
22
578.14
594.58
2.84
21
Cb5-6,4,30
571.01
614.50
7.62
24
634.05
657.57
3.71
27
Cb1-2,3,50 1113.29 1144.70
2.82
195
1182.26
1248.56
5.61
417
Cb2-2,3,50 1134.10 1217.06
7.31
351
1224.23
1257.71
2.73
545
Cb3-2,3,50 1124.77 1177.04
4.65
160
1261.79
1279.62
1.41
156
Cb4-2,3,50 1170.18 1199.72
2.52
164
1253.61
1269.41
1.26
267
Cb5-2,3,50 1015.95 1043.14
2.68
122
1078.74
1138.77
5.56
145
Cb1-3,5,50
938.01
981.83
4.67
450
987.03
1041.18
5.49
614
Cb2-3,5,50
983.20 1025.32
4.28
254
1061.51
1095.73
3.22
288
Cb3-3,5,50 1008.79 1047.33
3.82
269
1104.54
1142.00
3.39
344
Cb4-3,5,50
901.76
943.97
4.68
264
967.24
1000.31
3.42
331
Cb5-3,5,50
840.80
887.74
5.58
277
907.18
942.22
3.86
406
Cb1-6,4,50
920.66
932.37
1.27
190
1005.25
1016.42
1.11
238
Cb2-6,4,50 1057.55 1093.42
3.39
146
1144.70
1172.01
2.39
180
Cb3-6,4,50
950.49
988.88
4.04
227
1017.35
1050.01
3.21
190
Cb4-6,4,50
844.40
890.83
5.50
201
903.09
949.74
5.17
193
Cb5-6,4,50
922.57
930.48
0.86
132
1005.89
1018.61
1.26
208
a Gap is given in percentages, b Runtime is given in seconds.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
35
References
Agatz NA, Fleischmann M, Van Nunen JA, 2008 E-fulﬁllment and multi-channel distribution–a review.
European Journal of Operational Research 187(2):339–356.
Anderluh A, Hemmelmayr VC, Nolz PC, 2017 Synchronizing vans and cargo bikes in a city distribution
network. Central European Journal of Operations Research 25(2):345–376.
Anderluh A, Nolz PC, Hemmelmayr VC, Crainic TG, 2021 Multi-objective optimization of a two-echelon
vehicle routing problem with vehicle synchronization and ‘grey zone’ customers arising in urban logistics.
European Journal of Operational Research 289(3):940–958.
Baldacci R, Mingozzi A, Roberti R, 2011 New route relaxation and pricing strategies for the vehicle routing
problem. Operations Research 59(5):1269–1283.
Baldacci R, Mingozzi A, Roberti R, Calvo RW, 2013 An exact algorithm for the two-echelon capacitated
vehicle routing problem. Operations Research 61(2):298–314.
Belgin O, Karaoglan I, Altiparmak F, 2018 Two-echelon vehicle routing problem with simultaneous pickup and
delivery: Mathematical model and heuristic approach. Computers & Industrial Engineering 115:1–16.
Breunig U, Baldacci R, Hartl RF, Vidal T, 2019 The electric two-echelon vehicle routing problem. Computers
& Operations Research 103:198–210.
Breunig U, Schmid V, Hartl RF, Vidal T, 2016 A large neighbourhood based heuristic for two-echelon routing
problems. Computers & Operations Research 76:208–225.
Brown LD, Cai TT, DasGupta A, 2001 Interval estimation for a binomial proportion. Statistical Science
101–117.
Costa L, Contardo C, Desaulniers G, 2019 Exact branch-price-and-cut algorithms for vehicle routing. Trans-
portation Science 53(4):946–985.
Crainic TG, Ricciardi N, Storchi G, 2004 Advanced freight transportation systems for congested urban areas.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 12(2):119–137.
Cuda R, Guastaroba G, Speranza MG, 2015 A survey on two-echelon routing problems. Computers & Oper-
ations Research 55:185–199.
Dellaert N, Dashty Saridarq F, Van Woensel T, Crainic TG, 2019 Branch-and-price–based algorithms for the
two-echelon vehicle routing problem with time windows. Transportation Science 53(2):463–479.
Dellaert N, Van Woensel T, Crainic TG, Saridarq FD, 2021 A multi-commodity two-echelon capacitated
vehicle routing problem with time windows: Model formulations and solution approach. Computers &
Operations Research 127:105154.
Dinh T, Fukasawa R, Luedtke J, 2018 Exact algorithms for the chance-constrained vehicle routing problem.
Mathematical Programming 172(1-2):105–138.
Dror M, Laporte G, Trudeau P, 1989 Vehicle routing with stochastic demands: Properties and solution
frameworks. Transportation Science 23(3):166–176.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
36
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
Enthoven DL, Jargalsaikhan B, Roodbergen KJ, uit het Broek MA, Schrotenboer AH, 2020 The two-echelon
vehicle routing problem with covering options: City logistics with cargo bikes and parcel lockers. Com-
puters & Operations Research 118:104919.
Feillet D, Dejax P, Gendreau M, Gueguen C, 2004 An exact algorithm for the elementary shortest path prob-
lem with resource constraints: Application to some vehicle routing problems. Networks: An International
Journal 44(3):216–229.
Florio AM, Hartl RF, Minner S, 2020 New exact algorithm for the vehicle routing problem with stochastic
demands. Transportation Science 54(4):1073–1090.
Florio AM, Hartl RF, Minner S, Salazar-Gonz´alez JJ, 2021 A branch-and-price algorithm for the vehicle
routing problem with stochastic demands and probabilistic duration constraints. Transportation Science
55(1):122–138.
Gendreau M, Jabali O, Rei W, 2016 50th anniversary invited article—future research directions in stochastic
vehicle routing. Transportation Science 50(4):1163–1173.
Grangier P, Gendreau M, Lehu´ed´e F, Rousseau LM, 2016 An adaptive large neighborhood search for the
two-echelon multiple-trip vehicle routing problem with satellite synchronization. European Journal of
Operational Research 254(1):80–91.
Jacobsen SK, Madsen OB, 1980 A comparative study of heuristics for a two-level routing-location problem.
European Journal of Operational Research 5(6):378–387.
Jie W, Yang J, Zhang M, Huang Y, 2019 The two-echelon capacitated electric vehicle routing problem with
battery swapping stations: Formulation and eﬃcient methodology. European Journal of Operational
Research 272(3):879–904.
Kitjacharoenchai P, Min BC, Lee S, 2020 Two echelon vehicle routing problem with drones in last mile
delivery. International Journal of Production Economics 225:107598.
Li H, Wang H, Chen J, Bai M, 2020 Two-echelon vehicle routing problem with time windows and mobile
satellites. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 138:179–201.
Liu R, Tao Y, Hu Q, Xie X, 2017 Simulation-based optimisation approach for the stochastic two-echelon
logistics problem. International Journal of Production Research 55(1):187–201.
Louveaux FV, Salazar-Gonz´alez JJ, 2018 Exact approach for the vehicle routing problem with stochastic
demands and preventive returns. Transportation Science 52(6):1463–1478.
Lurkin V, Hambuckers J, Van Woensel T, 2021 Urban low emissions zones: A behavioral operations man-
agement perspective. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 144:222–240.
Marques G, Sadykov R, Deschamps JC, Dupas R, 2020 An improved branch-cut-and-price algorithm for the
two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem. Computers & Operations Research 114:104833.

Sluijk, Florio, Kinable, Dellaert, Van Woensel: Column Generation for 2E-VRPSD
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. (Please, provide the manuscript number!)
37
M¨uhlbauer F, Fontaine P, 2021 A parallelised large neighbourhood search heuristic for the asymmetric two-
echelon vehicle routing problem with swap containers for cargo-bicycles. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 289(2):742–757.
Noorizadegan M, Chen B, 2018 Vehicle routing with probabilistic capacity constraints. European Journal of
Operational Research 270(2):544–555.
Oyola J, Arntzen H, WoodruﬀDL, 2017 The stochastic vehicle routing problem, a literature review, part II:
solution methods. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 6(4):349–388.
Oyola J, Arntzen H, WoodruﬀDL, 2018 The stochastic vehicle routing problem, a literature review, part I:
models. EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 7(3):193–221.
Perboli G, Tadei R, Vigo D, 2011 The two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem: models and math-based
heuristics. Transportation Science 45(3):364–380.
Salavati-Khoshghalb M, Gendreau M, Jabali O, Rei W, 2019a An exact algorithm to solve the vehicle routing
problem with stochastic demands under an optimal restocking policy. European Journal of Operational
Research 273(1):175–189.
Salavati-Khoshghalb M, Gendreau M, Jabali O, Rei W, 2019b A rule-based recourse for the vehicle routing
problem with stochastic demands. Transportation Science 53(5):1334–1353.
Secomandi N, Margot F, 2009 Reoptimization approaches for the vehicle-routing problem with stochastic
demands. Operations Research 57(1):214–230.
Statista, 2020 Global retail e-commerce market size 2014-2023. URL https://www.statista.com/
statistics/379046/worldwide-retail-e-commerce-sales/.
TLN, 2021 N´og meer steden maken zero-emissie zone bekend. URL https://www.tln.nl/nieuws/
steeds-meer-steden-maken-zero-emissie-zone-bekend/.
Transport
Environment,
2018
City
bans
are
spreading
in
europe.
URL
https://www.
transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/City%20bans%20are%20spreading%
20in%20Europe_Report.PDF.
Wang K, Lan S, Zhao Y, 2017 A genetic-algorithm-based approach to the two-echelon capacitated vehicle
routing problem with stochastic demands in logistics service. Journal of the Operational Research Society
68(11):1409–1421.
Wang K, Shao Y, Zhou W, 2017 Matheuristic for a two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem with
environmental considerations in city logistics service. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment 57:262–276.
Zeng ZY, Xu WS, Xu ZY, Shao WH, 2014 A hybrid GRASP+VND heuristic for the two-echelon vehicle
routing problem arising in city logistics. Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2014.
Zhou L, Baldacci R, Vigo D, Wang X, 2018 A multi-depot two-echelon vehicle routing problem with delivery
options arising in the last mile distribution. European Journal of Operational Research 265(2):765–778.