TITLE: The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.1208
---

Made available by Hasselt University Library in https://documentserver.uhasselt.be
The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit
Peer-reviewed author version
MOLENBRUCH, Yves; BRAEKERS, Kris; Eisenhandler, Ohad & Kaspi, Mor (2023)
The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit. In: Transportation science, 57
(3), p. 573-837.
DOI: 10.1287/trsc.2023.1208
Handle: http://hdl.handle.net/1942/40136

The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit1 
Yves Molenbruchab, Kris Braekersc, Ohad Eisenhandlerd, Mor Kaspie 
 
a Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), Brussels, Belgium 
b Mobility, Logistics and Automotive Technology Research Centre (MOBI), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 
Brussels, Belgium 
c Research Group Logistics, UHasselt вҖ“ Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium 
d Department of Industrial Engineering, Afeka College of Engineering, Tel Aviv, Israel 
e Department of Industrial Engineering, Iby and Aladar Fleischman Faculty of Engineering, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
 
 
Abstract: 
Shared mobility services involving electric autonomous shuttles have increasingly been implemented in 
recent years. Due to various restrictions, these services are currently offered on fixed circuits and operated 
with fixed schedules. This study introduces a service variant with flexible stopping patterns and schedules. 
Specifically, in the Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit (eDARP-FC), a fleet of capacitated 
electric shuttles operates on a given circuit, consisting of a recharging depot and a sequence of stations 
where passengers can be picked-up and dropped-off. The shuttles may perform multiple laps between which 
they may need to recharge. The goal of the problem is to determine the vehiclesвҖҷ stopping sequences and 
schedules, including recharging plans, so as to minimize a weighted sum of the total passenger excess time 
and the total number of laps. The eDARP-FC is formulated as a non-standard lap-based MILP and is shown 
to be NP-Hard. Efficient polynomial time algorithms are devised for two special scheduling sub-problems. 
These algorithms and several heuristics are then applied as sub-routines within a Large Neighborhood 
Search metaheuristic. Experiments on instances derived from a real-life system demonstrate that the 
flexible service results in a 32%-75% decrease in the excess time at the same operational costs. 
 
Keywords: 
Electric Autonomous Vehicles, Pickup and Delivery, Dial-a-Ride, Dynamic Programming
 
1 This is an author accepted manuscript (AAM) version of the following paper: Molenbruch, Y., Braekers, K., 
Eisenhandler, O., Kaspi, M. (2023). The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed Circuit. Transportation Science, 
available at https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.1208. 

1 
 
1. Introduction 
Autonomous vehicles are a technological advancement that is expected to completely change urban 
mobility as we know it today. In particular, they promote the concept of mobility as a service, as opposed 
to private vehicle ownership, by enabling their shared utilization by multiple passengers simultaneously or 
at different time periods along the day. Recognizing this inevitable trend and the underlying opportunities 
it entails, many significant stakeholders have invested in recent years a considerable amount of resources 
into related research and development, such as technology companies (Google, Intel, Apple), car 
corporations (Daimler, GM, Toyota) and transit service providers (Uber). In parallel, this phenomenon has 
drawn the attention of the scientific community as it gives rise to new and challenging operational problems, 
in addition to technological and legal issues. See Naranayan et al. (2020) for a recent survey on shared 
autonomous vehicle services. 
The prospect of shared mobility transit services based on autonomous vehicles introduces opportunities 
for reduction in cost, mileage and vehicle ownership (Shaheen and Chan, 2015), representing a potential 
for positive environmental and social benefit and for a major impact on transportation. In addition, most of 
the developed autonomous vehicles are expected to be electric, further positioning them as a sustainable 
transit alternative. Above all, recent studies have claimed that a high penetration of autonomous vehicles is 
expected to significantly improve road safety and reduce the incidence of road casualties by up to 90% 
(Bertoncello and Wee, 2015). Nevertheless, while fully autonomous vehicles (SAE Level 5) are expected 
to become commercially available in the coming decade, the market is expected to completely mature only 
in three to four decades (Bansal and Kockelman, 2017; Litman, 2018). Recent evidence supporting these 
projections include, WaymoвҖҷs shift towards autonomous logistics (Alamalhodaei, 2021), AppleвҖҷs setbacks 
in its self-driving car division (Gurman, 2021), and UberвҖҷs withdrawal from its self-driving vehicle project 
(Metz and Conger, 2020). The main barriers to the evolution include cost, regulatory, security, privacy and 
moral concerns (Fagnant and Kockelman, 2015; Bagloee et al., 2016; Bonnefon et al., 2016). 
Preliminary attempts to provide shared transit services via autonomous shuttles have been carried out 
in multiple locations around the world during the last couple of years (Iclodean et al., 2020). Service in 
such systems is typically based on small fleets and in many cases is deployed for experimental purposes or 
due to publicity considerations. Because of the barriers mentioned above, many of these services have been 
designed to be provided in highly controlled environments, such as factories, resorts or campuses. 
Furthermore, despite the flexibility that autonomous vehicles could potentially offer, all such systems are 
currently reduced to providing scheduled services over circular fixed routes, see as examples the 
autonomous shuttle services provided in Renmark, Australia (Sage, 2020) and Sion, Switzerland (Postauto, 
2020). Considering current regulations, it is reasonable to assume that in the coming years autonomous 
shuttle services will continue to be provided on limited segments of the road network, mainly on fixed 

2 
 
routes. This prospect motivates specific focus on fixed circuits and other relatively simple network 
structures. At the same time, existing services can already be upgraded by providing flexible services over 
the existing fixed routes, i.e., services that are not based on fixed stopping regimes and schedules. 
In this work, we study an on-demand transit service provided by a fleet of electric autonomous shuttles 
that operate on a fixed unidirectional circular route. This route connects a set of stations, including a single 
recharging depot and several passenger stations. Figure 1 presents an illustration of a fixed unidirectional 
circular route. 
 
Figure 1: Fixed unidirectional circular route with a recharging depot and five passenger stations 
During operation, the shuttles carry out multiple laps, as part of which they may perform time 
consuming stops at stations to allow passengers to embark and disembark. In addition, if no passengers are 
aboard, the shuttles may stop at the depot in order to recharge their batteries. Each shuttle is characterized 
by a passenger capacity and battery features, including a capacity, a discharging rate and a recharging rate. 
Passengers provide in advance information regarding the earliest time they would be available to be picked 
up at their pick-up station, i.e., their arrival time to the system, and an upper bound on the drop-off time at 
their destination station. 
From the service providerвҖҷs perspective, the underlying operational optimization problem consists of 
determining the number of laps each shuttle performs, the stations in which it stops in each lap, including 
a potential stop at the recharging depot, and the corresponding stopping schedule of each shuttle. In 
particular, the stopping schedule prescribes the amount of time spent recharging (waiting) during each stop 
at the recharging depot (stations). We refer to this problem as The Electric Dial-a-Ride Problem on a Fixed 
Circuit (eDARP-FC). The goal of the problem is to simultaneously improve the quality of service provided 
to the passengers and reduce the operational costs. Specifically, the quality of service is represented by the 
total excess time of passengers in the system compared to a direct ride at the earliest possible time, and the 
operational costs are represented by the total number of laps traveled by all of the shuttles. 
The eDARP-FC is in its essence a special variant of the static Dial-a-Ride Problem (DARP), as it 
includes a set of service requests, each characterized by pickup locations, drop-off locations and 
corresponding time windows, to be served by designated vehicles. Molenbruch et al. (2017) and Ho et al. 
(2018) review the recent DARP literature, classify problem variants and survey the wide range of solution 
methodologies. However, it should be noted that the eDARP-FC is inherently defined by the limited 

3 
 
structure of the network included in it. In particular, while in the classic DARP, symmetry in the solution 
space is typically attributed to the possibility to swap complete routes between homogeneous vehicles, the 
eDARP-FC contains significantly more symmetries that result from the fact that all vehicles share the same 
route and traverse it multiple times. Additionally, this setting gives rise to a stronger pooling effect 
compared to the general DARP. Lastly, battery management considerations further add a decision type 
which is not prevalent in typical DARPs. These special elements of the eDARP-FC justify the consideration 
of new modeling and solution approaches compared to those introduced in the existing literature. 
Considering the limited number of locations in which passengers can be picked up or dropped off and 
the pooling effect it induces, the eDARP-FC shares some resemblances to the check-point DARP (Daganzo 
1984; Quadrifoglio et al., 2006). In this problem, vehicles are assumed to travel on a fixed route from which 
they are allowed to occasionally detour in order to pick-up or drop-off passengers at a limited set of stations 
given in advance. A notable difference to the setting of the eDARP-FC is that most stations will be visited 
at most once during the planning horizon and that multiple vehicles are not likely to repeatedly travel on 
the same network links. 
With respect to the network structure, the work of Pimenta et al. (2017) is the only one to have studied 
Dial-a-Ride services on fixed circuits. The model presented in this paper considers a set of travel requests 
that should be served by a homogeneous fleet cycling along the fixed circuit. Each request is characterized 
by a pick-up station, a drop-off station, and the number of passengers to be served. The objective is to 
minimize the total number of stops performed by the vehicles, while respecting vehicle capacity restrictions. 
In comparison, the eDARP-FC considers the timing of the requests both as part of the input (passengersвҖҷ 
time windows, stopping time at the stations) and in the objective function (passengersвҖҷ excess times). As a 
direct consequence, the eDARP-FC presents a more complicated objective function that considers the 
quality of service to passengers in addition to the operational aspects. Lastly, the eDARP-FC introduces 
battery management aspects which are not included in the model of Pimenta et al. (2017). Very recently, 
Trotta et al. (2022) studied the closely-related pick-up and delivery problems on rings. They provide a 
classification scheme, analyze the complexity of several problem variants and present a solution approach 
that is based on a greedy heuristic and on mathematical programming. The objective function of the problem 
they investigated considers only the total number of laps. The authors highlighted the incorporation of 
battery management considerations as a direction for future research. 
The implications of using electric vehicles in Dial-a-Ride services have recently been studied in several 
papers. Masmoudi et al. (2018) assume a non-linear battery consumption model and a battery swapping 
operating scheme, that is, vehicles can visit swapping stations to replace their depleted batteries with full 
ones. They formulate the problem as a non-linear Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) and devise 
evolutionary variable neighborhood search algorithms to solve it. Bongiovanni et al. (2018) introduce the 

4 
 
electric Autonomous Dial-A-Ride Problem, which considers multiple origin depot locations and integrates 
selection of the destination depots and decisions regarding battery management within the classic DARP. 
They devise a branch-and-cut algorithm with new valid inequalities that arise from the electric and 
autonomous aspects of the problem. A dynamic variant of the problem is studied in Bongiovanni et al. 
(2021), in which passenger requests appear online while the system is in operation. The two stage solution 
approach consists of a single passenger insertion phase and a polishing phase designed to re-optimize the 
plans for the already accepted requests. For this phase, the authors develop a machine learning-based 
metaheuristic that makes use of historical information from previously solved dynamic instances to 
efficiently guide the search. In a wider context, for a survey of electric vehicle routing problems, see Asghari 
et al. (2020). 
In conclusion, the eDARP-FC arises in an on-demand shared transit setting that is defined by the 
combination of the following three fundamental characteristics: (1) a special network structure, namely, a 
fixed circuit; (2) battery management decisions; and (3) time windows for the pick-up and drop-off 
passengers. This combination has not been studied before within a single model. By identifying, 
formulating and analyzing this novel operational problem, which has strong applicative grounds, we wish 
to close this gap in the literature. 
The contribution of this paper is fivefold: first, we introduce and formulate the eDARP-FC as a non-
standard, lap-based MILP. Second, we analyze the complexity of the problem and prove that it belongs to 
the class of NP-Hard problems. Third, we focus on two special scheduling sub-problems which assume that 
the sequence of pick-up/drop-off nodes is predetermined. We devise efficient polynomial time algorithms 
and several faster heuristics to solve them, which are applicable in general settings as the sub-problems are 
independent of the network structure. Fourth, we apply these solution algorithms as sub-routines within a 
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) metaheuristic (Pisinger and Ropke, 2010) tailored to the structure of 
the eDARP-FC. We perform a numerical experiment that is based on randomly generated problem 
instances, as well as real-life instances derived from an autonomous shuttle service in Renmark, Australia. 
The results demonstrate the capability of the proposed solution approach to efficiently handle real-world 
scenarios. Fifth, we show that in systems that follow the setting we consider, a flexible regime has the 
ability to significantly improve the quality of service provided to the passengers compared to the current 
mode of operation, at no additional costs. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we formally define the eDARP-FC 
and present a corresponding MILP formulation. In Section 3, we analyze the complexity of eDARP-FC as 
well as its scheduling sub-problems, and provide efficient algorithms for the latter ones. Following this, in 
Section 4, we present an LNS based solution approach, whose numerical analysis is then discussed in 
Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we provide our conclusions and suggest directions for further research. 

5 
 
2. Problem Formulation 
In this section, we formally introduce the eDARP-FC and several important sub-problems. In Section 2.1, 
we present a MILP formulation for the problem, which we also use later in the numerical analysis to 
benchmark the proposed solution approach against an exact state-of-the-art MILP solver. In Section 2.2, 
we define two sub-problems of the eDARP-FC. Specifically, the first sub-problem is a single-vehicle lap 
assignment and scheduling problem assuming that the routing, i.e., the order of requests to be served, is 
given. The second sub-problem further assumes that all lap assignment decisions have been made and 
focuses on the remaining single-vehicle scheduling problem. In Section 3 we present an efficient solution 
approach for the two sub-problems. This solution approach is a key component in our framework, as it 
enables us to evaluate exactly many routes and schedules within the LNS algorithm to be discussed in 
Section 4. For the convenience of the reader, all the notations introduced in these sections are summarized 
in Electronic Companion A. 
2.1. A MILP formulation for the eDARP-FC 
The formulation we present relies on the circular structure of the network. In particular, the operational 
routing decisions reduce to deciding upon the number of laps each vehicle will perform, the stations at 
which it will stop during each lap, and the passengers who will be served during each stop. In addition, it 
is assumed that passengers are dropped off at the first time the vehicle they boarded passes by their drop-
off station. In other words, once a passenger is assigned to be picked up by a certain vehicle at a certain lap, 
the same vehicle is constrained to stop at the drop-off station. Additional sets of constraints are used to 
enforce sufficient battery charging levels, battery capacity, vehicle passenger capacity and time windows 
for serving the passengers. 
Indices: 
рқ‘ 
stations 
рқ‘ҷ
laps 
рқ‘Ј
shuttle vehicles 
рқ‘–
pick-up and drop-off nodes 
 
Parameters: 
рқ‘Ҷ 
the number of stations (рқ‘ = 0 denotes the depot, and рқ‘ = 1, вҖҰ , рқ‘ҶвҲ’1 denote passenger 
stations, and рқ’®= {0, . . , рқ‘ҶвҲ’1}) 
рқҗҝ 
an upper bound on the number of laps per vehicle (в„’= {0, вҖҰ , рқҗҝвҲ’1})
рқ‘ү 
the number of vehicles (рқ’ұ= {0, вҖҰ , рқ‘үвҲ’1}) 
рқ‘ЎаҜҰ 
the traveling time to station рқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®from the one preceding it on the circuit
рқңғ 
the traveling time required to complete a full lap, i.e., рқңғ= вҲ‘
рқ‘ЎаҜҰ
аҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө
аҜҰаӯҖа¬ҙ
рқ‘ӣ
the number of passenger requests 
рқ’«
set of pick-up nodes (рқ‘–= 0, вҖҰ , рқ‘ӣвҲ’1)
рқ’ҹ
set of drop-off nodes (рқ‘–= рқ‘ӣ, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣвҲ’1), the drop-off node of pick-up node рқ‘–is рқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘–

6 
 
рқ‘ (рқ‘–)
the station of pick-up/drop-off node рқ‘–(we assume that рқ‘ (рқ‘–) вү рқ‘ (рқ‘ӣ+ рқ‘–) and рқ‘ (рқ‘–) вү 0)
рқ‘ҺаҜң
the passenger earliest pick-up time at node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«
рқ‘‘аҜң
the latest time the passenger(s) can be dropped off at drop-off node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ
рқӣҝ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—)
the direct travel time between nodes рқ‘–, рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«вҲӘрқ’ҹ
рқңҖаҜң
the earliest arrival time to drop-off node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ
рқ‘һаҜң
the number of passengers embarking (disembarking) at pick-up (drop-off) node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«(рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ)
рқҗј(рқ‘–)
an indicator that equals 0 if рқ‘ (рқ‘–+ рқ‘ӣ) > рқ‘ (рқ‘–) for node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«and 1 otherwise 
рқҗ¶
a shuttleвҖҷs passenger capacity 
рқңҺ 
the service duration for each stop at a passenger station (regardless of the number of requests 
or passengers served)
рқҗ»
the horizon time 
рқӣҪаҜ–
battery charging rate (unit of charge per time unit) 
рқӣҪаҜ—
battery discharge per lap 
рқӣҪаҜ 
the batteryвҖҷs capacity in units of charge 
рқӣја¬ө
the weight in the objective function of the total number of laps traveled by all vehicles 
рқӣја¬¶
the weight in the objective function of the passengersвҖҷ total excess times 
Оҳ(рқ‘ )
the set of pick-up nodes located at station рқ‘ (Оҳ(рқ‘ ) = {рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«|рқ‘ (рқ‘–) = рқ‘ }) 
ОҰа¬ҫ(рқ‘ ) the set of drop-off nodes located at station рқ‘  whose pick-up nodes are located at stations that 
precede station рқ‘ on the circuit (ОҰа¬ҫ(рқ‘ ) = {рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ|рқ‘ (рқ‘–) = рқ‘ вҲ§рқ‘ (рқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘ӣ) < рқ‘ (рқ‘–)})
ОҰа¬ҝ(рқ‘ )
the set of drop-off nodes located at station рқ‘  whose pick-up nodes are located at stations that 
follow station рқ‘ on the circuit (ОҰа¬ҝ(рқ‘ ) = {рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ|рқ‘ (рқ‘–) = рқ‘ вҲ§рқ‘ (рқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘ӣ) > рқ‘ (рқ‘–)}) 
The direct travel time between nodes рқ‘–, рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«вҲӘрқ’ҹ is defined as follows: 
рқӣҝ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) =
вҺ©
вҺӘвҺӘ
вҺЁ
вҺӘвҺӘ
вҺ§
а·Қ
рқ‘ЎаҜһ
аҜҰ(аҜқ)
аҜһаӯҖаҜҰ(аҜң)а¬ҫа¬ө
, рқ‘ (рқ‘–) вүӨрқ‘ (рқ‘—)
а·Қ
рқ‘ЎаҜһ
аҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө
аҜһаӯҖаҜҰ(аҜң)а¬ҫа¬ө
+ а·Қрқ‘ЎаҜһ
аҜҰ(аҜқ)
аҜһаӯҖа¬ҙ
,
рқ‘ (рқ‘–) > рқ‘ (рқ‘—)
 
The earliest arrival time to a drop-off node is calculated by the sum of the request earliest pick-up time, the 
service time at the pick-up node and the direct travel time from the pick-up node to the drop-off node, which 
can be precomputed using the following equation: 
рқңҖаҜң= рқ‘ҺаҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ+ рқңҺ+ рқӣҝ(рқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘ӣ, рқ‘–) вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ 
Note that a simple upper bound on the number of laps of a single vehicle can be obtained by the following 
expression: 
рқҗҝ= min аөӯа¶…
аҜ аҜ”аҜ«
аі”вҲҲрқ’ҹаҜ—аі”
аө¬а°Ҹа¬ҫа°ҷа¬ҫаҙҒаіҸ
аҙҒаіҺаө°
а¶ү, 2рқ‘ӣаөұ, in which рқңғ+ рқңҺ+ а°үаіҸ
а°үаіҺ represents the minimal time consumed when performing 
a non-empty vehicle lap. The horizon time, i.e., the latest time a vehicle may return to the depot on its final 
lap can be bounded by рқҗ»= рқңғ+ рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
аҜңвҲҲрқ’ҹрқ‘‘аҜң. 
 
 

7 
 
Decision Variables: 
рқ‘ҘаҜҰаҜҹаҜ© 
equals 1 if vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұstops at station рқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®on lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’, otherwise 0
рқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ© 
equals 1 if passengers at pick-up node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«board vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұon lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’, otherwise 0
рқ‘ӨаҜҹаҜ© 
equals 1 if vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұperforms lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’, otherwise 0 
рқ‘ҸаҜҹаҜ© 
the amount of time that vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұrecharges at the beginning of lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’
рқҗөаҜҹаҜ©
the state of charge of the battery of vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұat the beginning of lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’(before charging)
рқ‘ҮаҜҰаҜҹаҜ© 
the time vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ starts service (pick-up or charging) at station рқ‘ вҲҲрқ’® on lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’ (if no 
service is performed it represents the arrival time to the station)
рқ‘„аҜҰаҜҹаҜ© the amount of passengers aboard vehicle рқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ when it arrives at station рқ‘ вҲҲрқ’® on lap рқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’ 
(before any service is performed)
рқңҸаҜң
the arrival time to drop-off node рқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ
Note that decision variables рқ‘ҮаҜҰаҜҹаҜ© do not necessarily represent the drop-off times. In cases where pick-ups 
and drop-offs occurs at the same stop, рқ‘ҮаҜҰаҜҹаҜ© represent the pick-up time while the drop-off times may occur 
earlier. That is, as soon as the vehicle arrives at the stop. 
Formulation: 
рқ‘Җрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘§рқ‘’рқӣја¬өа·Қа·Қрқ‘ӨаҜҹаҜ©
аҜҸа¬ҝа¬ө
аҜ©аӯҖа¬ҙ
+ рқӣја¬¶а·Қрқ‘һаҜң(рқңҸаҜңвҲ’рқңҖаҜң)
аҜңвҲҲа®Ҫ
аҜ…а¬ҝа¬ө
аҜҹаӯҖа¬ҙ
 
(1) 
рқ‘ . рқ‘Ў. 
 
 
а·Қ
а·Қрқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©
аҜҸа¬ҝа¬ө
аҜ©аӯҖа¬ҙ
аҜ…а¬ҝа¬өа¬ҝаҜӮ(аҜң)
аҜҹаӯҖа¬ҙ
= 1 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’« 
(2) 
рқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқ‘ҘаҜҰ(аҜң),аҜҹ,аҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(3a) 
рқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқ‘ҘаҜҰ(аҜңа¬ҫаҜЎ),аҜҹа¬ҫаҜӮ(аҜң),аҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«; 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲ{0, вҖҰ , рқҗҝвҲ’1 вҲ’рқҗј(рқ‘–)}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(3b) 
рқ‘ҘаҜҰаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқ‘ӨаҜҹаҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(4) 
рқ‘ӨаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқ‘ӨаҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(5) 
рқҗөаҜҹаҜ©= рқҗөаҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©+ рқӣҪаҜ–рқ‘ҸаҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©вҲ’рқӣҪаҜ—рқ‘ӨаҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(6a) 
рқҗөаҜ…а¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©+ рқӣҪаҜ–рқ‘ҸаҜ…а¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©вҲ’рқӣҪаҜ—рқ‘ӨаҜ…а¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©вүҘ0 
вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(6b) 
рқҗөа¬ҙаҜ©= 0 
вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(7) 
рқӣҪаҜ–рқ‘ҸаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқӣҪаҜ рқ‘Ҙа¬ҙаҜҹаҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(8) 
рқҗөаҜҹаҜ©+ рқӣҪаҜ–рқ‘ҸаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқӣҪаҜ  
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(9) 
рқ‘„аҜҰа¬ҙаҜ©= рқ‘„аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө,а¬ҙ,аҜ©+
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜңа¬ҙаҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Җ(аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө)
вҲ’
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜңа¬ҙаҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Қа°¶(аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө)
 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(10a) 
рқ‘„аҜҰаҜҹаҜ©= рқ‘„аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹ,аҜ©+
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Җ(аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө)
вҲ’
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Қа°¶(аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө)
вҲ’
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜң,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Қа°·(аҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө)
 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(10b) 
рқ‘„а¬өаҜҹаҜ©= рқ‘„а¬ҙ,аҜҹ,аҜ© 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(10c) 

8 
 
рқ‘„а¬ҙаҜҹаҜ©= рқ‘„аҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©+
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜң,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Җ(аҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө)
вҲ’
а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜңрқ‘ўаҜң,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©
аҜңвҲҲа®Қа°¶(аҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө)
 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(10d) 
рқ‘„а¬ҙа¬ҙаҜ©= 0 
вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(11) 
рқ‘„аҜҰаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқҗ¶ 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(12) 
рқ‘„а¬ҙаҜҹаҜ©вүӨрқҗ¶(1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҙа¬ҙаҜҹаҜ©) 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(13) 
рқ‘Үа¬ҙаҜҹаҜ©вүҘрқ‘ҮаҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©+ рқңҺрқ‘ҘаҜҢа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜ©+ рқ‘Ўа¬ҙ 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(14a) 
рқ‘Үа¬өаҜҹаҜ©вүҘрқ‘Үа¬ҙ,аҜҹ,аҜ©+ рқ‘ҸаҜҹаҜ©+ рқ‘Ўа¬ө 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(14b) 
рқ‘ҮаҜҰаҜҹаҜ©вүҘрқ‘ҮаҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹ,аҜ©+ рқңҺрқ‘ҘаҜҰа¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹ,аҜ©+ рқ‘ЎаҜҰ 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®\{0}; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(14c) 
рқ‘Үа¬ҙа¬ҙаҜ©= 0 
вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(15) 
рқ‘ҮаҜҰ(аҜң),аҜҹ,аҜ©вүҘрқ‘ҺаҜңа·Қрқ‘ўаҜң,аҜҹбҮІ,аҜ©
аҜҹ
аҜҹбҮІаӯҖа¬ҙ
 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(16) 
рқңҸаҜңвүҘрқ‘ҮаҜҰ(аҜң)а¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹа¬ҫаҜӮ(аҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ),аҜ©+ рқңҺрқ‘ҘаҜҰ(аҜң)а¬ҝа¬ө,аҜҹа¬ҫаҜӮ(аҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ),аҜ©+ рқ‘ЎаҜҰ(аҜң) вҲ’рқҗ»(1 вҲ’рқ‘ўаҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ,аҜҹ,аҜ©) 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ: рқ‘ (рқ‘–) вү 1; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ;
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲ{0, вҖҰ , рқҗҝвҲ’1 вҲ’рқҗј(рқ‘–)} 
(17a) 
рқңҸаҜңвүҘрқ‘Үа¬ҙ,аҜҹа¬ҫа¬ө,аҜ©+ рқ‘Ўа¬өвҲ’рқҗ»(1 вҲ’рқ‘ўаҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ,аҜҹ,аҜ©) 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ: рқ‘ (рқ‘–) = 1; 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’\{рқҗҝвҲ’1}; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(17b) 
рқңҸаҜңвүӨрқ‘‘аҜң 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ 
(18) 
рқ‘ӨаҜҹаҜ©вҲҲ{0,1} 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’, вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(19) 
рқ‘ҘаҜҰаҜҹаҜ©вҲҲ{0,1} 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(20) 
рқ‘ўаҜңаҜҹаҜ©вҲҲ{0,1} 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’«; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(21) 
рқңҸаҜңвүҘ0 
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲрқ’ҹ 
(22) 
рқҗөаҜҹаҜ©, рқ‘ҸаҜҹаҜ©вүҘ0 
вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(23) 
рқ‘ҮаҜҰаҜҹаҜ©, рқ‘„аҜҰаҜҹаҜ©вүҘ0 
вҲҖрқ‘ вҲҲрқ’®; вҲҖрқ‘ҷвҲҲв„’; вҲҖрқ‘ЈвҲҲрқ’ұ 
(24) 
The objective function (1) minimizes a weighted sum of the total number of laps traveled by the shuttles 
and the total passenger excess time. Constraints (2)-(5) are assignment constraints guaranteeing that each 
passenger request is assigned to exactly one vehicle lap, that each vehicle stops at the stations and laps that 
correspond to the requests it serves, and that the vehicles only stop on laps that they perform. Constraints 
(6)-(9) are battery management constraints representing charge conservation, guaranteeing that charging 
can only take place if the vehicle stops at the depot, and asserting that the level of charge remains between 
zero and the battery capacity. Constraints (10)-(13) are vehicle capacity constraints including passenger 
flow conservation and vehicle capacity enforcement. In particular, Constraints (13) state that the vehicles 
can stop at the depot, and consequently that their batteries can be charged, only if there are no passengers 
on board. Constraints (14)-(18) are timing constraints enforcing the time windows of the requests and 
determining the drop-off time of each request, according to the arrival time at the drop-off station. Variable 
integrality and non-negativity are set in constraints (19)-(24). Finally, note that the above formulation can 

9 
 
be strengthened by adding a number of valid but redundant constraints. Several of such constraints are 
proposed in Electronic Companion B and applied in the numerical experiments we present in Section 5. 
2.2. Lap assignment and scheduling for a given node sequence 
In this section, we focus on a sub-problem, in which the assignment of passengers to vehicles and the order 
in which they will be served is known, while stops at the recharging depot still need to be determined. The 
remaining decisions concern determining the vehicle lap in which each request node will be served and the 
vehicle schedules, including the recharging stops and amounts. It is assumed and can be efficiently validated 
that the sequence satisfies all other conditions asserted by the above model (pairing, precedence, capacity). 
Noting that this sub-problem decomposes to vehicle-specific sub-problems, we next present the resulting 
single-vehicle lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem. Recall that we focus on this sub-problem 
because an efficient solution approach for it will be used many times as a subroutine within our LNS 
algorithm. Next, we provide a simplified notation of this sub-problem that is based on the position of the 
items in the given sequence: 
рқ‘ӣбҮұ
the number of passenger requests served by the vehicle 
ОЁ 
the given sequence of pickup and drop-off nodes (рқ‘—= вҲ’1 and рқ‘—= 2рқ‘ӣвҖІ, representing vehicle start 
and end depot)
рқ’«а®Ҹ
the subset of items in the sequence representing pickup nodes 
рқ’ҹа®Ҹ
the subset of items in the sequence representing drop-off nodes
рқ‘ МӮаҜқ 
the station associated with item рқ‘— 
рқ‘ҺаҜқ 
the lower time window associated with the node represented by item рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®Ҹ 
рқ‘‘аҜқ 
the upper time window associated with the node represented by item рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
рқңҖаҜқ 
the earliest arrival time to the drop-off node represented by item рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
рқ‘’аҜқ 
equals 1 if item рқ‘— is served in the same station as item рқ‘—вҲ’1, 0 otherwise 
рқңҶаҜқ 
the cumulative number of laps completed since travelling from the depot up to the station 
associated with item рқ‘—
рқ‘ЎаҜқ 
the traveling time to item рқ‘— from the one preceding it in the sequence 
рқ‘һаҜқ 
the number of passengers embarking/disembarking at item рқ‘— 
Lastly, 
we 
set 
the 
following 
values: 
рқ‘ МӮа¬ҝа¬ө= рқ‘Ҷ, рқңҶа¬ҝа¬ө= 0, рқ‘’а¬ҝа¬ө= 1, рқ‘Ўа¬ҙ= 0, рқ‘ҺаҜқ= 0 вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’ҹа®Ҹ, 
рқ‘‘аҜқ= рқҗ» вҲҖ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®Ҹ . 
We denote by в„ӣвҠҶрқ’«а®Ҹ the subset of pickup nodes to which the vehicle arrives with no passengers on 
board, thus potentially allowing for recharging to take place prior to serving the pickup node. We refer to 
these pickup nodes as recharging opportunities, and distinguish between two types: type (0), in which the 
vehicle passes anyway by the recharging depot on its way to the pickup node; and type (+), in which the 
vehicle bypasses the pickup node and travels specially to the recharging depot, thus adding an extra lap to 
the route. Formally, let в„ӣа¬ҙ= аөӣрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣ: рқ‘ МӮаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө> рқ‘ МӮаҜқаөҹ and в„ӣа¬ҫ= аөӣрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣ: рқ‘ МӮаҜқа¬ҝа¬өвүӨрқ‘ МӮаҜқаөҹ be the subset of recharging 
opportunities of types (0) and (+), respectively. Note that в„ӣа¬ҙвҲ©рқ‘…а¬ҫ= вҲ… and в„ӣа¬ҙвҲӘв„ӣа¬ҫ= в„ӣ. Furthermore, 
note that as recharging opportunities of type (0) do not require additional traveling, we only need to make 

10 
 
sure that if recharging takes place, the recharging time is taken into account in the schedule. However, 
recharging opportunities of type (+) come with extra traveling distance (i.e., a full lap), extra battery 
discharge because of the added lap and extra travel time that should be directly accounted for while 
formulating the sub-problem. The lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem can then be formulated as a 
MILP, using the following decision variables: 
Decision Variables: 
рқ‘ҰаҜқ 
equals 1 if a type (+) recharging opportunity is taken in item рқ‘—= 0, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣбҮұвҲ’1, otherwise 0 
рқҗәаҜқ 
the accumulative recharging time up to item рқ‘—= 0, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣбҮұвҲ’1 in the sequence (рқҗәа¬ҝа¬ө= 0) 
рқ‘ҮаҜқ 
the time the vehicle arrives to item рқ‘—= 0, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣбҮұвҲ’1 in the sequence (рқ‘Үа¬ҝа¬ө= 0) 
This leads to the following formulation: 
рқ‘Җрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘§рқ‘’рқӣја¬өа·Қ
рқ‘ҰаҜқ
аҜқвҲҲв„ӣа°¶
+ рқӣја¬¶а·Қ
рқ‘һаҜқ(рқ‘ҮаҜқвҲ’рқңҖаҜқ)
аҜқвҲҲрқ’ҹаІҮ
 
 
(25) 
рқ‘ . рқ‘Ў.
рқ‘ҺаҜқвүӨрқ‘ҮаҜқ
 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®Ҹ 
(26) 
рқ‘‘аҜқвүҘрқ‘ҮаҜқ
 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
(27) 
рқ‘ҮаҜқвүҘрқ‘ҮаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқңҺаө«1 вҲ’рқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өаөҜ+ рқңҺрқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өрқ‘ҰаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқ‘ЎаҜқ 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲ(рқ’«а®Ҹ\в„ӣ) вҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
(28) 
рқ‘ҮаҜқвүҘрқ‘ҮаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқңҺаө«1 вҲ’рқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өаөҜ+ рқҗәаҜқвҲ’рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқңҺрқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өрқ‘ҰаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқ‘ЎаҜқ 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҙ 
(29) 
рқ‘ҮаҜқвүҘрқ‘ҮаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқңҺаө«1 вҲ’рқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өаөҜ+ рқҗәаҜқвҲ’рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқңҺрқ‘’аҜқа¬ҝа¬өрқ‘ҰаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө+ рқ‘ЎаҜқ+ рқңғрқ‘ҰаҜқ 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ 
(30) 
рқҗәаҜқвҲ’рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬өвүӨрқӣҪаҜ 
рқӣҪаҜ–рқ‘ҰаҜқ 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ 
(31) 
 рқҗәаҜқвҲ’рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө= 0 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲ(рқ’«а®Ҹ\в„ӣ) вҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
(32) 
рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬өвүҘрқӣҪаҜ—
рқӣҪаҜ–бүҢрқңҶаҜқ+
а·Қ
рқ‘ҰаҜһ
аҜһвҲҲаҜӢа°¶:аҜһа®ёаҜқ
бүҚ 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣвҲӘ{2рқ‘ӣбҮұ} 
(33) 
рқҗәаҜқвүӨрқӣҪаҜ + рқӣҪаҜ—аө«рқңҶаҜқ+ вҲ‘
рқ‘ҰаҜһ
аҜһвҲҲв„ӣа°¶:аҜһа®ёаҜқ
аөҜ
рқӣҪаҜ–
 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣ 
(34) 
рқ‘ҰаҜқ= 0 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲ(рқ’«а®ҸвҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ)\в„ӣа¬ҫ 
(35) 
рқҗәаҜқ, рқ‘ҮаҜқвүҘ0 
вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®ҸвҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ 
(36) 
рқ‘ҰаҜқвҲҲ{0,1} 
вҲҖрқ‘—= вҲ’1, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣвҖІ 
(37) 
 
The objective function (25) is the equivalent representation of (1) to the nodes included in the given 
sequence. Constraints (26)-(27) guarantee that the service times at pick-up/drop-off nodes satisfy the 
lower/upper bounds. Constraints (28)-(30) make sure that arrival times to successive items in the sequence 
respect travel durations, service durations, and recharging times. Note that the term рқҗәаҜқвҲ’рқҗәаҜқа¬ҝа¬ө represents 
the recharging duration in recharging opportunity рқ‘—, and that the addition of a full lap is also accounted for 
in Constraints (30). Constraints (31) state that if recharging opportunity of type (+) рқ‘— is not used, then there 
is no additional recharging. Constraints (32) stipulate that the accumulative recharging time at any item in 
the sequence that does not allow recharging will be equal to the recharging time at the item that precedes 
it. Constraints (33) enforce lower bounds on the total amount recharged up to recharging opportunity рқ‘—. 

11 
 
This amount should be sufficient to travel the total number of laps up to this recharging opportunity, 
including extra laps. Constraints (34) provide an upper bound on the total amount that can be recharged up 
to and including recharging opportunity рқ‘—. Constraints (35) set the value of the рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables to equal zero at 
any item that does not belong to рқ‘…а¬ҫ. Constraints (36)-(37) are non-negativity and integrality constraints. 
Once decisions regarding the recharging opportunities (+) are taken (represented by the рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables), 
the route of the vehicle is fully known. In particular, the first component of the objective function becomes 
a constant. We refer to the remaining sub-problem as the single-vehicle scheduling sub-problem, under 
which the service start time and recharging times need to be determined in a manner that minimizes the 
total excess time of the passengers. A straightforward LP formulation of the scheduling sub-problem is 
obtained by fixing the values of the рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫin the MILP (25)-(37). 
3. Complexity Analysis 
This section analyses the complexity of the eDARP-FC and its sub-problems. First, we prove the problem 
is NP-Hard considering separately each of the components of the objective function. Second, we 
characterize the settings under which the single-vehicle lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem can be 
solved in pseudo-polynomial time using a Dynamic Programming (DP) algorithm. Lastly, we note that the 
single-vehicle scheduling sub-problem can be solved efficiently under any setting. 
The assignment of requests with multiple passengers into vehicles has been shown to be a complicating 
factor (Pimenta et al., 2017). Similar to that study, a straightforward reduction from the Bin Packing 
Problem can be used to show that the eDARP-FC is also NP-Hard. Thus, we next focus our discussion on 
cases with single-passenger requests. 
 
Claim 1: Minimizing the number of laps for the eDARP-FC with single-passenger requests is NP-Hard. 
Claim 2: Minimizing the passengersвҖҷ total excess time for the eDARP-FC with single-passenger requests 
is NP-Hard. 
Claim 3: the eDARP-FC is NP-Hard. 
Proof 1: Consider an instance of the eDARP-FC with the following characteristics: (1) all requests are unit 
size, that is, рқ‘һаҜң= 1 вҲҖрқ‘–= 1, вҖҰ , рқ‘ӣ; (2) request time windows are non-binding, that is, рқ‘ҺаҜң= 0 and рқ‘‘аҜң= вҲһ 
вҲҖрқ‘–= 1, вҖҰ , рқ‘ӣ; (3) a single capacitated vehicle is available; (4) service does not require any time, that is, 
рқңҺ= 0; (5) the battery recharging is non-binding, that is, рқӣҪаҜ = вҲһ,рқӣҪаҜ—= 0 and рқӣҪаҜ–= 0; and (6) the objective 
is to minimize the total number of laps, that is, рқӣја¬ө= 1, рқӣја¬¶= 0. The setting of this special case was shown 
to be NP-Hard (Theorem 3 in Trotta et al., 2022) when minimizing the time the vehicle returns to the depot 
after serving all requests. Note that under this setting minimizing this objective is fully equivalent to 
minimizing the total number of laps performed by the vehicle. вҲҺ 

12 
 
Proof 2: We claim that under the setting of the special case described in Proof 1, minimizing the passengersвҖҷ 
total excess time also minimizes the total number of laps, therefore establishing the NP-hardness of this 
setting as well. To see this, suppose, by contradiction, that these two measures have different optimal 
solutions, denoted as Solution E (for excess) and Solution L (for laps). In particular, in Solution E more 
laps are performed as compared to Solution L. We will demonstrate that if this is the case, Solution E does 
not minimize the total excess time, leading to a contradiction. For this purpose, we take Solution E and 
apply the following procedure: first (Step 1), we select a request that is served in the last lap and shift it to 
the lap to which it is assigned under Solution L (denoted as X), which is necessarily an earlier lap. If this 
move results with a feasible solution, this solution has a lower total excess time than Solution E, as a single 
request was shifted earlier in time. Otherwise (Step 2), we select a request from lap X that is not assigned 
to it in Solution L and shift this request to the last lap of Solution E. Note that the combination of Step 1 
and Step 2 does not change the total excess time. We repeat these two steps until a feasible solution is found 
at the end of Step 1. Such a solution is guaranteed to be found due to the existence of Solution L. This 
shows that minimizing the total excess time is at least as hard as minimizing the number of laps. вҲҺ 
Proof 3: follows directly from the combination of Claim 1 and Claim 2. 
Next, we analyze the complexity of the lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem. In particular, we 
will characterize settings under which this sub-problem can be solved with a polynomial time DP algorithm. 
In order to demonstrate how the sub-problem can be solved with a DP algorithm, we first wish to show that 
under certain input characteristics, it has an integral optimal solution. 
Definition 1: in integral instances of the lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem or the scheduling 
sub-problem 
the 
following 
parameters 
have 
integral 
values: 
рқ‘ҺаҜқ (вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®Ҹ); рқ‘‘аҜқ (вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’ҹа®Ҹ); 
рқ‘ЎаҜқ (вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®ҸвҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ); рқңҺаҜқ (вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқ’«а®ҸвҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ), рқңғ and the ratios 
а°үаіҸ
а°үаіҺ and 
а°үаіҳ
а°үаіҺ. 
Definition 2: in an integral solution of the lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem or the scheduling 
sub-problem, all arrival times to the nodes in the sequence and all recharging times are integral. 
Note that in many realistic scenarios, time windows, travel times, service times and the lap completion 
time can be rescaled to a time unit for which all of these values are integral (e.g. seconds or minutes). 
However, while the ratios 
а°үаіҸ
а°үаіҺ and 
а°үаіҳ
а°үаіҺ are not necessarily integral, when they are, we can claim the following: 
Claim 4: The coefficient matrix of the scheduling sub-problem is totally unimodular (TU). 
Claim 5: An integral instance of the scheduling sub-problem has an integral optimal solution. 
Claim 6: An integral lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem has an integral optimal solution. 
Proof 4: By carefully examining the structure of the scheduling sub-problem formulation (i.e., the MILP 
(25)-(36) with the рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables fixed to an appropriate value), we show that it is characterized by a constraint 

13 
 
coefficient matrix which is totally unimodular (TU). The proof of this property relies on the sufficient 
condition due to Ghouila-Houri (see Padberg, 1976), by which a matrix A is TU if each collection of its 
columns can be split into two parts so that the sum of the columns in one part minus the sum of the columns 
in the other part is a vector with entries only 0, +1 or -1. For the sake of brevity, we provide the details of 
this proof in Electronic Companion C. 
Proof 5: Consider a formulation for the scheduling sub-problem obtained by fixing the values of the 
рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ in the MILP (25)-(36). This formulation can be standardized to having only smaller-
equal inequalities with all the decision variables on the left hand side. In particular, by Definition 1, in any 
integral instance of the problem, the constant coefficients on the right hand side are all strictly integral. In 
addition, since by Claim 4 the coefficient matrix of the resulting formulation is TU, it follows that an 
integral instance of the scheduling sub-problem has an integral optimal solution. вҲҺ 
Proof 6: Follows straightforwardly from Claim 5. For any feasible assignment of binary values to the 
рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ, we obtain an integral instance of the scheduling sub-problem, which has an integral 
optimal solution by Claim 5. In particular, the scheduling sub-problem resulting from the optimal 
assignment of binary values to the рқ‘ҰаҜқ variables вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ, has an integral optimal solution as well. вҲҺ 
A direct consequence of Claim 6 is that the search for an optimal solution of an integral instance of the 
lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem can be restricted to the set of integral solutions. This allows us 
to devise a pseudo-polynomial time DP algorithm that while considering only integral states and integral 
decision values, is still guaranteed to obtain an optimal solution. 
Observation 1: as the earliest pick-up time of the passengers is fixed, in order to minimize their total excess 
times, the service start times at the drop-off nodes should be scheduled as early as possible. Therefore, once 
recharging is completed, service at the following nodes (up to the next recharging opportunity) should start 
as early as possible. 
As a result, the only decisions that impact the quality of the schedule concern the recharging durations 
at each recharging opportunity. We denote a state of the vehicle by the quartet (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) representing the 
current item рқ‘— the vehicle is visiting, the time рқ‘Ү at which service begins at that item, the current state of 
charge рқҗө, and whether a recharging opportunity of type (+) was used (в„Һ= 1) or not (в„Һ= 0) before item рқ‘—. 
The decision associated with each such state refers to the amount of time spent recharging the vehicle after 
service in item рқ‘— (or put differently, before arriving to item рқ‘—+ 1), and therefore depends on the node type 
of item рқ‘—+ 1. In this context, we distinguish between two cases. First, at states (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) having item рқ‘—+
1 вҲҲ(рқ’«а®Ҹ\в„ӣ) вҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ, no recharging can take place, and therefore no decision needs to be made. In this case, 
given Observation 1, the state of the vehicle at the following item is straightforwardly implied. Second, at 
states (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) having item рқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲв„ӣ, we may decide the recharging duration, which must take an 
integral value according to Claim 6. Therefore, we denote by в„Ө(рқ‘—, рқҗө) = рқ‘§аҜ…(рқ‘—, рқҗө), вҖҰ , рқ‘§аҜҺ(рқ‘—, рқҗө) the range of 

14 
 
possible positive integral recharging durations, when the vehicle is in state (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) such that рқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲв„ӣ. 
The boundaries рқ‘§аҜ…(рқ‘—, рқҗө), рқ‘§аҜҺ(рқ‘—, рқҗө) are defined as follows: 
рқ‘§аҜ…(рқ‘—, рқҗө) = max аөң1, 1
рқӣҪаҜ–вӢ…аө«рқӣҪаҜ— аө«рқңҶаҜЎаҜҳаҜ«аҜ§(аҜқа¬ҫа¬ө) вҲ’рқңҶаҜқа¬ҫа¬ө+ 1аөҜвҲ’рқҗөаөҜаө  
рқ‘§аҜҺ(рқ‘—, рқҗө) = min аөңmax аөң0, 1
рқӣҪаҜ–вӢ…аө«рқӣҪаҜ—аө«рқңҶа¬¶аҜЎбҮІвҲ’рқңҶаҜқа¬ҫа¬ө+ 1аөҜвҲ’рқҗөаөҜаө , 1
рқӣҪаҜ–вӢ…аө«рқӣҪаҜ вҲ’рқҗө+ рқӣҪаҜ—аөҜаө  
рқ‘§аҜҺ(вҲ’1, рқҗө) = min аөңmax аөң0, 1
рқӣҪаҜ–вӢ…аө«рқӣҪаҜ—рқңҶа¬¶аҜЎбҮІвҲ’рқҗөаөҜаө , 1
рқӣҪаҜ–вӢ…(рқӣҪаҜ вҲ’рқҗө)аө  
where рқ‘ӣрқ‘’рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў(рқ‘—) = min
аҜһвҲҲаҜӢ{рқ‘ҳ|рқ‘ҳ> рқ‘—} denotes the recharging opportunity that follows recharging opportunity рқ‘—. 
The lower bound рқ‘§аҜ…(рқ‘—, рқҗө) is the additional recharging duration that guarantees sufficient battery to arrive 
at the following recharging opportunity. If the vehicle can reach the following recharging opportunity 
without additional recharge, the lower bound is set to a single time unit. The upper bound рқ‘§аҜҺ(рқ‘—, рқҗө) is the 
minimum of the recharging duration that guarantees sufficient battery to arrive at the end depot and the 
recharging duration up to the battery capacity. In all other cases, i.e. рқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲ(рқ’«а®Ҹ\в„ӣ) вҲӘрқ’ҹа®Ҹ, we set 
в„Ө(рқ‘—, рқҗө) = вҲ…. 
Next we introduce the cost function рқҗ№(рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ), representing the minimal weighted sum of the total 
excess times of passengers served in items рқ‘—+ 1, вҖҰ ,2рқ‘ӣвҖІ and the number of laps traveled in order to serve 
them, given that the vehicle is in state (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ). This function can be defined recursively using the 
following Bellman equation: 
рқҗ№(рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) =
min
аҜӯвҲҲ{а¬ҙ}вҲӘв„Ө(аҜқ,а®») рқҗ№бүҖрқ‘—+ 1,maxаөӣрқ‘ҺаҜқа¬ҫа¬ө, О (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқ‘§, в„Һ)аөҹ, О©(рқ‘—, рқҗө, рқ‘§), рқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§)бүҒ+ рқӣја¬өрқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§) + рқӣја¬¶рқ”»(рқ‘—, в„Һ, рқ‘Ү) 
Where рқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§) defines whether a recharging opportunity of type (+) is to be used before item рқ‘—+ 1, 
О (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқ‘§, в„Һ) defines the arrival time to item рқ‘—+ 1, О©(рқ‘—, рқҗө, рқ‘§) defines the state of charge at item рқ‘—+ 1, and 
рқ”»(рқ‘—, в„Һ, рқ‘Ү) calculates the excess time incurred by a request dropped-off at item рқ‘—+ 1. These functions are 
mathematically defined as follows: 
рқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§) = аөң1,
рқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲв„ӣа¬ҫ рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘ рқ‘§> 0
0,
рқ‘Ӯрқ‘Ўв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘Өрқ‘–рқ‘ рқ‘’
 
О (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқ‘§, в„Һ) = рқ‘Ү+ рқңҺаө«1 вҲ’рқ‘’аҜқаөҜ+ рқңҺв„Һрқ‘’аҜқ+ рқ‘§+ рқ‘ЎаҜқа¬ҫа¬ө+ рқңғрқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§) 
О©(рқ‘—, рқҗө, рқ‘§) = рқҗө+ рқ‘§рқӣҪаҜ–вҲ’рқӣҪаҜ—бүҖрқңҶаҜқа¬ҫа¬өвҲ’рқңҶаҜқ+ рқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§)бүҒ 
рқ”»(рқ‘—, в„Һ, рқ‘Ү) = аөңрқ‘һаҜқа¬ҫа¬өвӢ…аө«рқ‘Ү+ рқңҺаө«1 вҲ’рқ‘’аҜқаөҜ+ рқңҺв„Һрқ‘’аҜқ+ рқ‘ЎаҜқа¬ҫа¬өвҲ’ОөаҜқа¬ҫа¬өаөҜ,
рқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲрқҗ·а®Ҹ 
0 ,
рқ‘Ӯрқ‘Ўв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘Өрқ‘–рқ‘ рқ‘’ 
 
The structure of the Bellman equation is explained next by referring to the decision space, the state transition 
and the instantaneous cost function. Positive recharging decisions are enabled only at items representing 
recharging opportunities, and the recharging amount can be selected from the range в„Ө(рқ‘—, рқҗө) as defined 

15 
 
above, or zero. The arrival time to item рқ‘—+ 1 is set to be the latest between its lower time window and the 
arrival time of the vehicle to that item, as defined by О (рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқ‘§, в„Һ) which accounts for the arrival time to item 
рқ‘—, and adds the travel time, service time, recharging time and potentially an additional lap time. The state 
of charge at item рқ‘—+ 1 as defined by О©(рқ‘—, рқҗө, рқ‘§) accounts for the state of charge at item рқ‘—, adds the chosen 
amount to be recharged and subtracts the amount discharged since item рқ‘— which may include the discharge 
incurred due to an additional lap performed using recharging opportunity of type (+). The updated value of 
state variable в„Һ is by definition the value of рқ•Җ(рқ‘—, рқ‘§). Lastly, the instantaneous cost consists of two 
components: the first represent an additional lap to be accumulated in case a recharging opportunity of type 
(+) is used; the second component represents the excess time accumulated in items representing drop-offs. 
An optimal solution of the sub-problem is obtained by calculating the cost рқҗ№(вҲ’1,0,0,0), which 
represents the minimal total weighted cost of a vehicle located at the start depot at the beginning of the 
planning period with an empty battery. An end condition is applied, representing the cost of the last lap: 
рқҗ№аө«2рқ‘ӣбҮұвҲ’1, рқ‘Ү, рқӣҪаҜ—, 0аөҜ= рқӣја¬ө вҲҖрқ‘Ү вүӨрқ‘‘а¬¶аҜЎбҮІа¬ҝа¬ө 
In addition, the following boundary conditions are applied to prevent exploration of infeasible solutions: 
пӮ· 
рқҗ№аө«2рқ‘ӣбҮұвҲ’1, рқ‘Ү, рқӣҪаҜ—, 0аөҜ= вҲһ вҲҖрқ‘Ү> рқ‘‘а¬¶аҜЎбҮІа¬ҝа¬ө 
пӮ· 
рқҗ№(рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, 0) = вҲһ вҲҖрқ‘Ү> рқ‘‘аҜқ вҲҖрқҗө вҲҖрқ‘—вҲҲрқҗ·а®Ҹ 
пӮ· 
рқҗ№(рқ‘—, рқ‘Ү, рқҗө, в„Һ) = вҲһ вҲҖрқ‘—+ 1 вҲҲв„ӣ, вҲҖрқҗө< рқӣҪаҜ— вҲҖрқ‘Ү, вҲҖв„ҺвҲҲ{0,1} 
The first condition refers to states in which the maximal drop-off time in the last item of the sequence is 
violated; the second conditions enforces the same restriction with respect to any preceding item; the third 
condition forbids states without sufficient charge to reach the following recharging opportunity; and the 
fourth condition excludes states in which the minimal and maximal recharging amount contradict. 
A pseudocode summarizing the DP algorithm for the integral lap assignment and scheduling sub-
problem is presented in Electronic Companion D. Note that the algorithm traverses at most рқ‘Ӯ(рқ‘ӣвҖІ) items, 
the service at each item may begin during at most рқ‘ӮбүҖ
рқӣҪрқ‘ҡ
рқӣҪрқ‘җвӢ…рқ‘ӣвҖІбүҒ time units, the state of charge may reach at 
most рқ‘ӮбүҖ
рқӣҪрқ‘ҡ
рқӣҪрқ‘җбүҒ different levels, and the state variable в„Һ can take рқ‘Ӯ(1) different values. Therefore, at most 
рқ‘Ӯаө¬бүҖ
рқӣҪрқ‘ҡ
рқӣҪрқ‘җбүҒ
а¬¶
вӢ…рқ‘ӣбҮұа¬¶аө° states may be reached. At each of these states, at most рқ‘ӮбүҖ
рқӣҪрқ‘ҡ
рқӣҪрқ‘җбүҒ recharging decisions may be 
considered. Given a recharging decision, the following state and the contribution to the cost function can 
be both calculated in constant time. To conclude, the worst-case time complexity of the proposed DP 
algorithm is рқ‘Ӯаө¬бүҖ
рқӣҪрқ‘ҡ
рқӣҪрқ‘җбүҒ
а¬·
вӢ…рқ‘ӣбҮұа¬¶аө°, which is pseudo-polynomial as it depends not only on the number of requests 
рқ‘ӣбҮұ, but also on the time to fully recharge an empty battery, а°үаіҳ
а°үаіҺ. 

16 
 
As a final remark, we note that we were not able to demonstrate that in the general case, the lap 
assignment and scheduling sub-problem can be solved in pseudo-polynomial time. In contrast, as the 
scheduling sub-problem can be formulated as an LP, it can be solved efficiently in the general case as well. 
4. A Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the eDARP-FC 
As demonstrated in the previous section, the e-DARP-FC in its general definition is NP-Hard. Therefore, 
to generate good solutions for large instances of the problem within short running times, a heuristic 
approach is needed. Notably, the structure of the problem suggests that good solutions to the problem may 
be similar in terms of the vehicle and lap assignments. In particular, the sequence of requests that a vehicle 
serves is likely to correspond to the served requestsвҖҷ earliest pick-up times as well as the physical locations 
of their origin and destination stations on the circuit. For example, requests that have early earliest pick-up 
times are not likely to appear at the ends of the vehiclesвҖҷ visit sequences. Therefore, a heuristic approach 
that is based on neighborhood search principles seems to be adequate. 
The analysis of the single-vehicle lap assignment and scheduling sub-problem highlights that the impact 
of local modifications to a given solution cannot be estimated in advance without fully evaluating the 
resulting solution. That is, a minor change in a vehicleвҖҷs sequence of visits may result with a new optimal 
schedule that greatly differs from the original one. In other words, one cannot benefit from the so called 
вҖңdelta calculationsвҖқ that are often utilized in local search heuristics. Nevertheless, the DP algorithm and 
additional scheduling heuristics developed for this sub-problem (Section 4.2) permit fast evaluations of 
complete sequences, which allows us to incorporate them within an LNS framework. In what follows, we 
present an overview of the LNS framework for the eDARP-FC. The main elements of the framework are 
then further described in the following subsections. 
Our encoding represents a solution for the eDARP-FC by a sequence of passenger nodes for each 
vehicle. Each of these sequences can then be evaluated independently by solving the single-vehicle lap 
assignment and scheduling sub-problem. The overall evaluation of a solution is the sum of the single-
vehicle evaluations. In the LNS, the sequences of a given solution are modified in search for an improving 
solution, by removing some requests and reinserting them in new positions of the solution. Each newly 
obtained single-vehicle sequence is reevaluated using either the DP algorithm or the scheduling heuristics, 
and then aggregated with the evaluations of the other vehicles to obtain the value of the new solution. In 
Table 1, we present the main steps of the LNS framework. 
Table 1: LNS framework 
1. Initialize a solution рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ 
2. рқ‘ аҜ•аҜҳаҜҰаҜ§= рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ 
3. Repeat: 
4. рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ= рқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘қрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ҹаө«рқ‘‘рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ўрқ‘ҹрқ‘ңрқ‘Ұ(рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ)аөҜ 
5. If рқ‘Һрқ‘җрқ‘җрқ‘’рқ‘қрқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ, рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ), then рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ= рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ 

17 
 
6. If рқ‘ӣрқ‘’рқ‘Ө_рқ‘Ҹрқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ, рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ) then рқ‘ аҜ•аҜҳаҜҰаҜ§= рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ 
7. Until running time is exhausted 
8. Return рқ‘ аҜ•аҜҳаҜҰаҜ§ 
The algorithm applies an initialization procedure to construct a solution (step 1) and sets it as the initial 
incumbent solution (step 2). Such a solution may be incomplete in the sense that not all requests are 
included in it. In this case, we refer to the set of non-included requests as the request bank. The main loop 
of the LNS framework iteratively destroys and repairs solutions by removing some requests from the 
solution, moving them to the bank, and then trying to reinsert all of the requests that are in the bank. At 
each iteration, the algorithm selects a single destroy operator and a single repair operator to be applied, out 
of a predefined set of operators (step 4). If the newly obtained solution passes some acceptance criterion 
the algorithm shifts to the new solution (step 5). If the newly obtained solution is better than the incumbent 
solution, it is stored as the new incumbent solution (step 6). The algorithm terminates after a predefined 
calculation time is exhausted (step 7) and returns the best solution found (step 8). 
4.1. Solution destruction 
At each iteration of the LNS, the proportion of requests to be removed from the current solution is drawn 
from a uniform distribution рқңӢ~рқ‘Ҳ[0,0.4]. The framework uniformly selects a destroy operator from the 
following set of operators and applies it until рқ‘ӣа·ң= вҢҲрқңӢ(рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ӣаҜ•)вҢү requests are removed, where рқ‘ӣаҜ• denotes 
the number of requests currently in the bank. 
пӮ· 
Random request removal: randomly selects a request to be removed. 
пӮ· 
Shaw removal: first removes one random request. Next, it continuously removes from the solution the 
request which is most similar to the initially removed request. In this context, the similarity between a 
pair of requests is defined with respect to the difference between request earliest pick-up times, as well 
as the travel time between the stations associated with the requests. In particular, the similarity рқңӮ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) 
between requests рқ‘–, рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘ғ is defined as follows: 
рқңӮ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) = 1 вҲ’0.5 бүҶ
аё«аҜ”аі”а¬ҝаҜ”аі•аё«
аӯ«аӯҹаӯ¶
аі–,аі—вҲҲрқ’«|аҜ”аі–а¬ҝаҜ”аі—| +
а°ҹ(аҜң,аҜқ)
аӯ«аӯҹаӯ¶
аі–,аі—вҲҲрқ’«а°ҹ(аҜһ,аҜҹ)бүҮ 
Where рқң“(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) is defined as the minimal direct travel time between the requests' рқ‘–, рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘ғ pick-up nodes 
or drop-off nodes, Namely: 
рқң“(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) = minаө«рқӣҝ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—), рқӣҝ(рқ‘—, рқ‘–), рқӣҝ(рқ‘–+ рқ‘ӣ, рқ‘—+ рқ‘ӣ), рқӣҝ(рқ‘—+ рқ‘ӣ, рқ‘–+ рқ‘ӣ)аөҜ 
Note that the similarity measure is independent of the solution and therefore can be calculated for all 
pairs of requests as a preprocessing step. 
пӮ· 
Latest request removal: removes the request which is, in the current schedule, delivered closest to the 
upper TW of the drop-off node. 

18 
 
пӮ· 
Random lap removal: removes all requests in a randomly selected vehicle lap. 
пӮ· 
Related lap removal: first selects a random vehicle lap and removes all requests included in it. Then, 
it continuously removes all requests in the lap (in any vehicle) whose service end time at the recharging 
depot is closest in time to the initially removed lap. 
пӮ· 
Worst lap removal: removes all requests in the vehicle lap serving the lowest number of requests. 
 
4.2. Solution reconstruction 
The reconstruction of a solution follows several steps. First, we determine the order according to which the 
requests in the bank will be reinserted. Second, we iterate over the requests in the bank in that order and 
attempt to reinsert them. For each request, we screen out positions in the vehicle sequences to which it 
cannot be inserted due to capacity and time-window considerations. Third, the remaining candidate 
positions are exhaustively explored by evaluating their resulting schedules. Finally, the best insertion 
position is selected. If there are no candidate positions for a request, it remains in the bank. 
For the first step, we uniformly select and apply one of the following repair strategies: 
пӮ· 
Random order best insertion: sort the requests in random order. 
пӮ· 
Time-based best insertion: sort the requests according to their earliest pick-up times (ascending). 
At the second step we screen out infeasible insertion positions using three types of considerations, namely, 
simple time-window considerations, vehicle load considerations and the requirement that no passenger 
completes a full lap on board a vehicle (the screening-out procedure is described in details in Electronic 
Companion E). 
Next, at the third step, for each of the remaining candidate positions, we solve the single-vehicle lap 
assignment and scheduling sub-problem to determine the impact of inserting the request in this position on 
the overall objective value. Specifically, we apply one of the following solution approaches: 
пӮ· 
DP: the dynamic programming algorithm presented in Section 3, which obtains the optimal lap 
assignment and schedule simultaneously. 
пӮ· 
2S: a two-stage heuristic procedure, in which first the lap assignments are determined, and then the 
schedule of each such assignment is obtained. Specifically, in the first stage, all recharging 
opportunities of type (+) are identified and all subsets whose sizes do not exceed a predefined value are 
enumerated. In the second stage, the schedules are obtained via an LP (Section 2) or a scheduling 
heuristic (Electronic Companion F). These heuristics are based on two simple rules, namely вҖңrecharge 
as early as possibleвҖқ and вҖңrecharge as late as possibleвҖқ. 

19 
 
4.3. Initialization procedure and acceptance criterion 
We construct initial vehicle sequences by starting from empty sequences and iteratively applying the 
random order best insertion operator, as defined in Section 4.2. Any request that is not successfully inserted 
into the solution (e.g., if all candidate insertion positions violate the requestвҖҷs time window), is inserted 
instead into the bank. 
We use a hierarchical evaluation function with a primary component that represents the number of 
requests in the bank and a secondary component representing the objective value of the eDARP-FC. During 
the search, a new solution with fewer requests in the bank compared to the current solution is always 
accepted. Vice versa, a new solution with more requests in the bank is never accepted. In cases where the 
new solution has the same number of requests in the bank we apply a deterministic annealing acceptance 
criterion with respect to the objective value. Specifically, let рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ рқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ) and рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ рқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ) denote the 
evaluations of the current and new solutions, respectively. In addition, let рқ‘җрқ‘ўрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘’, рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘’ and рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘–рқ‘Ў 
denote, the elapsed computation time, the maximum computation time and the initial accepted percentage 
increase in the objective value. A new solution having the same number of requests in the bank is accepted 
if the following condition is met: 
рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ рқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ) вүӨрқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ рқ‘Ў(рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ) вӢ…аө¬1 + рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвӢ…рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘’вҲ’рқ‘җрқ‘ўрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘’
рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ҡрқ‘’
аө° 
Note that this condition implies that strictly improving solutions are always accepted. Finally, the 
incumbent solution is updated in case that рқ‘ аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ is strictly improving compared to рқ‘ аҜ–аҜЁаҜҘаҜҘ according to the 
same hierarchical evaluation function. 
5. Numerical Results 
In this section, we describe a series of numerical experiments designed to evaluate the performance of the 
methods presented in the previous sections. We base these experiments on two sets of problem instances 
whose construction approach will be detailed in Section 5.1. Following this, we analyze in Section 5.2 the 
impact of various lap assignment and scheduling approaches on the quality of the obtained solutions and 
on the required computation times. In addition, we provide in this section a comparison to fixed schedule 
services and highlight scenarios under which the on-demand service is shown to be beneficial. 
5.1. Problem instances 
Two sets of problem instances are used in the numerical experiments. The first set is based on an artificial 
network with a simple structure as illustrated in Figure 1. The second set consists of a real-life network 
structure derived from the driverless bus service launched during 2019 in Renmark, Australia, as illustrated 
in Figure 2. Together, these two sets provide a variety of input sizes and demand characteristics. A summary 
of the main parameters with respect to the network and the fleet is presented in Table 2 below, and following 

20 
 
this we discuss the generation of requests. All of the instances are available at the following website: 
https://www.autolab.sites.tau.ac.il/publications. 
Table 2: Instance parameters 
 
рқ‘Ҷ 
рқ‘ЎаҜҰ 
рқңғ 
рқңҺ 
рқ‘ү 
рқҗ¶ 
рқӣҪаҜ  
рқӣҪаҜ– 
рқӣҪаҜ— 
Artificial 
6 
Varying 1-8 
24 
1 
3 вҲ’4 
6 
[9,11,13,17] 
1 
4 
Renmark 
10 
Varying 2-6 
30 
1 
4 вҲ’9 
10 
40 
1 
16 
For the artificial instances, note that with the given parameters, a vehicle can complete up to four laps 
with a full battery, and up to 17 minutes would be required to fully recharge an empty battery. We note that 
for the artificial instances, we have randomized 10 different spatial distributions of the stations along the 
circuit, for the sake of diversity. For the Renmark instances, we note that though the existing service is 
based on a single vehicle, in this experiment we tested fleet sizes that vary between five to eight vehicles, 
so as to analyze more complex service characteristics. The travel times between the stations were obtained 
from the published fixed schedule, assuming a one-minute stop at each station, and are presented over their 
corresponding links in Figure 2. We note that the actual battery characteristics for this network are not 
publicly available and were approximated using the published schedule. With the used parameters, 2.5 laps 
can be completed with a full battery, and 40 minutes are required to fully recharge an empty battery. 
Next, we describe the random mechanism applied to generate requests. In particular, we generate 
instances that include [25, 50, 75] single-passenger requests for the artificial network and [100,300] multi-
passenger requests for the Renmark network, having one, two, or three passengers per requests, with equal 
probabilities. We generate 10 instances for each number of requests and denote them by the convention 
вҖңxy_zвҖқ, where x represents the set type (artificial/Renmark), y represents the number of requests and z 
represents the instance number. For each request we first draw the pick-up and drop-off stations. The pick-
up station was selected at random from all passenger stations. In the artificial instances the drop-off station 
was randomly selected from the set of passenger stations, excluding the pick-up station. In the Renmark 
instances, the drop-off station was randomly selected from the five stations that follow the pick-up station 
to reflect realistic demand patterns, namely, to avoid trips that are considerably longer than the walking 
time between the stations. We draw the earliest pick-up time from a uniform distribution between 
predefined values (рқ‘Ҳ(30,200) for the artificial instances and рқ‘Ҳ(60,420) for the Renmark instances. The 
latest drop-off time at node рқ‘– is calculated using the following equation: 
рқ‘‘аҜң= рқ‘ҺаҜңа¬ҝаҜЎ+ рқӣҫа¬өвӢ…рқӣҝ(рқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘ӣ, рқ‘–) + рқӣҫа¬¶ 
where рқӣҫа¬ө and рқӣҫа¬¶ are instance specific parameters representing a direct time multiplier and a constant time 
addition, respectively. In the experiment we have tested the following values: рқӣҫа¬өвҲҲ{1.5,2} and рқӣҫа¬¶вҲҲ
{15,20}. Finally, recall that the objective function is a weighted sum of the total number of laps traveled by 

21 
 
the shuttles and the total passenger excess time, multiplied by weight factors рқӣја¬ө and рқӣја¬¶, respectively. 
Throughout this experiment we use the values рқӣја¬ө= 0.85, рқӣја¬¶= 0.15. 
 
Figure 2: The eastern route of the driverless bus service in Renmark, Australia. Travel times in minutes are depicted on each 
link. 
5.2. Results and analysis 
The LNS framework and all its components, including the DP algorithm and the scheduling heuristics were 
implemented in C++ and were executed on a Xeon Gold 6140 CPUs@2.3 GHz desktop with 192GB of 
RAM. The MILP formulation was implemented in GUROBI v9.5.2 and run on an Intel Core 6230 CPU@ 
2.1GHz desktop with 128GB of RAM. In what follows we address several research questions: 1) is there 
value in using the 2-stage lap assignment and scheduling heuristics over the exact DP approach; 2) how 
does the LNS heuristic compare to a state-of-the-art MILP solver in solving the eDARP-FC; 3) how 
sensitive are the results to changes in several parameter settings, including: the battery capacity, the time 
window widths, and the vehicle fleet size; and 4) can flexible services constitute a superior alternative to 
fixed schedule services? These questions are addressed in Sections 5.2.1 to 5.2.4, respectively. 
5.2.1. Comparison of lap assignment and scheduling approaches 
We have tested the performance of the LNS framework using the following lap assignment and scheduling 
approaches: the dynamic programming algorithm (DP), the 2-stage procedure with the recharge as early as 
possible scheduling heuristic (2S_Earliest), the 2-stage procedure with the recharge as late as possible 
scheduling heuristic (2S_Latest), the 2-stage procedure using both scheduling heuristics (2S_Both) and the 
2-stage procedure using the LP for scheduling (2S_LP). In Table 3, we present the results obtained for the 
artificial instances by applying the LNS framework with a 60 seconds time limit using the following 
baseline parameter settings: рқӣҫа¬ө= 1.5, рқӣҫа¬¶= 15, рқӣҪаҜ = 11. Specifically, each row represents the average 
values over 100 runs, i.e. 10 instances Г— 10 algorithm repetitions. The first three columns in the table 

22 
 
represent the number of requests per demand scenario, the number of vehicles used and the solution 
approach. The following five columns present the number of requests in the bank, the objective value, the 
first component of the objective function (number of laps), the second component of the objective function 
(total passenger excess time) and the number of LNS iterations performed within the time limit. As can be 
observed, the DP approach produces superior results in all three instance sizes. The DP results are obtained 
with fewer iterations, as each iteration applying the DP comprises of higher computational burden. 
Nevertheless, this highlights the impact of determining the optimal lap assignment and schedules of given 
sequences on the evolution of the search process. In addition, note that the linear programming based 
approach consistently yields poor results. This is due to running time of each schedule evaluation, which 
overall does not permit executing a sufficient number of LNS iterations. 
 Table 3: Comparison of Lap Assignment and Scheduling Approaches based on the Artificial Instances 
(60 seconds, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹҸрқҹҸ) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
Approach 
рқ‘ӣаҜ• 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
25 
3 
DP 
0.00
23.31
14.80 
71.50 
25469 
25 
3 
2S_Earliest 
0.00
23.67
14.80
73.90
80248
25 
3 
2S_Latest 
0.00
23.98
14.50
77.70
64509
25 
3 
2S _Both 
0.00
23.63
14.90
73.10
32687
25 
3 
2S_LP 
0.00
23.72
14.83 
74.11 
195 
50 
3 
DP 
0.00
53.29
16.83
259.90
12238
50 
3 
2S_Earliest 
0.00
53.76
16.30
266.00
27746
50 
3 
2S_Latest 
0.00
55.11
16.29
275.10
21378
50 
3 
2S _Both 
0.00
53.77
16.30
266.08
10751
50 
3 
2S_LP 
0.02
56.18
16.84
279.09
63
75 
4 
DP 
0.00
65.82
23.20 
307.34 
6416 
75 
4 
2S_Earliest 
0.00
66.72
22.95
314.73
11960
75 
4 
2S_Latest 
0.00
67.83
22.57
324.31
9673
75 
4 
2S _Both 
0.00
66.94
23.09
315.45
4678
75 
4 
2S_LP 
0.09
80.20
22.28 
408.42 
16 
 
Table 4 reports the results obtained for the Renmark instances, with a 600 seconds time limit. It follows 
the same structure of Table 3. The values presented in this table are averaged over 100 runs, i.e., 10 demand 
scenarios Г— 10 algorithm repetitions, for a representative parameter setting: рқӣҫа¬ө= 1.5, рқӣҫа¬¶= 15, рқӣҪаҜ = 40. 
As can be seen, for these instances the DP approach is no longer superior. This can be attributed to the 
considerably lower number of LNS iterations performed within 600 seconds. The linear programming based 
approach seems to produce even poorer results as the number of requests grows. Specifically, for the 300-
request instances, the framework could not even complete the first iteration. Comparing the four 2-stage 
heuristics, it is evident that the 2S_Earliest approach yields the best results for both the 100- and 300- 
request instances. Consequently, in the following sections we focus on results obtained using this approach, 
unless stated otherwise. 
 

23 
 
 Table 4: Comparison of Lap Assignment and Scheduling Approaches based on the Renmark Instances 
(600 seconds, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹ’рқҹҺ) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
Approach 
рқ‘ӣаҜ• 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
100
5 
DP 
0.00
100.72 
34.33 
476.94 
1447 
100
5 
2S_Earliest 
0.00
101.16 
32.81 
488.45 
25306 
100
5 
2S_Latest 
0.00
107.96 
31.95 
538.66 
20725
100
5 
2S _Both 
0.00
101.24 
32.78 
489.18 
12753
100
5 
2S_LP 
0.01
122.51 
33.99 
624.14 
64 
300
8 
DP 
0.00
379.99
57.18
2209.22
421
300
8 
2S_Earliest 
0.00
361.05
55.60
2091.93
3786
300
8 
2S_Latest 
0.00
385.08
54.53
2258.18
3054
300
8 
2S _Both 
0.00
374.84
55.62
2183.75
1661
300
8 
2S_LP 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
To test these insights statistically, we have compared the leading scheduling approach to each of the 
other approaches, at the instance level. This resulted with a total of 190 comparisons (4 comparisons times 
50 instances minus 10 300-requests instances in which the LP is inapplicable). Out of 190 t-tests that were 
conducted, 147 were significant, i.e. with p-value smaller than 0.05. In 8 of the remaining cases, the 
difference was not significant since both approaches were able to find the optimal solution in all runs (i.e. 
obtained the exact same average). Thus, it is safe to assume that whenever the averages are not equal, the 
differences are statistically significant. 
Next, we zoom in on the performance of the scheduling heuristics by fixing the lap assignment 
decisions. This allows us to further analyze the capability of the scheduling heuristics to find optimal 
schedules. For this purpose, for each of the Renmark instances, we have randomly generated 100,000 single 
vehicle sequences. The optimal lap assignment and scheduling of each sequence was first determined using 
the DP algorithm. Then, we have fixed the lap assignment decisions and solved each resulting scheduling 
sub-problem with the scheduling heuristics (Earliest, Latest and Both). In Table 5, we present the results of 
this experiment. The first column presents the instance name, the following four columns present the 
average values of the schedules for the four scheduling approaches, and the last three columns represent 
the percentage of cases in which each heuristic succeeded in finding the optimal schedule. The average 
performance of the heuristics is between 5% to 29% worse than the optimal schedules. Earliest consistently 
performs better than Latest, and as can be expected, considering Both benefits from the advantages of both 
and therefore leads to better schedules. The same trend is observed when viewing the percentage of cases 
that the heuristics were able to find the optimal schedules. Once again, these results emphasize the need to 
carefully tradeoff between the times required to find schedules and their quality within the overall solution 
framework. 
 
 

24 
 
Table 5: Comparison of Scheduling Approaches based on the Renmark Instances (600 seconds, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹ’рқҹҺ) 
Instance 
Name 
Average Objective Values (per vehicle) 
 
% Optimal Schedules 
DP 
Earliest 
Latest 
Both 
 
Earliest
Latest 
Both 
r100_0 
21.37 
24.23 
26.63 
23.53 
 
41.85% 18.36%
43.74%
r100_1 
26.73 
29.90 
31.08 
28.82 
 
39.87% 23.83%
43.52%
r100_2 
25.09 
28.24 
30.57 
27.10 
 
46.33% 22.15%
48.62%
r100_3 
23.20 
26.52 
27.61 
25.25 
 
44.40% 23.49%
47.29%
r100_4 
24.94 
28.40 
32.09 
27.23 
 
42.12% 23.21%
45.60%
r100_5 
28.00 
32.56 
33.93 
30.62 
 
36.16% 20.34%
41.67%
r100_6 
26.91 
30.76 
33.08 
29.41 
 
41.51% 20.42%
44.40%
r100_7 
28.44 
32.69 
33.51 
30.94 
 
31.86% 20.94%
37.84%
r100_8 
29.77 
34.82 
35.34 
32.62 
 
30.67% 21.09%
36.48%
r100_9 
27.22 
29.93 
32.26 
29.12 
 
46.76% 22.06%
50.45%
r300_0 
57.43 
61.72 
64.00 
60.33 
 
37.95% 17.58%
41.73%
r300_1 
61.16 
66.33 
67.97 
64.60 
 
29.14% 15.61%
33.72%
r300_2 
60.83 
65.49 
68.65 
64.06 
 
34.26% 20.00%
38.69%
r300_3 
61.15 
67.81 
70.51 
65.07 
 
28.65% 13.40%
34.73%
r300_4 
61.52 
67.61 
71.09 
65.53 
 
24.16% 13.86%
29.17%
r300_5 
60.26 
65.86 
65.47 
63.43 
 
27.99% 17.12%
31.66%
r300_6 
59.43 
64.77 
68.10 
62.84 
 
31.80% 13.80%
35.03%
r300_7 
56.55 
61.40 
63.94 
59.62 
 
36.01% 15.13%
40.08%
r300_8 
59.59 
65.63 
67.25 
63.42 
 
32.75% 15.77%
36.69%
r300_9 
63.06 
68.82 
69.30 
66.10 
 
34.74% 21.96%
40.88%
5.2.2. Comparison to a state-of-the-art commercial solver 
In Table 6, we compare the average results obtained for the baseline parameter configuration by 10 
repetitions of the LNS framework, each within 60 seconds, to those obtained using Gurobi to solve the 
MILP model presented in Section 2, enhanced by the valid inequalities presented in Electronic Companion 
B. In particular, we present the results obtained by Gurobi with a running time limitations of 120 seconds 
and 10 hours, used for heuristic and exact comparison, respectively. The first two columns of the table 
present the instance name and the fleet size. The third and fourth columns present the objective value and 
actual CPU time when a 10-hour limitation is set. Note that all of the 25-request and 50-request instances 
(except one) converge to the optimal values within this time (denoted by an asterisk). The fifth and sixth 
columns present analogous values for the 120 seconds time limitation. The remaining five columns refer to 
the LNS framework and present the objective value, the number of laps, the total passenger excess time, 
the number of LNS iterations and the optimality gap. As can be seen, for most of the 25- and 50-request 
instances, the LNS framework was able to find the optimal solutions within 60 seconds. In contrast, after 
120 seconds the optimality gaps obtained by Gurobi range from a few percent for the 25-request instances 
up to 30.67% for the 50-request instances. For the 75-requests instances, no incumbent solution could be 
obtained within 120 seconds, and the optimality gaps could not be closed within a time limit of ten hours 
(with remaining optimality gaps of 77% to 88%). Furthermore, the solutions obtained be the LNS 
framework within 60 seconds are superior to the ones obtained by Gurobi in 10 hours. This highlights that 

25 
 
one cannot expect to solve the MILP formulation for realistic settings using a state-of-the-art solver within 
a reasonable computational time, further emphasizing the practical importance of the LNS framework. 
Table 6: Comparison of heuristic and optimal solutions for the artificial instances (рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹҸрқҹҸ) 
Instance 
Name 
рқ‘ү 
Gurobi (10 hours) 
 
Gurobi (120 seconds) 
 
LNS Framework - DP (60 seconds) 
Obj. 
CPU (s) 
 
Inc. 
Opt. Gap 
 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
Opt. Gap 
a25_0
3
17.45*
305
17.45
0.00%
17.45
14.00
37.00
31094
0.00%
a25_1
3
24.00*
2279
26.10
8.75%
24.00
15.00
75.00
29005
0.00%
a25_2
3
23.20*
2301
25.20
8.62%
23.20
16.00
64.00
23265
0.00%
a25_3
3
26.35*
562
27.25
3.42%
26.35
16.00
85.00
22478
0.00%
a25_4
3
21.45*
217
21.85
1.86%
21.45
12.00
75.00
26435
0.00%
a25_5
3
26.50*
239
27.20
2.64%
26.50
16.00
86.00
35351
0.00%
a25_6
3
23.55*
490
24.30
3.18%
23.55
12.00
89.00
29171
0.00%
a25_7
3
20.85*
5517
22.95
10.07%
20.85
15.00
54.00
13318
0.00%
a25_8
3
24.75*
530
25.55
3.23%
24.75
15.00
80.00
25565
0.00%
a25_9
3
24.95*
98
24.95
0.00%
24.95
17.00
70.00
19008
0.00%
a50_0
3
56.75
36000
65.55
-
56.75
17.00
282.00
11378
-
a50_1
3
53.20*
11184
61.75
16.07%
53.20
16.00
264.00
16439
0.00%
a50_2
3
52.00*
23500
67.95
30.67%
52.18
16.10
256.60
11839
0.34%
a50_3
3
53.05*
2561
53.75
1.32%
53.13
16.20
262.40
15678
0.15%
a50_4
3
57.10*
16165
-
-
57.10
16.00
290.00
13208
0.00%
a50_5
3
53.70*
13917
58.20
8.38%
53.70
18.00
256.00
8072
0.00%
a50_6
3
45.95*
19626
-
-
45.95
17.00
210.00
13188
0.00%
a50_7
3
56.20*
4634
68.35
21.62%
56.20
19.00
267.00
11112
0.00%
a50_8
3
52.30*
24559
-
-
52.30
16.00
258.00
10817
0.00%
a50_9
3
52.40*
20467
-
-
52.40
17.00
253.00
10645
0.00%
a75_0
4
66.10
36000
-
-
63.88
23.80
291.00
5911
-
a75_1
4
60.25
36000
-
-
60.36
22.90
272.60
5400
-
a75_2
4
79.00
36000
-
-
68.80
25.00
317.00
5669
-
a75_3
4
72.65
36000
-
-
70.54
23.00
339.90
7620
-
a75_4
4
78.00
36000
-
-
67.57
22.30
324.10
6813
-
a75_5
4
73.30
36000
-
-
68.50
22.70
328.00
6432
-
a75_6
4
69.35
36000
-
-
63.52
22.00
298.80
5321
-
a75_7 
4 
76.90
36000
 
-
-
 
68.25
24.00
319.00
8019
-
a75_8
4
72.20
36000
-
-
62.76
22.90
288.60
5539
-
a75_9 
4 
65.15
36000
 
-
-
 
64.05
23.40
294.40
7436
-
In Figure 3, we present the evolution of the solution values for the 25, 50 and 75-requests instances, 
using the LNS framework (in grey) and Gurobi (in orange), compared to the best known solution found by 
either approach. As can be observed, in all cases the LNS framework fully converges in a few minutes and 
in particular almost all 25 and 50-request instances converge to the optimal solution in less than a minute. 
In comparison, using Gurobi, a considerably longer calculation time is needed to obtain the same incumbent 
solution. Furthermore, for the 75-requests instances the remaining relative gap is 9%, on average, after one 
hour of CPU time. 
 
Figure 3: Evolution of the solution values over time - Artificial Instances (рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹҸрқҹҸ) 
 

26 
 
5.2.3. Sensitivity analysis 
Next, we perform a sensitivity analysis on our results. First, we test the impact of the battery capacity. Table 
7 presents the results on the artificial instances obtained using the LNS framework with the DP approach 
for different battery capacity values. Each row in the table presents the average values obtained over 100 
runs, namely 10 repetitions of 10 instances per setting. Noticeably, as the battery capacity increases the DP 
requires more computational effort and therefore less LNS iterations can be completed within the 60 
seconds time limit. At the same time, increasing the battery capacity provides added flexibility to the 
system, and hence, the overall solution value improves. The eighth column in the table displays the average 
number of recharging visits per setting. Noticeably, when the battery capacity increases from 9 to 11 slightly 
more visits to the recharging station are performed, which can be explained by the added flexibility, whereas 
further increasing the battery capacity leads to an expected drop in the number of recharging visits. The last 
four columns in the table consider the extent to which the added capacity is used during recharging at the 
first four laps (when increasing capacity from 9 to 11, 11 to 13, and 13 to 17). Observe that the added 
capacity is mainly used in the first lap, and to a lesser extent during the following laps. Indeed, as the 
vehicles advance in their routes, they are less likely to require more recharging in order to complete their 
tasks. Nevertheless, the impact of the added capacity is non-negligible. 
Table 7: The impact of the battery capacity вҖ“ Artificial instances (60 seconds, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
рқӣҪаҜ  
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
Avg. 
recharging 
visits
 
% cases added capacity is used 
Lap 1 
Lap 2 
Lap 3 
Lap 4 
25 
3 
9 
21.26
14.48
59.72
26815
2.63
 
-
-
-
-
25 
3 
11 
23.73
14.70
74.90
51419
2.67
 
23.00%
3.67%
13.00%
0.00%
25 
3 
13 
23.31
14.80
71.50
25719
1.93
 
72.00%
12.00%
20.33%
14.67%
25 
3 
17 
19.64
14.10
51.06
19531
1.67
 
64.33%
12.00%
6.67%
3.33%
50 
3 
9 
18.37
14.30
41.40
10589
2.87
 
-
-
-
-
50 
3 
11 
48.65
16.78
229.23
13635
2.93
 
50.00%
3.33%
26.67%
3.33%
50 
3 
13 
54.27
16.40
268.88
26663
2.21
 
73.33%
8.00%
29.00%
41.33%
50 
3 
17 
53.27
16.80
259.90
12534
1.94
 
73.67%
7.33%
19.67%
5.33%
75 
4 
9 
45.23
16.77
206.47
9944
3.05
 
-
-
-
-
75 
4 
11 
41.84
17.16
181.67
5397
3.09
 
45.25%
6.50%
29.75%
6.25%
75 
4 
13 
61.35
23.19
277.55
7238
2.32
 
85.00%
5.75%
26.25%
41.50%
75 
4 
17 
66.93
22.95
316.14
14204
2.12
 
74.75%
7.75%
19.50%
5.00%
In Table 8, we analyze the sensitivity of the solution values to the tightness of the requestsвҖҷ time 
windows. This analysis was carried out by varying the values of the parameters рқӣҫа¬ө, рқӣҫа¬¶ (representing the 
direct travel time multiplier and constant time factor, respectively) in the artificial instances and looking 
into the solutions obtained using the LNS framework with the DP approach. As before, each row in the 
table presents the average values obtained over 100 runs. In terms of the number of iterations that can be 
completed within the 60 second running time, a consistent decrease is observed as рқӣҫа¬ө, рқӣҫа¬¶ increase. This can 
be explained by the fact that as the requestsвҖҷ time windows become more loose, there are less opportunities 

27 
 
to screen-out possible insertions at each LNS iterations. On the other hand, loosening the time windows 
provides an opportunity for better schedules, leading to a mixed trend with respect to the objective value. 
Table 8: The impact of the time-window width вҖ“ Artificial instances (60 seconds, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹҸрқҹҸ) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
рқӣҫа¬ө 
рқӣҫа¬¶ 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
25 
3 
1.5 
15 
23.31
14.80
71.50
25469
25 
3 
2.0 
15 
23.31
14.80
71.50
18966
25 
3 
1.5 
20 
23.31
14.80
71.50
19527
25 
3 
2.0 
20 
23.31
14.80
71.50
14402
50 
3 
1.5 
15 
53.29
16.83
259.90
12238
50 
3 
2.0 
15 
53.27
16.80
259.90
8755
50 
3 
1.5 
20 
53.27
16.78
260.05
8763
50 
3 
2.0 
20 
53.27
16.80
259.93
6105
75 
4 
1.5 
15 
65.82
23.20
307.34
6416
75 
4 
2.0 
15 
65.91
23.07
308.64
4807
75 
4 
1.5 
20 
65.92
23.17
308.18
4692
75 
4 
2.0 
20 
65.96
23.07
308.98
3384
For the Renmark instances, we have also tested the impact of the fleet sizes. Table 9 presents the results 
for the 100- and 300-request instances, with fleet sizes of {4,5,6} and {7,8,9}, respectively. As can be 
observed, the quality of the solutions greatly improves with the increase in the fleet size. With more 
vehicles, the offered load increases and so does the ability to coordinate the vehicles. The total number of 
laps performed increases, allowing to better facilitate the passenger requests, thus, the total excess time 
significantly decreases. Further on, to examine the importance of the number of vehicles as compared to 
the vehicle capacity, we evaluate various configurations in which the total number of seats is constant. 
Specifically, in Table 10 we report the results for 50 seat settings for the 100-request instances, considering 
the following configurations: (2 vehicles, 25 seats), (5 vehicles, 10 seats) and (10 vehicles, 5 seats). 
Similarly, we test for the 300-request instances a setting with 80 seats, considering the following 
configurations: (2 vehicles, 40 seats), (4 vehicles, 20 seats), (8 vehicles, 10 seats), (16 vehicles, 5 seats), 
and (20 vehicles, 4 seats). As can be observed, for the weight factors used in this experiment (рқ‘Һа¬ө= 0.85, 
рқӣја¬¶= 0.15) it appears that it is beneficial to operate a larger fleet with low capacity vehicles rather than 
using a small fleet with a high capacity. This results in a considerable decrease in the weighted total excess 
time and a more moderate increase in the weighted total number of laps performed. As the weight of latter 
component in the objective function increases we expect to see an opposite trend. 
Table 9: The impact of the fleet size вҖ“ Renmark instances (600 seconds, 2S_Earliest, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹ’рқҹҺ) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
100
4 
145.824
27.820
814.510
33658
100
5 
101.156
32.810
488.450
25306
100
6 
77.128
37.640
300.890
17601
300
7 
433.831
49.430
2612.100
4409
300
8 
361.050
55.600
2091.930
3786
300
9 
314.357
61.620
1746.530
2800

28 
 
Table 10: The impact of capacity distribution over vehicles - Renmark instances 
(600 seconds, 2S_Earliest, рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹ’рқҹҺ ) 
рқ‘ӣ 
рқ‘ү 
C 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Itr. 
100
2 
25 
231.23
15.08
1456.05
91679
100
5 
10 
101.16
32.81
488.45
25306
100
10 
5 
48.73
47.59
55.19
9758
300
2 
40 
555.80
14.73
3621.83
18978
300
4 
20 
724.09
29.56
4659.75
6834
300
5 
16 
606.13
36.36
3834.80
5478
300
8 
10 
361.05
55.60
2091.93
3786
300
10 
8 
288.80
67.85
1540.85
2332
300
16 
5 
192.36
101.26
708.59
1248
300
20 
4 
166.95
120.74
428.83
950
 
5.2.4. Comparison to fixed-schedule services 
Finally, to measure the potential benefit of the proposed on-demand service, we benchmark it against the 
existing fixed-stop fixed-schedules service, based on the Renmark case study. We start by describing the 
fixed service and then compare it to the proposed flexible service. In the fixed service, vehicles are required 
to stop at all stations. In addition, the vehicles are distributed with uniform margins along the fixed-circuit. 
Thus, the lap travel time divided by the number of vehicles, determines the headway between consecutive 
vehicles. When a vehicle stops at a station, it serves the requests waiting there according to a first-come-
first-served regime, up to the capacity of the vehicle. The remaining requests are required to wait for the 
following vehicles. As in the flexible service, passengers disembark at the first visit to their destination 
following their embarking. The fixed service is simulated by applying the following assumptions: 1) the 
time required to complete a lap includes the direct travel time between the stations, the service times at all 
stations and the time required to recharge the battery for a single lap. 2) The recharging time is deducted 
from the excess times of passengers who are bound to be on board the vehicle while the vehicle enters the 
recharging station. This is done in order to adhere to the requirement that no passengers spend time at the 
recharging depot. 
For a meaningful comparison, we evaluate both services with the same system settings (network 
structure, travel and service times, fleet size, battery characteristics, vehicle capacity) and the same demand 
realizations. With respect to the demand distribution, as demonstrated in multiple public transit studies in 
the past (e.g., Ingvardson et al. 2018), approximately uniformly distributed arrival times are observed when 
the vehicle headway is relatively small. Hence, considering the same arrival time realizations as in the on 
demand service seems appropriate for 12-minute and 7-minute headways used for the 100-request and 300-
request instances, respectively. 
In Table 11, we present the results obtained by the LNS framework and the described above simulation 
for the Remark instances. Two types of scenarios are considered: five vehicles and 100-request instances, 

29 
 
as well as eight vehicles and 300-request instances. In addition to the performance measures presented in 
previous tables, we introduce an additional column representing the average excess time per passenger in 
the system. Recall that these instances include multi-passenger requests. We note that the results of the LNS 
framework are the averages of ten repetitions, while given the demand realizations, the fixed service 
simulation is fully deterministic and therefore was run a single time for each instance. 
The results demonstrate that for all tested demand realizations, while completing approximately the 
same number of laps, considerably shorter excess times can be obtained using a flexible service. This is 
also reflected in the average excess times, which decrease by 32% to 75%. The improvement in the quality 
of the solutions is a direct consequence of the flexible serviceвҖҷs ability to adapt itself to the actual requests. 
Note that often the vehicles in the flexible service perform slightly fewer laps though they have the ability 
to skip stops and thus complete laps faster. This occurs as in many cases vehicles do not directly continue 
to the following stations, but instead wait at the current station for passengers that are about to arrive soon. 
Interestingly, it can be observed that as the number of requests and vehicles increase, the gap between the 
average excess times in the flexible and fixed schedule services decreases. This suggests that as the 
frequency of service and the demand increases, the advantage of a flexible service might decrease. 
Table 11: Comparison of flexible and fixed schedule services вҖ“ Renmark instances (рқңёрқҹҸ= рқҹҸ. рқҹ“, рқңёрқҹҗ= рқҹҸрқҹ“, рқ‘Ә= рқҹҸрқҹҺ, рқң·рқ’Һ= рқҹ’рқҹҺ) 
Instance 
Name 
рқ‘ү 
LNS Framework - 2S_Earliest (600 seconds) 
 
Fixed Schedule Service 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Avg. 
Excess
Itr. 
 
Obj. 
Laps 
Excess 
Avg. 
Excess
r100_0
5
79.02
31.50
348.30
1.81
21352
 
237.05
32.00 1399.00
7.29
r100_1
5
113.22
34.00
562.10
2.88
25461
 
266.45
35.00 1578.00
8.09
r100_2
5
95.97
32.40
456.20
2.51
25260
 
259.20
33.00 1541.00
8.47
r100_3
5
99.69
33.40
475.30
2.44
24614
 
260.30
35.00 1537.00
7.88
r100_4
5
93.48
32.50
439.00
2.13
23394
 
251.95
34.00 1487.00
7.22
r100_5
5
98.27
34.50
459.60
2.36
28943
 
245.30
32.00 1454.00
7.46
r100_6
5
101.03
31.20
496.70
2.26
22486
 
251.85
33.00 1492.00
6.78
r100_7
5
117.18
31.60
602.10
3.00
28026
 
265.45
34.00 1577.00
7.85
r100_8
5
105.29
33.30
513.20
2.52
28031
 
257.25
33.00 1528.00
7.49
r100_9
5
108.45
33.70
532.00
2.76
25497
 
252.70
34.00 1492.00
7.73
r300_0
8
357.69
54.30
2076.90
3.57
3722
 
533.70
57.00 3235.00
5.56
r300_1
8
374.85
56.20
2180.50
3.60
3817
 
525.70
58.00 3176.00
5.26
r300_2
8
357.73
56.50
2064.70
3.39
3991
 
568.35
60.00 3449.00
5.66
r300_3
8
366.02
54.60
2130.70
3.42
3487
 
566.45
59.00 3442.00
5.52
r300_4
8
376.74
55.30
2198.20
3.65
3596
 
578.20
58.00 3526.00
5.84
r300_5
8
358.17
56.70
2066.50
3.44
3911
 
576.20
59.00 3507.00
5.85
r300_6
8
371.39
56.30
2156.90
3.71
4043
 
534.65
59.00 3230.00
5.56
r300_7
8
330.26
55.40
1887.80
3.29
3501
 
507.05
59.00 3046.00
5.32
r300_8
8
335.49
55.60
1921.50
3.30
3637
 
531.15
60.00 3201.00
5.49
r300_9
8
382.18
55.10
2235.60
3.70
4157
 
591.15
57.00 3618.00
5.98
6. Conclusion 
Autonomous shuttle services have already been brought into operation in multiple locations globally. 
Because of various restrictions, these services are typically provided by small fleets of electric autonomous 

30 
 
shuttles that travel on predefined circuits according to fixed-stop-fixed-schedule plans. The goal of this 
study was to develop a decision support framework that will enable operators to provide on-demand 
services over the same circuits, while taking to account battery management considerations. 
In this paper, we have investigated the operational problem faced by the service providers of such 
systems, denoted as eDARP-FC, and formulated it as an MILP that differs from standard Dial-a-Ride 
formulations because of the circular route. We have shown that the eDARP-FC belongs to the class of NP-
Hard problems and analyzed the complexity of two important sub-problems. Namely, given the sequence 
of requests to be served by a single vehicle, the first sub-problem simultaneously determines the optimal 
lap assignment and schedule, whereas the second sub-problem determines the optimal schedule given a 
predetermined lap assignment as well. We have shown that under realistic conditions, the first sub-problem 
can be solved exactly via dynamic programming, while the second one can be formulated as a linear 
program and can thus be solved efficiently even with no particular assumptions regarding the input. In 
addition, we have developed scheduling heuristics for the second sub-problem. All of these solution 
procedures have been incorporated as subroutines within an LNS framework, which was tested through an 
extensive numerical study of an artificial circuit as well as a real-world case study of the autonomous shuttle 
service in Renmark, Australia. Numerical results for 25- and 50-request problem instances demonstrate that 
in many cases, the LNS framework is capable of finding the optimal solution within one minute. The 
impacts of various problem parameters are examined, including: battery capacity, vehicle fleet size and 
request time-window widths. This leads to several methodological and managerial insights: there is a trade-
off between the effort spent on the scheduling sub-problems (exact vs. heuristic) and the number of LNS 
iterations that can be performed in a given time limit, with different approaches leading to better results for 
different instance characteristics and time limits; looser time constraints allow for better solutions but 
require more computational effort; and for the considered setting, a larger fleet of small vehicles is to be 
preferred over a small fleet of large vehicles. Finally, a comparison to a fixed-stop-fixed-schedule regime 
has demonstrated that an on-demand service can lead to a significant reduction in passenger excess time, 
ranging between 32% to 75%. This improvement is achieved using the same fleet and at a comparable (and 
even smaller) operational cost. 
To conclude, we highlight several directions for future research. First, it may be interesting to explore 
the impact of different network structures on the properties of the resulting optimization problem and the 
ensuing solution strategies. Such structures can either be simpler special cases, such as a line, or more 
complicated ones, such as bi-directional or star-shaped circuits. Focusing on the sub-problems, we note that 
once the sequence of nodes to be visited is determined, the resulting scheduling sub-problem is independent 
of the complete network structure. Thus, the scheduling procedures developed in this study may well be 
used in more general network structures. Second, a dynamic variant of the setting discussed in this paper 

31 
 
should be considered, in which information regarding new requests may be arriving after the system has 
started its operation. We believe that the modeling approaches and methodology presented in this paper 
may be useful for these cases as well. Third, in this study we assumed that the network includes a single 
recharging depot. Future studies should examine generalizations in this direction, including the 
incorporation of multiple recharging depots and the possibility to recharge at passenger stations. The 
implications of battery swapping approaches constitute an additional interesting direction for consideration. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the projects Data-driven logistics (FWO Strategic Basic Research, S007318N), 
Optimising the design of a hybrid urban mobility system (FWO junior research project, G020222N) and 
OR4Logistics (FWO-WOG), all funded by the Research Foundation вҖ“ Flanders. Yves Molenbruch is 
partially funded by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO-1202719N). The computational resources and 
services used in this work were provided by the VSC (Flemish Supercomputer Center), funded by the 
Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) and the Flemish Government. 
References 
Alamalhodaei, A. (2021). Waymo and J.B. Hunt partner to bring autonomous trucks to Texas in new pilot. 
TechCrunch. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://techcrunch.com/2021/06/10/waymo-and-jb-hunt-partner-to-bring-
autonomous-trucks-to-texas-in-new-pilot/. 
Asghari, M., & Al-e, S. M. J. M. (2020). Green vehicle routing problem: A state-of-the-art review. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 107899. 
Bagloee, S. A., Tavana, M., Asadi, M. and Oliver, T. (2016). Autonomous vehicles: challenges, opportunities, and 
future implications for transportation policies. Journal of Modern Transportation, 24(4), 284-303. 
Bansal, P., & Kockelman, K. M. (2017). Forecasting AmericansвҖҷ long-term adoption of connected and autonomous 
vehicle technologies. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 95, 49-63. 
Bertoncello, M., & Wee, D. (2015). Ten ways autonomous driving could redefine the automotive world. McKinsey & 
Company, 6. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/ten-ways-
autonomous-driving-could-redefine-the-automotive-world. 
Bongiovanni, C., Kaspi, M., & Geroliminis, N. (2019). The electric autonomous dial-a-ride problem. Transportation 
Research Part B: Methodological, 122, 436-456. 
Bongiovanni, C., Kaspi, M., Cordeau, J-F., & Geroliminis, N. (2021). A learning large neighborhood search for the 
dynamic electric autonomous dial-a-ride problem. Working paper. 
Bonnefon, J. F., Shariff, A., & Rahwan, I. (2016). The social dilemma of autonomous vehicles. Science, 352(6293), 
1573-1576. 
Daganzo, C. F. (1984). Checkpoint dial-a-ride systems. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 18(4-5), 
315-327. 
Fagnant, D. J. and Kockelman, K. (2015). Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: opportunities, barriers and 
policy recommendations. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77, 167-181. 
Gurman, M. (June 2, 2021). Apple Loses Multiple Top Managers from Self-Driving Car Division. Bloomberg. 
Retrieved from: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-06-02/apple-loses-several-top-managers-from-
self-driving-car-division 
Ho, S. C., Szeto, W. Y., Kuo, Y. H., Leung, J. M., Petering, M., & Tou, T. W. (2018). A survey of dial-a-ride problems: 
Literature review and recent developments. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 111, 395-421. 

32 
 
Iclodean, C., Cordos, N., & Varga, B. O. (2020). Autonomous shuttle bus for public transportation: A 
review. Energies, 13(11), 2917. 
Ingvardson, J. B., Nielsen, O. A., Raveau, S., & Nielsen, B. F. (2018). Passenger arrival and waiting time distributions 
dependent on train service frequency and station characteristics: A smart card data analysis. Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 90, 292-306. 
Litman, T. (2018). Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions. Victoria, Canada: Victoria Transport Policy 
Institute. 
Masmoudi, M. A., Hosny, M., Demir, E., Genikomsakis, K. N., & Cheikhrouhou, N. (2018). The dial-a-ride problem 
with electric vehicles and battery swapping stations. Transportation research part E: logistics and transportation 
review, 118, 392-420. 
Metz, C., & Conger, K. (December 7, 2020). Uber, After Years of Trying, Is Handing Off Its Self-Driving Car Project. 
The 
New 
York 
Times. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://www-nytimes-
com.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www.nytimes.com/2020/12/07/technology/uber-self-driving-car-project.amp.html 
Molenbruch, Y., Braekers, K. and Caris, A. (2017). Typology and literature review for dial-a-ride problems. Annals 
of Operations Research, 259(1-2), 295-325. 
Narayanan, S., Chaniotakis, E., & Antoniou, C. (2020). Shared autonomous vehicle services: A comprehensive 
review. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 111, 255-293. 
Padberg, M. W. (1976). A note on the total unimodularity of matrices. Discrete Mathematics, 14(3), 273-278. 
Pimenta, V., Quilliot, A., Toussaint, H., & Vigo, D. (2017). Models and algorithms for reliability-oriented dial-a-ride 
with autonomous electric vehicles. European Journal of Operational Research, 257(2), 601-613. 
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2010). Large neighborhood search. In Handbook of metaheuristics (pp. 399-419). Springer, 
Boston, MA. 
Postauto, 2020. Project SmartShuttle вҖ“ Testing in Sion. Retrieved from: https://www.postauto.ch/en/testing-uvrier 
Quadrifoglio, L., Hall, R. W., & Dessouky, M. M. (2006). Performance and design of mobility allowance shuttle 
transit services: bounds on the maximum longitudinal velocity. Transportation science, 40(3), 351-363. 
Sage, 2020. Renmark Autonomous Vehicle Trial. Retrieved from: http://renmark.rideswithsage.com/ 
Shaheen, S., & Chan, N. (2016). Mobility and the sharing economy: Potential to facilitate the first-and last-mile public 
transit connections. Built Environment, 42(4), 573-588. 
Trotta, M., Archetti, C., Feillet, D., & Quilliot, A. (2022). Pickup and delivery problems with autonomous vehicles 
on rings. European Journal of Operational Research, 300(1), 221-236.