TITLE: Mission Planning for Emergency Rapid Mapping with Drones
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0963
---

Mission planning for emergency rapid mapping with drones
Katharina Glock∗, Anne Meyer†
Abstract
We introduce a mission planning concept for routing unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
through a set of sampling locations in the immediate aftermath of an incident such as a
ﬁre or chemical accident.
Using interpolation methods that account for the spatial in-
terdependencies inherent in the surveyed phenomenon, these samples allow predicting the
distribution of hazardous substances across the aﬀected area. We deﬁne the generalized
correlated team orienteering problem (GCorTOP) for selecting informative samples consid-
ering spatial correlations between observed and unobserved locations as well as priorities
in the surveyed area. To quickly provide high-quality solutions in time-sensitive situations,
we propose a two-phase multi-start adaptive large neighborhood search (2MLS). We show
the competitiveness of the solution approach using benchmark instances for the team ori-
enteering problem and investigate the performance of the proposed models and solution
approach in an extensive study based on newly introduced benchmark instances for the
mission planning problem.
Keywords: generalized correlated team orienteering problem; UAV mission planning; adap-
tive large neighborhood search; emergency surveillance
1
Introduction
In the immediate aftermath of an incident, the ﬁrst step towards an eﬀective emergency response
is to assess the nature and scale of the situation at hand in order to coordinate emergency re-
sponse teams. For major disasters such as landslides, earthquakes, or ﬂoods, dedicated systems
have been proposed for acquiring this information using satellite-based remote sensing technolo-
gies, for example, the Copernicus Rapid Mapping Service (Copernicus EMS 2018). Meanwhile,
the vast majority of emergencies faced by ﬁrst responders do not reach the magnitude of natural
disasters. Nonetheless, reconnaissance is the ﬁrst action to be taken in every operation (see,
e.g., the command system of the German federal ﬁre service regulations (FwDV 100 1999)). In
this work, we focus on operations dealing with large ﬁres and chemical accidents that lead to the
release of hazardous substances. The German Federal Oﬃce of Civil Protection and Disaster
Assistance (BBK) reports that a total of 99 severe incidents and an estimated 1000 incidents
involving transports of dangerous goods occurred within three years (BBK 2018).
∗FZI
Research
Center
for
Information
Technology,
Haid-und-Neu-Str.
10-14,
D-76131
Karlsruhe,
kglock@fzi.de, ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0670-6269
†TU Dortmund University, Leonhard-Euler-Straße 5, D-44227 Dortmund, anne2.meyer@tu-dortmund.de, OR-
CID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6380-1348
1
arXiv:2203.05972v1 [cs.RO] 2 Mar 2022

The objective of the reconnaissance phase after an incident is to obtain information about
the spatial distribution of smoke or toxic substances. The BBK suggests the prioritization of
locations depending on the size of the population that may be aﬀected so as to obtain reliable
estimates in areas where intervention is most likely to be necessary (BBK 2016).
To this
date, ﬁre services largely depend on ground-based surveillance in these situations, which is slow
and carries the risk of exposing response teams to hazardous substances. Rotary wing UAVs
equipped with optical remote sensing systems oﬀer an alternative: they can be deployed quickly,
can start and land vertically, require less personnel than conventional surveillance methods, and
are able to provide information about areas that are inaccessible or are dangerous to access for
ground-based reconnaissance units. Nonetheless, due to the limited ﬂight time of the UAV,
it is often impossible to survey an area completely. In this case, observations can instead be
made at a number of sampling locations, taking advantage of the fact that the distribution of
gases and contaminants is usually positively spatially autocorrelated, i.e., similar values can be
observed at locations close to each other (Stachniss, Plagemann, and Lilienthal 2009). Using
geostatistical interpolation approaches, these samples yield an estimation of the extent and
severity of the contamination.
The purpose of this paper is to derive models and solution methods that allow the de-
termination of “informative” missions for several UAVs within a reasonable time for practical
applications. We refer to this setting as emergency rapid mapping. As it is the case today in the
“manual” ground-based reconnaissance process, we investigate the emergency rapid mapping
problem in a static setting. In particular, we assume that priorities and the distribution of gases
do not change during the mission. These assumptions can be argued, as response teams con-
sider the distribution of the contaminants as well as the distribution of the population as more
or less stable during the considerably shorter time required for the UAV missions compared to
ground-based reconnaissance.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1. We derive new models for jointly considering spatial correlations and priorities for planning
informative UAV missions.
2. We evaluate the impact of the proposed models based on a set of new benchmark instances
for the UAV mission planning problem.
3. We propose an exact solution procedure for benchmark purposes, introduce an adaptive
large neighborhood search, and demonstrate its performance in experimental studies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the use case
and planning requirements. Section 3 provides an overview of statistical models for describ-
ing the distribution of airborne substances, which are the foundation of the proposed mission
planning approach. We introduce the central planning problem in Section 4 and review the
literature related to this planning problem in Section 5. In Section 6, we derive models for
planning informative UAV missions. An exact algorithm and a metaheuristic solution approach
are proposed in Section 7. In Section 8, we evaluate the proposed approach on existing and
new benchmark instances. We summarize the main ﬁndings of this paper and give an outline
of future research in Section 9.
2

2
Mission planning for emergency rapid mapping
The solution approach proposed here has been developed within the BigGIS research project1.
This section provides an overview of the technologies studied within the course of this project
and outlines the core concepts of emergency rapid mapping applications. In Section 2.1, we give
an overview of UAV systems and sensor technologies based on the experiences in this project.
We summarize sampling guidelines and relevant mission parameters in Sections 2.2 and 2.3,
respectively. Section 2.4 gives an illustrative example demonstrating diﬀerent mission concepts.
2.1
UAV platform and sensor system
UAV systems can be grouped into two categories: ﬁxed-wing systems and rotary-wing UAVs.
Fixed-wing UAVs can ﬂy at higher speeds but need to maintain constant forward motion.
In contrast to ﬁxed-wing UAVs, rotary-wing UAVs have a lower maximum speed and ﬂight
duration, but can start and land vertically and are able to stay stationary during the ﬂight.
This ﬂexibility makes them attractive for emergency surveillance (Boccardo et al. 2015).
For this reason, we focus on rotary-wing UAVs with optical remote sensor systems for
surveying an area after an emergency. These UAVs can carry sensors and equipment with a
total weight of up to 3 kg. Some systems are able to ﬂy up to around 40 minutes at a maximum
horizontal cruise speed of around 50 km/h above ground, depending on the total payload and
environmental inﬂuences. In practice, these factors can have a major impact on realistic ﬂight
times and cruise speed.
Optical remote sensors allow the provisioning of information while
avoiding direct contact with a substance, even if these substances are invisible to the human
eye. Commercially available systems include, for example, infrared (IR) camera systems that
are able to detect substances such as methane. The BBK operates, for example, the IR remote
reconnaissance device SIGIS 2 for detecting chemical and biological threats (Harig and Rusch
2011). In recent years, the emergence of lightweight hyperspectral cameras has allowed their use
onboard of UAVs (Aasen et al. 2015). Similar to earlier approaches for the remote sensing of
chemical agents (Flanigan 1996, Mayﬁeld, Eastwood, and Burggraf 2000), prototypical systems
for detecting a wider range of substances using thermal and hyperspectral imaging systems have
been developed in the BigGIS project. Proofs of concepts have successfully been carried out for
detecting chlorophyll within smoke clouds.
2.2
Sampling guidelines
Because the selection of sampling locations is crucial for estimating the extent and severity of
an airborne substance, the BBK has published guidelines and recommendations for sampling
in case of chemical, biological and radioactive hazards (BBK 2016). These guidelines suggest a
basic sampling strategy for ﬁrst responders, consisting of:
1. Deﬁning the area of interest, i.e., the area suspected of contamination,
2. Identifying potential sampling points where a hazard may be present,
1http://biggis-project.eu/, accessed 14.05.2019
3

3. Prioritizing these candidate sampling locations,
4. Taking samples at a selected set of locations in accordance with these priorities,
5. Evaluating the samples, and
6. Decontaminating personnel and equipment, if necessary.
The priorities referred to in step 3 depend on the likelihood of contamination and on the size
of the potentially aﬀected population in an area. The purpose is to ensure that samples are
taken at critical locations, i.e., at regions with a high likelihood of contamination where the
civil population may need assistance.
2.3
Mission parameters
Prior to planning the UAV mission, the operators of the system determine the target area
using a rectangular bounding box that encloses the aﬀected region. Moreover, they specify
the number and characteristics of the UAVs, including their maximum ﬂight range and their
starting and ending locations. The target area is discretized into a grid of evenly distributed
target locations, each one representing the center of the area that can be covered with one image
taken during the ﬂight. These centers make up the set of candidate sampling locations for the
UAVs. Priorities are assigned to each location based on population data. If additional data
sources such as updated population maps based on mobile phone data are available, they can
be used to update UAV missions while they are in progress based on the currently available
data and previous observations.
2.4
Illustrative example
In Figure 1, we illustrate how priorities in the target area and spatial coverage can be taken into
account for planning informative UAV missions. The images depict a scenario with a target
area of approximately 2.5 × 2.5 km2. The colors indicate the priorities, with red representing
highly relevant locations, and blue representing lower-ranked ones. Candidate waypoints for
the UAV are indicated at the ﬂight altitude of 120 m, while the route is depicted as a solid line.
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Full coverage
(Tr of approx. 12500 s)
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Maximization of priorities
(Tr = 1200 s)
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
priorities
(c) Emergency rapid mapping
(Tr = 1200 s)
Figure 1: Illustration of diﬀerent mission planning concepts
4

Figures 1a to 1c show three concepts for surveying this area. In all cases, the UAV departs
from and returns to a location indicated in the middle of the target region. Figure 1a shows
a mission pattern that ensures full ground coverage, a concept that is often used in environ-
mental sensing (see e.g. Stachniss, Plagemann, and Lilienthal 2009). While providing complete
information about the target area, this UAV mission is not feasible in practice due to the long
ﬂight time. In contrast, Figure 1b represents the mission resulting from maximizing the sum of
priorities of the surveyed locations given a realistic ﬂight time limitation. In this solution, the
UAV quickly travels to the area with the highest priorities and stays there. Finally, in Figure
1c, we depict a mission plan that combines priorities and spatial coverage. This plan oﬀers two
advantages: Firstly, it includes all highly prioritized regions. Secondly, as we will see in the next
section, distributing the sample locations across the area allows a more accurate prediction of
the distribution of hazardous substances.
3
Models for spatial processes
The comparison of the two UAV missions depicted in Figures 1b and 1c illustrates the impact
that considering the spatial correlation in the surveyed ﬁeld can have on the UAV mission. Ex-
isting approaches for sampling design use formalized models for spatial phenomena account for
these interdependencies (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008). Likewise, these concepts provide
the theoretical foundation for our own models. In this section, we provide an overview of the
central ideas and approaches for modeling spatial processes in a stochastic fashion.
3.1
Expressing spatial structure
Environmental processes such as the distribution of airborne contaminants over a given spatial
area follow physical laws, but are too complex to be easily described or even understood. A
possibility to deal with the complexity is to consider these processes as random and to employ
statistical methods to describe and analyze them (Cressie and Wikle 2011). Representing the
aﬀected area via a set of Cartesian coordinates V ⊂R2, a physical phenomenon can be described
as a stochastic process {Z(s)}s∈V over the locations in V, i.e., as a collection of random vari-
ables deﬁned over a two-dimensional ﬁeld (ibid.). The spatial structure of a given phenomenon
is expressed by its spatial covariance Cov(Z(s), Z(s′)), which describes the relationship between
pairs of variables Z(s) and Z(s′) at diﬀerent locations s, s′ ∈V. The covariance of a stochastic
process is usually modeled using a covariance function k(s, s′) := Cov(Z(s), Z(s′)), often called
a kernel (Rasmussen and Williams 2006). It depends on the distance between these locations
and generally decreases with growing distance (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008). The pair-
wise covariances are combined in a covariance matrix ΣV,V with each element describing the
covariance Cov(Z(s), Z(s′)) for s, s′ ∈V. Therefore, this matrix comprises the fundamental
information and assumptions about the relationship between locations, and therefore about the
spatial process itself.
5

3.2
Spatial interpolation
The main purpose of modeling spatial processes is to allow inferences about unsurveyed loca-
tions based on a ﬁnite number of known observations. A popular way to do so is to model the
spatial phenomenon as a Gaussian process (GP), denoted as ZV := {Z(s)}s∈V, i.e., as “a collec-
tion of random variables, any ﬁnite number of which have a multivariate normal distribution”
(Rasmussen and Williams 2006). This means that for any ﬁnite subset V′ ⊂V, the random
vector ZV′ is normally distributed. A GP is completely deﬁned by its covariance k(s, s′) and
mean µ(s) = E[Z(s)], which gives the expected value for all s ∈V.
The GP without taking sample observations into account is referred to as a Gaussian prior.
This prior encapsulates all assumptions or information that one could possibly have about
the phenomenon without having performed observations, in particular, assumptions about the
kernel function and smoothness of the distribution. In short, we denote the prior as
ZV ∽GP(µV, ΣV,V)
(1)
with the prior mean µV representing a column vector of expected means with one entry for each
s ∈V.
If samples are available for a set of locations S ⊂V, the prior belief is updated taking these
measurements into account. The result is a Gaussian posterior, represented by a posterior mean
µV|S and a covariance matrix ΣV,V|S conditioned on a set S. We write this as
ZV|S ∽GP(µV|S, ΣV,V|S).
(2)
This posterior incorporates the knowledge obtained using the sampled locations in combination
with the fundamental characteristics of the process that are given by the prior. To derive the
posterior, we deﬁne ΣV,S as the covariance matrix between all s, s′ with s ∈V, s′ ∈S, and ΣS,S
as the covariance matrix between all s, s′ ∈S. Furthermore, µS designates a column vector
of prior mean values µ(s) for s ∈S. The observed values at locations S are represented as a
column vector uS. We can then determine the mean vector and covariance matrix of the GP
posterior as follows:
µV|S = µV + ΣV,SΣ−1
S,S(uS −µS)
(3)
ΣV,V|S = ΣV,V −ΣV,SΣ−1
S,SΣS,V.
(4)
The posterior mean determined in Equation (3) gives the predicted values µV|S for all s ∈
V. The posterior covariance in Equation (4) indicates the uncertainty associated with these
predictions.
3.3
Designing sampling strategies
Gaussian processes can be used to design sampling strategies, i.e., strategies for selecting sam-
pling locations that yield as much information as possible about a spatial process (Curran and
Atkinson 1998). This is made possible by the fact that a GP provides knowledge about the
6

variability that remains in the process, represented in form of the posterior covariance ΣV,V|S
(Equation (4)). This covariance is independent of the observed values uS and only depends on
the sampled locations S, which makes it possible to estimate the quality of a set of sampling
locations S prior to actually making the observations.
One possible measure for the variability in the process is the trace tr(Σ) of a covariance
matrix, which is deﬁned as the sum of the diagonal elements k(s, s), s ∈V. Another measure of
uncertainty is the so-called “entropy” H(ZV) of a Gaussian process ZV in |V| = n dimensions
(Rasmussen and Williams 2006):
H(ZV) = 0.5 · log((2πe)n|ΣV,V|),
where |ΣV,V| denotes the determinant of the covariance matrix ΣV,V. The lower these measures
are, the better is the corresponding prediction.
Based on the trace and the entropy, additional variability measures for estimating the in-
formation gain yielded by a set S have been proposed in the literature on Gaussian processes.
We discuss two measures often used in literature: The ﬁrst criterion for measuring the quality
of a set S is the average reduction in variance (ARV) that is achieved by the selected sampling
locations (Das and Kempe 2008, Krause et al. 2008). The measure is formally deﬁned as
ARV (S) = 1
|V|(tr(ΣV,V) −tr(ΣV,V|S)),
(5)
with tr(ΣV,V) and tr(ΣV,V|S) measuring the variability of the GP prior and posterior, respec-
tively. Another criterion is the mutual information (MI) between the selected sensing locations
and the interpolated locations V \ S (Caselton and Zidek 1984). With ZV\S as the Gaussian
prior over all interpolated locations and ZV\S|S as the corresponding Gaussian posterior, MI is
deﬁned as follows:
MI(S) = H(ZV\S) −H(ZV\S|S).
(6)
Using these criteria, sensing locations S can be determined such that ARV or MI is maximal,
which means that the variability of the posterior is minimal. Note that the basic complexity of
all of these measures is O(n3), because computing the GP posterior requires inverting an n × n
matrix with n = |S| (Rasmussen and Williams 2006).
4
The mission planning problem for emergency surveillance
Based on foundations laid in the previous two sections, we deﬁne the mission planning prob-
lem for emergency surveillance (MPPES): The MPPES consists of determining tours for UAVs
through a selected subset of candidate sensing locations such that ﬁrst responders can be pro-
vided with a reliable overview of the distribution of hazardous substances. This planning prob-
lem consists of three simultaneous decisions:
1. The selection of appropriate sensing locations,
2. The assignment of the selected locations to UAVs, and
7

3. The determination of routes through the assigned target locations for each UAV.
The routes have to comply with the ﬂying time constraints of the UAVs. They are furthermore
restricted by the speciﬁed take-oﬀand landing locations, which may lay outside the speciﬁed
target area.
The second and third decisions arise in nearly all types of vehicle routing problems (Irnich,
Toth, and Vigo 2014). The ﬁrst decision is crucial for planning informative missions and mainly
characterizes the problem at hand. To increase the informativeness of the missions, this selection
has to take into account that the distribution of hazardous substances within a region exhibits
positive spatial correlations. Hence, samples in close proximity yield less information about the
overall distribution of a contaminant than samples taken further apart at locations not correlated
with one another. This interrelationship has to be adequately considered when planning UAV
missions.
The priority of sample locations depends on the risk of contamination and the size of the
population that may be aﬀected. This ensures that the focus of the UAV mission lies in areas
where an intervention of the response personnel is most likely to be necessary. Jointly consider-
ing spatial interdependencies and the target locations’ priorities in MPPES is therefore essential
to achieve both accurate information in highly prioritized areas and a reliable overview of the
distribution of contaminants throughout the entire region.
5
Related literature
The MPPES introduced in the previous section shares similarities with problems studied in
diﬀerent disciplines: the variants of the covering tour problem and the team orienteering problem
discussed in the operations research literature on vehicle routing, and the informative path
planning addressed in the ﬁeld of robotics.
5.1
Covering tour problem
Covering tour problems deal with the determination of cost-minimal (e.g., assignment, travel,
and/or service cost) routes such that every node that is not included in a vehicle tour is within a
given maximum distance to a node directly served by a vehicle. The covering salesman problem
(CSP) was ﬁrst introduced and formulated by Current and Schilling (1989) as a variant of the
traveling salesman problem (TSP). Gendreau, Laporte, and Semet (1997) and Golden et al.
(2012) proposed generalizations of this problem variant, referred to as covering tour problems
(CTP), which consider modiﬁed versions of covering concepts (e.g., mandatory nodes, nodes
that must be covered but cannot be visited directly and nodes that must be served or covered
multiple times).
All authors provide heuristics for this single-vehicle version that combine
approaches for solving a set covering problem with VRP heuristics. Gendreau, Laporte, and
Semet (1997) additionally proposed an exact branch-and-cut approach.
Hachicha et al. (2000), Naji-Azimi et al. (2012), H`a et al. (2013), and Allahyari, Salari, and
Vigo (2015) consider diﬀerent variants of the multi-vehicle case denoted the m-CTP. H`a et al.
(2013) propose a heuristic approach and an exact branch-and-cut algorithm, while the other
authors describe heuristic approaches, notably local search variants and metaheuristics.
8

5.2
Combining coverage and proﬁt maximization
Coverage aspects in the context of proﬁt maximization have been addressed more frequently in
recent years. Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) introduce the correlated team orienteering problem
(CorTOP) with the explicit objective of integrating information about spatial correlations in
the model. Visited nodes partially cover unvisited nodes nearby. This coverage is cumulative,
i.e., additional stops within covering distance provide an additional beneﬁt. When all covering
nodes are included in a vehicle tour, the full reward of an unvisited target node is provided.
The authors propose a mixed integer quadratic programming (MIQP) formulation for solving
the problem using a commercial solver.
The largest instances solved involve 49 candidate
locations in the single-vehicle case and 36 for the multi-vehicle case. Still, the combination of
coverage aspects with proﬁt maximization seems promising for the planning problem addressed
in this work. More recently, Ozbaygin, Yaman, and Karasan (2016) proposed a branch-and-cut
approach for a single-vehicle problem called the maximal covering salesman problem (MaxCSP)
with the objective of maximizing covered demand. The authors consider unvisited nodes as
covered as long as they are within a given distance to a visited node. However, only a given
percentage of a node’s demand can be covered that way. This percentage is independent of the
number of nodes that provide coverage.
A related problem is the set orienteering problem (SOP) introduced by Archetti, Carrabs,
and Cerulli (2018), where customers are grouped into clusters and visiting one customer within
a cluster allows collecting the full proﬁt associated with this cluster.
Clusters can, but do
not have to, represent spatial relations. Additional visits within one cluster do not provide
additional beneﬁts. Both heuristic and exact solution approaches have been proposed (Pˇeniˇcka,
Faigl, and Saska 2019). However, only the single-vehicle case has been considered to this date.
5.3
Orienteering and team orienteering
The orienteering problem (OP) and the team orienteering problem (TOP) are variants of the
TSP and VRP, respectively, in which not all nodes can be visited due to scarce resources.
The optimization objective is proﬁt maximization rather than the minimization of resource
consumption. This problem has been widely studied in VRP literature. A detailed overview
is provided in recent surveys by Vansteenwegen, Souﬀriau, and Van Oudheusden (2011) and
Gunawan, Lau, and Vansteenwegen (2016). In this review, we focus on the approaches that
are state-of-the-art in terms of solution quality or computational performance on benchmark
instances.
Souﬀriau et al. (2010) propose a fast path relinking approach based on a greedy randomized
adaptive search procedure. Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013) introduced a particle swarm
optimization-inspired algorithm (PSOiA) combining destruction and recreation operators, TSP
search moves, and crossover operators for merging promising partial tours. Vidal et al. (2015)
propose a genetic search including a new neighborhood concept: Based on solutions where
resource constraints are relaxed, feasible TOP solutions are determined by solving a resource-
constrained shortest path problem for each vehicle. For generating faster solutions, Vidal et al.
(2015) also provided a multi-start local search relying on a similar neighborhood concept. Ke
et al. (2016) propose a Pareto mimic algorithm that maintains a population of solutions based
9

on Pareto dominance. The so-called mimic operator is used to build new solutions based on an
incumbent one in a similar fashion as path relinking (Souﬀriau et al. 2010).
5.4
Informative path planning
Informative path planning (IPP) is concerned with planning vehicle trajectories for monitoring
a phenomenon that varies in time and space while respecting the vehicles’ maximum range.
IPP approaches seek to determine sensing locations such that the uncertainty remaining in
the process is minimal. To this end, they use the variability measures discussed in Section
3.3 for determining the information gain achieved by the vehicles with respect to the observed
phenomenon.
Most of the solution approaches discussed in this line of research have focused on optimal al-
gorithms or approximation algorithms providing performance guarantees in view of high sensing
costs. Singh et al. (2007, 2009) propose a recursive greedy algorithm for solving a single-vehicle
problem variant. They furthermore address the multi-vehicle case by sequentially applying this
algorithm to a series of single-vehicle problems. Binney, Krause, and Sukhatme (2010) use a
version of this algorithm to solve an IPP variant with time windows for accessing certain ar-
eas. A branch-and-bound algorithm for the single-vehicle IPP has been introduced by Binney
and Sukhatme (2012). Despite applying acceleration techniques, problems remain computa-
tionally intractable for vehicle routes comprising more than around 15 locations. Hollinger and
Sukhatme (2014) discuss a rapidly-exploring information gathering algorithm, which iteratively
assigns random sampling locations to vehicle routes and expands vehicle paths towards these
nodes. However, all of these approaches scale poorly in case of more than a few dozen target
nodes, despite the integration of acceleration techniques.
5.5
Comparison of models and contribution of this paper
The problem variants related to the MPPES are summarized in Table 1, focusing in particular
on the respective planning objective and the consideration of spatial interdependencies between
nodes in the various models. Comparing these characteristics with the requirements for planning
UAV missions discussed in Section 4, we can identify three major aspects that need to be
addressed for solving this planning problem successfully:
Joint consideration of proﬁts and spatial interdependencies
A signiﬁcant body of
work either focus on proﬁt maximization or the minimization of resource utilization subject to
aspects of spatial coverage or spatial interdependencies. To the best of our knowledge, only the
models of Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) and Ozbaygin, Yaman, and Karasan (2016) combine
proﬁt maximization with coarse models for spatial correlations.
Approximate models for spatial interdependencies
Most models proposed in the lit-
erature considering spatial interdependencies in route planning use either very coarse approxi-
mations (CSP, CTP, CorTOP, MaxCSP) or apply Gaussian process models (IPP). The latter
provide sophisticated models for spatial interdependencies, but are computationally expensive
10

Problem variant
First reference
Vehicles
Priorities
Spatial interdep.
Objective
Solution
ap-
proach
Orienteering prob-
lem (OP)
Tsiligirides
(1984)
1
Yes
Not considered
Max.
sum of
priorities
Heuristics,exact
approaches
Covering salesman
problem (CSP)
Current
and
Schilling (1989)
1
No
Complete
cov-
erage
of
nearby
nodes
Min. distance
Heuristics, exact
approaches
Team orienteering
problem (TOP)
Chao,
Golden,
and Wasil (1996)
m
Yes
Not considered
Max.
sum of
priorities
Heuristics,exact
approaches
Covering
tour
problem (CTP)
Gendreau,
La-
porte, and Semet
(1997)
1
No
Complete
cov-
erage
of
nearby
nodes
Min. distance
Heuristics,
branch-and-cut
m-covering
tour
problem(m-CTP)
Hachicha
et
al.
(2000)
m
No
Complete
cov-
erage
of
nearby
nodes
Min. distance
Heuristics,
branch-and-cut
Informative
path
planning (IPP)
Singh
et
al.
(2007)
1,m∗
No
Implicitly deﬁned
by GP models
Min.
predic-
tion variability
Exact
and
ap-
proximative
ap-
proaches
Correlated
team
orienteering prob-
lem (CorTOP)
Yu,
Schwager,
and Rus (2014)
m
Yes
Partial and cumu-
lative coverage of
nearby nodes
Max.
sum of
direct and cov-
ered priorities
Branch-and-
bound
Maximal covering
salesman problem
(MaxCSP)
Ozbaygin,
Yaman,
and
Karasan (2016)
1
Yes
Partial coverage of
nearby nodes
Max.
sum of
direct and cov-
ered priorities
Branch-and-cut
Set
orienteering
problem (SOP)
Archetti,
Carrabs,
and
Cerulli (2018)
1
Yes
Complete
cover-
age
of
nodes
in
same cluster
Max.
sum of
direct and cov-
ered priorities
Heuristics, exact
approaches
This contribution
m
Yes
Partial,
distance-
dependent, cumu-
lative coverage of
nearby nodes
Max.
sum of
direct and cov-
ered priorities
Dynamic
pro-
gramming
and
heuristic
ap-
proach
(*) Multi-vehicle cases are typically solved by sequentially planning single-vehicle tours
Table 1: Summary of problem variants with proﬁt maximization or coverage constraints
11

(O(n3) in the number of sampled locations): The impact of local changes to a solution can-
not be computed eﬃciently – a prerequisite for many successful VRP approaches such as local
search based heuristics. Models that are suﬃciently accurate but can be evaluated eﬃciently
are missing, even if the CorTOP is a ﬁrst promising step.
Eﬃcient solution approaches for the mission planning problem
No eﬃcient solution
approach exists that is applicable to the mission planning problem. Eﬃcient heuristics designed
for TOP do not account for spatial interdependencies between nodes, while those proposed for
CTP exploit the fact that all nodes need to be covered, which is not applicable in our use case.
IPP approaches are limited in the size of the problem instances they can solve. For MaxCSP
and CorTOP, only exact solution approaches have been proposed, which are not scalable.
We address this gap by proposing generalized models combining priorities and approxima-
tion of spatial interdependencies that are more accurate than the simple coverage models and
require less computational eﬀort than GP models (Section 6). These models can be seen as
a generalization of the models with partial coverage introduced by Yu, Schwager, and Rus
(2014) and Ozbaygin, Yaman, and Karasan (2016). To ﬁnd good solutions quickly, we propose
a two-phase multi-start adaptive large neighborhood search that incorporates knowledge about
spatial interdependencies for the construction of vehicle routes (Section 7). For benchmarking
purposes, we introduce an exact solution approach. In an extensive computational study, we
evaluate the impact of diﬀerent modeling variants on the solutions and the performance of the
proposed approaches (Section 8).
6
Models for planning informative UAV missions
This section formally deﬁnes the MPPES and discusses diﬀerent modeling variants that diﬀer in
how they quantify “informativeness”. Because this measure determines the selection of locations
to be surveyed, it is crucial for the accuracy of any spatial interpolation approach based on these
samples. Based on a basic problem formulation, we introduce stochastic modeling variants. We
derive approximations for spatial interdependencies and show how to integrate priorities.
6.1
Basic problem formulation
Consistent with the notation introduced in Section 3, we denote the set of locations within the
two-dimensional target area as V and the set of sensing locations as S ⊆V. When planning
informative tours, the selection of the sensing locations S constitutes the main decision. Each
UAV m in the set of available UAVs M is associated with a starting location sm and ending
location em. In the following, NS and NE designate the sets comprising UAV starting and
ending locations, respectively. We refer to the set of all locations as N, with N = V ∪NS ∪NE.
Target locations i ∈V are associated with priorities ui ≥0 that specify their relevance to the
response units. As discussed in Section 2.3, these priorities can, for example, indicate the size
of the aﬀected population. A survey at a location i requires a ﬁxed sensing time τi in order to
take and process images at standstill. Each UAV mission is limited by a maximum duration of
T max
m
. The distance between two locations i and j is denoted as dij. Traveling from a location
12

i to a location j with i, j ∈N requires a nonnegative travel time τij that includes the time
necessary for acceleration and deceleration. To simplify the formulation, this also includes the
sensing time τj at the destination location.
We deﬁne the set of all feasible routes Ω= S
m∈M Ωm. Each route r ∈Ωm consists of
a sequence of locations r = (sm, i0, i1, . . . , in, em) such that the total travel time of this route
Tr = τsmi0 +Pn−1
c=0 τicic+1 +τinem ≤T max
m
. The set of included locations Sr = {i0, i1, . . . , in} ⊂V
corresponds to the sensing locations selected for the route r. We denote a feasible solution to this
problem as ω, where ω = (r1, . . . , rm) ∈Ω1 × . . . × Ωm represents one element in the Cartesian
product of routes, i.e., one combination of routes with one feasible route per vehicle. Finally,
we consider a general measure of informativeness I to determine the quality of a solution. We
can now model the mission planning problem using binary decision variables yr with
yr =



1,
if route r ∈Ωis selected,
0,
otherwise.
Then, the set of sampling locations is S := S
r:yr=1 Sr. This notation can consistently be used
both for the stochastic informativeness measures of Section 6.2 and for the models introduced
in this work (Section 6.3). The basic problem of planning informative UAV missions can then
be stated as follows:
(MPPES)
max
I(S)
(7)
s.t.
X
r∈Ωm
yr = 1
m ∈M
(8)
yr ∈{0, 1}
r ∈Ω
(9)
Objective (7) maximizes total informativeness, while constraints (8) ensure that exactly one
route is selected per vehicle. Constraints (9) set the variable domains.
6.2
Stochastic informativeness measures
As discussed in Section 5.4, IPP models use the Gaussian process models discussed in Section
3. Binney and Sukhatme (2012) use the average reduction in variance measure as deﬁned in
Equation (5) in order to determine solution quality. Singh et al. (2007) propose a formulation
based on the concept of mutual information, see Equation (6). Note that both variants are
monotonic, i.e., increasing the number of observations cannot decrease the total informativeness
(Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008, Binney and Sukhatme 2012).
This corresponds to the
intuitive notion that making more observations cannot decrease the overall information gain.
6.3
Objective functions for approximating spatial interdependencies
The stochastic informativeness measures discussed above provide sophisticated models for spa-
tial interdependencies but are computationally expensive. In the following, we derive objective
functions that show similar characteristics regarding the spatial aspects of a solution while
avoiding the computational overhead of a GP regression.
13

Approximating spatial correlations
In statistical interpolation approaches, interdepen-
dencies between pairs of locations are described using a kernel function k. Using the correlation
rather than the covariance as a normalized measure of spatial similarity, a kernel is a func-
tion k : R2 →[0, 1] that decreases with distance and asymptotically converges to 0 (Stachniss,
Plagemann, and Lilienthal 2009). In our approach, we represent these interdependencies using
discrete weights w deﬁned over the set of candidate locations V such that w : V × V →[0, 1]. A
weight of wij = 1 for any i, j ∈V indicates perfect correlation, whereas weights close to 0 mean
that the observations at i and j are independent, i.e., no information can be inferred about i
upon visiting j. Observations at larger distances can generally be assumed to be independent
of one another. We can, therefore, make use of local neighborhoods including only pairs of
locations between which there is a signiﬁcant correlation. To this end, we deﬁne a covering
neighborhood Ci such that j ∈Ci ⇔wji ≫0 for j ̸= i.
Informativeness measures
The discretized weights represent the similarity between diﬀer-
ent targets. Using these weights, we are able to estimate the overall information obtained by
a number of sampling locations. A ﬁrst model for estimating the overall informativeness based
on these discretized weights has been proposed by Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014). The weights
used in this approximation can be interpreted as the proportion of the information available at
i that is obtained upon visiting j. Then, the overall informativeness is modeled as follows:
IY U(S) =
X
i∈S
1
| {z }
full information at
visited locations
+
X
i∈V\S
X
j∈S∩Ci
wji
|
{z
}
estimated proportion
of unvisited targets
(10)
In the following, we refer to the corresponding optimization model as IPP-YU. This approxi-
mation, however, has drawbacks in practice. One problem is illustrated in Figure 2, which gives
the optimal routes and objective values on two small graphs that only diﬀer in the degree of
similarity between a center and the surrounding targets. On the left-hand side, the correspond-
ing weights are set to wji = 0.2, which means that full information about the graph is only
obtained when the center is included in the vehicle tour. On the right hand side, weights are
increased to wji = 0.3. In this case, the estimated information gain can be increased by leaving
the center unvisited. From a practical point of view and considering the monotonicity of the
stochastic models in Section 6.2, this eﬀect is undesirable: In any realistic setting, it is not pos-
sible to increase the information available about a location by not performing an observation.
Consequently, this model is not a valid approximation for the spatial interdependencies that
govern the surveyed area.
Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) avoid this problem by requiring that
X
j∈Ci
wjiui ≤ui
(11)
14

෍
𝑖𝑖∈𝑆𝑆
1 + ෍
𝑖𝑖∈𝑉𝑉\S
෍
𝑗𝑗∈𝑆𝑆
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗= 5
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗= 0.2
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗= 0.3
෍
𝑖𝑖∈𝑆𝑆
1 + ෍
𝑖𝑖∈𝑉𝑉\S
෍
𝑗𝑗∈𝑆𝑆
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗= 5.2
Figure 2: Illustration of the limitations of the approximation by Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014).
Given are ﬁve target locations and weights wji with respect to the center i. The black arrows
indicate the optimal route with the objective value given underneath the graph. Visited targets
are indicated in grey. The right-hand side illustrates an improving solution obtained by visiting
fewer targets.
holds for all i ∈V. In their model, this is achieved by explicitly setting weights wji such that
wji =
1
|Ci|,
j ∈Ci.
(12)
This model, however, introduces a counter-intuitive dependency between the size of the covering
neighborhood and the weights. In particular, spatial processes with strong correlations and
observations that are similar even at larger distances should be associated with an increased
size of the covering neighborhood and increased weights for all i, j ∈Ci.
This cannot be
represented accurately in the approach by Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014): If the neighborhood
size |Ci| increases as more locations are positively correlated, the weights wji have to be reduced
in order not to violate Equation (11). This means that information about the stronger spatial
interdependencies is lost.
We propose to relax the condition stated in Equation (11). To avoid that the estimated
information gain increases by leaving out target locations (see Figure 2), we limit the maximum
information gain in a generalized objective function:
IGEN(S) =
X
i∈S
1 +
X
i∈V\S
min{1,
X
j∈S∩Ci
wji}
(13)
We refer to the corresponding planning problem as IPP-GEN in the remainder of this paper.
We model weights using a simple approximation scheme based on inverse distance weighting.
We assign a weight ¯w < 1 to locations at distance dmin and specify all other weights relative to
¯w as follows:
wji =



¯w · dmin
dji ,
j ∈Ci
0,
otherwise.
(14)
Other approaches based on diﬀerent kernel functions k are equally possible.
15

Using such an approximation, we can derive weights wji that can represent interdependencies
of varying strength more accurately. This is illustrated in Figure 3: On the left-hand side, we
give approximated weights for our approach and for the model by Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014)
for a comparatively small neighborhood, depending on the distance dji to an observed location
i. The right-hand side gives weights for a situation with stronger correlations, represented by an
increase in the size of the covering neighborhood. In the case of the model by Yu, Schwager, and
Rus (2014), increasing neighborhood size reduces the weights for all locations. In our model,
the stronger correlation can be reﬂected by increasing ¯w without side eﬀects. Note that similar
to the stochastic variants, both models are monotonic in the number of observations.
6.4
Integrating priorities
Apart from the spatial interdependencies discussed above, UAV missions should also be based
on priorities within the target region that characterize how valuable a sample is at a particular
location. As the speciﬁcation of these priorities depends on the user, they do not necessarily
have to be spatially correlated.
The observations made at these locations, in contrast, are
always characterized by spatial correlations in our use case. Hence, some information about a
highly prioritized location can also be obtained by making measurements nearby. The objective
function needs to adequately account for this eﬀect.
In this work, we combine these aspects: We model relations between target locations based
on the approximated weights introduced in the previous section, and use these weights in the
objective function to partially account for the priority of locations that are not visited them-
selves, but are in the proximity of targets included in a UAV mission. This way, the fact that
some information can be inferred based on observations nearby reduces the relative importance
of additional observations at these locations. Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) address this by
combining the classical TOP, which maximizes direct coverage of priorities, with the approxi-
mative model (IPP-YU) in Equation (10). This yields a mixed integer quadratic programming
(MIQP) formulation, denoted as the correlated team orienteering problem (CorTOP) by the
authors, which is based on the following objective:
ICorTOP (S) =
X
i∈S
ui +
X
i∈V\S
X
j∈S∩Ci
wjiui
(15)
1
|𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖|
ഥ𝑤𝑤𝑑𝑑𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑑𝑑𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
1
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
𝑑𝑑𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
(a) Initial neighborhood size
𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
𝑑𝑑𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
1
𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
ഥ𝑤𝑤′ 𝑑𝑑𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑑𝑑𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗
1
|𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖
′|
(b) Doubled radius of Ci
Figure 3: Impact of increased neighborhood size on approximated weights
16

Equation (15) maximizes the sum of the priorities associated with selected sensing locations
P
i∈S ui. Unobserved locations are partially taken into account, with their total contribution
to the objective depending on the selected targets within their covering neighborhoods. For
an unobserved location i, the value of the indirectly inferred information is approximated as
P
j∈S∩Ci wjiui. Please note that we adapted the formulation of Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014)
for reasons of consistency to our notation.
The original MIQP formulation corresponds to
ICorTOP (S) = P
i∈V xiui + P
i∈V
P
j∈Ci xj(xj −xi)wjiui with binary decision variable xi = 1 if
i ∈S and 0 otherwise.
This model suﬀers from the same problems as IPP-YU, see Section 6.3. We derive a new
model based on the relaxed variant IPP-GEN. We refer to the corresponding model as the
generalized correlated team orienteering problem (GCorTOP) based on the following objective
function:
IGCorTOP (S) =
X
i∈S
ui +
X
i∈V\S
min{ui,
X
j∈S∩Ci
wjiui}
(16)
Equation (16) ensures that indirectly collected beneﬁt never exceeds a location’s priority. Hence,
the beneﬁt of each additional observation j ∈Ci with respect to i ̸∈S is determined as
min{wjiui, max{0, (1 −
X
k∈S∩Ci
wki) · ui}},
(17)
i.e., the beneﬁt is at most wjiui, thus imposing a threshold that prevents overestimating a
mission’s informativeness. This combines the consideration of priorities as proposed by Yu,
Schwager, and Rus (2014) with the advantages of the relaxed discretization in Equation (13).
7
Solution approach
We propose two solution approaches addressing the MPPES: an exact algorithm and a heuristic
approach.
The exact approach based on bidirectional dynamic programming is introduced
in Section 7.1. We then discuss a two-phase multi-start adaptive large neighborhood search
(2MLS) that is able to quickly provide solutions to realistic problem instances in Section 7.2.
7.1
Exact solution approach
We use bi-directional dynamic programming for solving the MPPES exactly. Our algorithm
assumes that the objective function I(S) is monotonic in the number of selected samples. We do
not impose further requirements on the objective function, which makes this approach applicable
to all informativeness measures that we have discussed in the previous section. However, this
means that all UAV routes have to be deﬁned completely in order to determine their quality.
7.1.1
Generation of vehicle routes
As the beneﬁt of individual vehicle missions cannot be evaluated in isolation, i.e., without
considering the routes of all other vehicles, we use a giant-tour representation for modeling the
17

routes of all UAVs at once. Preliminary tests have indicated that this version is faster than a
variant where individual missions are created ﬁrst for each vehicle and the optimal combination
of these tours is determined second. The solution approach is based on the concepts introduced
by Righini and Salani (2008). The algorithm maintains data structure Lfw and Lbw comprising
the generated labels in the forward and backward direction, respectively. Each label corresponds
to a tuple (S, m, Tm, i) that represents a giant tour through the target locations in S ⊂V. The
routes corresponding to a forward label start at s0, i.e. at the starting node of the ﬁrst UAV,
and end at location i ∈N. In the backward direction, routes starting at the ending location of
the last UAV e|M|−1 and continue in the reverse direction until i. The current vehicle, i.e., the
UAV visiting location i, is indicated as m with m ∈{0, . . . , |M| −1}. Tm stores the travel time
associated with the current (partial) routes of vehicle m from sm to i or from backwards em to
i.
A label (S, m, Tm, i) is extended to a label (S′, m, T ′
m, j) by adding a previously unvisited
location j ∈V \ S and updating the set of visited target locations S′ and route cost T ′
m
accordingly, i.e,
S′ = S ∪{j},
T ′
m = Tm + τij.
The extension is feasible as long as T ′
m + τjem ≤T max
m
. In the backward direction, we extend
labels along arcs (j, i) starting at possible predecessors j of location i. An extension is not
feasible if T ′
m + τsmj > T max
m
. If the maximum route duration of vehicle m would be exceeded
for all j ∈V \ S, a label is extended by closing the current vehicle route and opening a new
one.
In this case, the new label is set to (S, m + 1, 0, sm+1) in the forward direction and
(S, m −1, 0, em−1) in the backward direction.
Similar to Righini and Salani (2008), we apply resource-based bounding to avoid the gen-
eration of redundant labels. In our case, the critical resource is the ﬂight duration. Forward
labels are extended as long as m ≤⌈|M|/2⌉−1 ≡mfw. Correspondingly, backward labels
are extended while m ≥|M| −mfw −1 ≡mbw. If m is not a multiple of 2, the same vehicle
is included in forward and backward labels, as mfw = mbw. In this case, extensions in any
directions are only performed while Tm ≤T max
m
/2 for all labels with m = mfw = mbw.
7.1.2
Dominance tests
As stated in the introduction of this section, we do not assume speciﬁc properties of the objective
function other than monotonicity. Therefore, dominance checks can only be performed on the
selected locations and routing costs when comparing labels. Consequently, a label (S, m, Tm, i) ∈
Lfw is dominated by another label (S′, m′, T ′
m, i) ∈Lfw if (a) m′ < m and S′ ⊇S or (b) m′ = m
and either T ′
m = Tm and S′ ⊇S or T ′
m < Tm and S′ = S. Similarly, in the backward direction,
a label (S, m, Tm, i) ∈Lbw is dominated by (S′, m′, T ′
m, i) ∈Lbw if (a) m′ > m and S′ ⊇S or
(b) m′ = m and either T ′
m = Tm, S′ ⊇S or T ′
m < Tm, S′ = S hold true.
18

7.1.3
Optimal solution
To compute a feasible solution, we join forward and backward labels (S, m, Tm, i) ∈Lfw and
(S′, m′, T ′
m, j) ∈Lbw such that S ∩S′ = ∅.
If there is an uneven number of vehicles, i.e.,
mfw = mbw, a join is feasible only if Tm + τij + T ′
m ≤T max
m
. The objective value I(S) only
depends on the visited target locations. As several solutions may result in the same set of
samples, we store already computed objective values in a hash table.
Among all solutions
achieving the same informativeness I, we then select the one with the lowest associated cost.
7.2
Two-phase adaptive large neighborhood search
As a generalization of the TOP, the GCorTOP is NP-hard, which results in high computation
times even for small instances when solving these problems exactly. In the following, we propose
a two-phase multi-start adaptive large neighborhood search (2MLS) approach for solving the
MPPES. We ﬁrst give an overview and then describe the constituting elements in depth.
7.2.1
Overview and algorithm design
Existing local search approaches for related problems usually focus on the cost-eﬃcient service
of targets. This often results in compact routes with target locations in close proximity. This
is opposed to our goal of observing large areas.
Our algorithm speciﬁcally promotes explorative UAV routes. The solution scheme is sum-
marized in Algorithm 1. Phase 1 consists of a multi-start approach for constructing diverse
solutions ωred
i
based on aggregated or decomposed problem representations P red (see Section
7.2.4). In each iteration, routes are initialized with seed nodes generated by a k-means++ al-
gorithm (Section 7.2.3) and further are completed iteratively using an insertion strategy δinsert.
The solution is improved using an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) approach and
ﬁnally transformed to a solution ωi to the initial problem representation P. In Phase 2, an
ALNS is applied to the best solution obtained in Phase 1.
Algorithm 1: Two-phase multi-start adaptive large neighborhood search (2MLS)
Input: Problem P
Output: Solution ωfinal
/* Phase 1:
multi-start search on simplified problem representations
*/
1 ωinit = ∅, I(ωinit) = 0;
2 for i = 1 until the maximum number of multi-starts do
3
determine problem representation P red;
4
initialize ωred
i
using a k-means++ algorithm;
5
ωred
i
←δinsert(ωred, P red);
6
ωred
i
←ALNS(ωred
i
);
7
determine solution ωi to initial problem representation P based on ωred
i
;
8
if I(ωi) > I(ωinit) then ωinit = ωi;
9 end
/* Phase 2:
ALNS on complete problem representation
*/
10 ωfinal ←ALNS(ωinit);
11 return ωfinal;
19

7.2.2
Adaptive large neighborhood search
The ALNS used in both phases is an adaptation of the framework proposed by Pisinger and
Ropke (2007). In each iteration, one removal strategy δremoval and one insertion strategy δinsert
are selected from the sets of strategies based on their previous successes and failures.
The
removal strategy selects nh locations and removes them from the current solution (Section 7.2.6).
The removed locations are re-inserted by applying δinsert to the partial solution (Section 7.2.7).
The search is guided by a reheating-based acceptance criterion that accepts a non-improving
move with a probability depending on the number of iterations since the last improvement
(Section 7.2.8). The ALNS stops if a convergence criterion is met or itermax is reached.
7.2.3
Seed nodes
In each iteration of the multi-start approach, a seed for every vehicle route is determined
using a k-means++ variant (Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2007) that can account for route duration
restrictions and starting and ending locations. For each UAV, the algorithm determines the set
of reachable locations Vm = {i ∈V : τsmi+τiem ≤T max
m
} and then selects a seed location i ∈Vm
with a probability proportional to the minimum squared distance between i and any j ∈N
that is either a starting or ending location or has already been selected as seed in another route.
This ensures that the initial seed locations are spread across the area, thereby facilitating the
construction of vehicle routes covering large parts of the target region.
7.2.4
Aggregation and decomposition strategies
For emphasizing spatial exploration, we propose two diﬀerent schemes for providing reduced
problem representations:
Grid-based priority aggregation
In this aggregation scheme, the target area is divided
into evenly sized grid cells C. Each cell comprises a number of locations Vc ⊂V such that
S
c∈C Vc = V. For each cell c ∈C, we determine the priority-weighted center (px
c, py
c) based on
the coordinates (px
i , py
i ) for i ∈Vc such that px
c =
P
i∈Vc uipx
i
P
i∈Vc ui
and py
c =
P
i∈Vc uipy
i
P
i∈Vc ui . We chose a
representative i⋆
c ∈Vc that is closest to this point. The sum of priorities within a cell P
i∈Vc ui
is assigned to its corresponding representative. This results in a set of target locations
Vred = {i⋆
c | c ∈C}.
(18)
In the multi-start approach, we use diﬀerent levels of aggregation in each iteration to obtain
a larger range of candidate solutions. Speciﬁcally, we determine the size |Vc| of the grid cells
c ∈C such that either 4, 6 or 9 locations are grouped together, making exceptions for grid
cells located at the border of the target region. This approach allows to quickly identify highly
relevant regions within the target area and to compute provisional routes for several vehicles.
Furthermore, any solution to the reduced problem represents a feasible solution with respect to
the initial problem representation.
20

Vehicle-oriented spatial decomposition
The spatial decomposition scheme separates the
target area into independent sections, which are assigned to one vehicle each, and solved as a
series of single-vehicle problems. Given the seed routes rm = (sm, cm, em) (see Section 7.2.3),
we determine subsets Vred
m
⊂V for all vehicles such that each target location is assigned to
the vehicle whose seed tour it is closest to. Ties are broken arbitrarily. This makes it possible
to apply the decomposition scheme to instances with multiple starting or ending locations.
As every single-vehicle problem contains a non-overlapping subset of candidate locations, the
combination of routes represents a feasible solution for the original problem.
7.2.5
Weighted objective function
During the ALNS, we employ a hierarchical objective function with the distance traveled by
the UAVs as a secondary objective. This ensures that among solutions with similar sensing
locations S, the ones with lower resource consumption are preferred. This is particularly relevant
whenever it is possible to achieve complete or near-complete coverage of a region, in which case
distance minimization becomes more relevant. However, distance minimization is detrimental
to our focus on explorative missions, as these typically require long travel times for traversing
the entire target area. Therefore, total route length is included in the objective function by
multiplying it with a suﬃciently small factor of ϱ > 0 to adjust its relative weight. For each
problem instance, we heuristically set ϱ based on the sum of priorities P
i∈V ui and the average
distance ¯d =
P
i∈V
P
j∈V dij
|V|2
such that
ϱ = 0.01
P
i∈V ui
|V| ¯d
.
(19)
7.2.6
Removal strategies
The basic removal strategy of our 2MLS is depicted in Algorithm 2. The set of planned loca-
tions N p contains locations included in a route, while the set of unvisited locations N u contains
locations not selected to be visited in the current solution. Note that we explicitly select loca-
tions among the set N u for removal instead of considering all unvisited locations as candidates
for re-insertion. Firstly, this reduces the overall neighborhood size and ensures that candidates
that are unlikely to be inserted in a tour do not need to be evaluated in the subsequent in-
sertion strategy. Secondly, this allows us to explicitly create diﬀerent neighborhoods, e.g., for
emphasizing either diversiﬁcation or more local repair steps.
The number of locations to be removed, i.e. neighborhood size nh, is divided among the
planned and the unvisited locations according to their proportion in the initial solution. The
planned locations are selected ﬁrst following a removal heuristic δremoval−routed, resulting in
relaxed routes with fewer targets. Then, the free capacity T free
m
of each UAV is computed as the
diﬀerence between the vehicle’s maximum route duration T max
m
and the duration of the relaxed
route T ′
m. Afterward, the unvisited locations are selected for removal using δremoval−unvisited.
A feasibility check ensures that for each removed unvisited location, there is at least one vehicle
in the relaxed solution that can reach this location. The removed locations are stored in the set
of open locations N o.
21

Algorithm 2: Basic removal strategy
Input: Solution ωinit with selected locations S, neighborhood size nh
Output: Open targets N o, remaining planned locations N p, unvisited locations N u
1 set N p = S, N u = V \ S, N o = ∅, nhp = ⌈|S|
|V| · nh⌉;
2 while |N o| < nhp do
3
select i ∈N p following removal heuristic δremoval−routed;
4
N o = N o ∪{i}, N p = N p \ {i};
5 end
6 for m ∈M do
7
compute route length T ′
m of the relaxed solution;
8
free capacity T free
m
= T max
m
−T ′
m;
9 end
10 while |N o| < nh do
11
select i ∈N u following removal heuristic δremoval−unvisited;
12
if ∃m ∈M with minimum insertion cost of i no larger than T free
m
then
13
N o = N o ∪{i}, N u = N u \ {i};
14
end
15 end
Sequence-based nearest neighbors
For this strategy, a starting point for each segment
is selected randomly from N p. The subsequent targets in the given vehicle route are removed
until either the ending location is reached or the number of removed locations exceeds a given
segment length lensegment. The segment length limit depends on the average route size, i.e.,
lensegment = ⌊υ· |S|
|M|⌋with a parameter υ < 1. For each segment, we select the closest remaining
locations in N u for removal, as these are the most likely candidates for re-insertion.
Route sparsiﬁcation
This strategy randomly selects one vehicle m ∈M and removes a large
number of target locations within this route in segments of length lensegment. One location
remains between any two consecutive segments. This allows preserving the general shape of
the route. Unvisited locations are removed from a plan by choosing one location in each of the
removed segment at random, and selecting the closest remaining locations among the set N u
for removal.
Priority-delta strategy
This strategy selects the locations associated with the lowest con-
tribution to the objective value among the targets in N p. Furthermore, it selects the locations
with the highest priority among the reachable unvisited targets in N u. As recommended by
Pisinger and Ropke (2007), both the selection of routed and unvisited locations are randomized.
To this end, locations in N p are sorted by ascending priority, and locations in N u by descending
priority. Given a randomization parameter det and a random number p ∈[0, 1], the l-th location
is selected with l = ⌊pdet|N p|⌋or l = ⌊pdet|N u|⌋, respectively.
Region-based selection
This strategy accounts for priorities of other locations within a
limited distance dlimit of a target instead of evaluating each location’s priority in isolation. The
value dlimit is randomized in each iteration. Based on this value, we deﬁne the cost-beneﬁt ratio
ratioi of location i as
ratioi =
detouri,min
P
j∈V:dij<dlimit uj
.
(20)
22

detouri,min corresponds to the minimum detour needed to insert a location i at the best insertion
position over all routes of the current solution. If a feasible insertion of location i is not possible,
detouri,min is set to ∞. Locations in N p are sorted by ascending ratioi, while those in N u are
sorted by descending ratioi. The selection is randomized using a determinism parameter det as
above.
Worst angle removal
This strategy selects combinations of target locations that form sharp
angles in the route. Sharp angles can be associated with considerable detours and imply that
at least two targets in the route are located relatively close to one another, which is rarely
beneﬁcial in terms of information gain. Therefore, in this strategy, we remove all three nodes
related to the sharpest angles. Unvisited locations are selected randomly from N u.
7.2.7
Insertion strategies
The basic heuristic for constructing solutions is depicted in Algorithm 3. The heuristic itera-
tively selects a location i among the set of open locations N o following an insertion strategy
δinsert. Each selected location is inserted at its minimum cost position and added to the set of
planned locations. If no feasible insertion position is available, a location is left unvisited and
added to the set of unvisited locations N u. In order to prevent the repeated construction of
similar solutions, the insertion heuristic is slightly randomized such that a random location is
selected with probability prand ∈[0, 1] instead of following δinsert.
Algorithm 3: Basic insertion strategy
Input: Partial solution ωinit with open targets N o, planned locations N p, unvisited locations N u,
randomization parameter prand
Output: Completed solution ωfinal with selected targets S = N p
1 while N o ̸= ∅do
2
determine a random number p ∈[0, 1];
3
if p ≤prand then
4
select i ∈N o at random;
5
else
6
select i ∈N o following construction heuristic δinsert;
7
end
8
if ∃feasible insertion position in N p then
9
insert i at its minimum cost position;
10
N p = N p ∪{i};
11
else
12
N u = N u ∪{i};
13
end
14
N o = N o \ {i};
15 end
Visit insertion relies on the marginal beneﬁt of inserting a target location, i.e., the incre-
mental change of the objective caused by including a location in a route, given the current
partial solution. To this end, we distinguish between the remaining priority ur
i and marginal
contribution um
i
of target i. The remaining priority ur
i reﬂects the proportion of the location’s
priority value that has not yet been covered by visiting nearby target locations. The marginal
contribution um
i
indicates the incremental change of the objective function when i is included
23

in a UAV route. For the GCorTOP, the remaining priority of a location i is:
ur
i = max{0, (1 −
X
j∈S∩Ci
wji) · ui}.
(21)
The marginal beneﬁt of a location i can then be determined as:
um
i =



ur
i + P
j∈V\{i}:i∈Cj min{ur
j, wijuj}
if i ∈N o
0
otherwise,
(22)
i.e., it comprises the remaining priority of location i plus the priorities of all locations that can
be surveyed by i.
Maximum marginal priority insertion
The maximum marginal priority insertion strategy
greedily inserts the visit with the highest marginal contribution to the objective value. In the
case of a tie, the visit with the highest priority ui is inserted ﬁrst.
Best marginal priority ratio insertion
The best marginal priority ratio strategy seeks to
balance marginal beneﬁt and resource utilization. It selects a visit i ∈N o such that
i = arg max
N o
(um
i )q
detouri,min
.
(23)
The factor q > 0 allows to adjust the relative importance of um
i
and detouri,min. Increasing
q leads to a higher focus on priorities during construction. Higher factors would lead to re-
sults similar to the maximum priority strategy. Again, ties are broken by the locations’ direct
priorities ui.
Region-based insertion
Similar to the corresponding removal strategy, the region-based
insertion strategy accounts for the priorities of nearby locations. Locations are selected such
that
i = arg max
N o
P
j∈V:dij<dlimit ur
j
detouri,min
.
(24)
The objective is to prioritize highly relevant regions early during the (re-)construction of routes.
Note that we use remaining priorities ur
i instead of the marginal contributions um
i . Otherwise,
we would consider the locations’ priorities several times as they are considered in the marginal
priority values of all their respective neighbors. The size dlimit is randomized in order to insert
locations in diﬀerent orders during the search.
Cost-greedy insertion
The cost-oriented insertion strategy greedily inserts visit i with min-
imum insertion cost. We use this strategy for diversiﬁcation during the search, as most other
strategies focus on the locations’ priorities. Furthermore, in case of the TOP, it may help to
construct and improve routes that include clustered locations.
24

Orienteering-regret insertion
The orienteering-regret heuristic inserts visit locations ﬁrst
that may no longer be feasible if their insertion is delayed. In order to use this strategy, we have
to compute two values for each target remaining in N o: the change in the objective value at
the current best position for visit i, denoted δobj
i,1 , and the change in the objective if i is inserted
in its n-th best position, denoted δobj
i,n , with regret parameter n ∈{2, . . . , |N p|}. If the n-th best
position is not a feasible insertion position, we set δobj
i,n = 0. Then, the heuristic selects a visit i
such that
i = arg max
N o |δobj
i,n −δobj
i,1 |.
(25)
If some locations only have few feasible insertion positions left, setting δobj
i,n = 0 ensures that
these are associated with high regret values. In this case, the strategy prioritizes the locations
that oﬀer the highest marginal contribution to the objective, oﬀering additional diversiﬁcation
as locations that are further away from a current route are inserted early. If the n-th best
position exists for all i ∈N o, the diﬀerence between δobj
i,n and δobj
i,1 reﬂects the change in total
route distance due to the weighted objective function. In this situation, the insertion strategy
ﬁrst selects locations where a delay may lead to a high detour.
Similar to the cost-greedy
strategy, this improves routes in terms of total duration. If no feasible position remains, δobj
i,1 is
0 and the location is added to set N u.
7.2.8
Reheating-based acceptance criterion
As acceptance criterion, we employ a reheating-based scheme that increases the likelihood of
accepting a move associated with a decreasing objective value with the number of moves since
the last strict improvement of the objective function. This way, subsequent search steps focus
on intensiﬁcation after an improving move. The acceptance threshold is only lowered if such
improvements cannot be found, thereby accepting solutions with decreasing objective values in
order to leave local minima.
Similar to simulated annealing, a new solution ωnew is accepted with a probability that
depends on the best solution found so far ωbest and a current temperature Ψ. The probability
of accepting a non-improving move with an absolute decrease in solution quality of δobj =
|Ibest −Inew| is determined as:
P

δobj
= exp
−δobj
Ψ

.
(26)
The temperature Ψi in iteration i is increased in non-improving iterations such that Ψi+1 = Ψi·ψ
with ψ > 1. In the beginning and whenever a new best solution is found, Ψi is set to a given
minimum temperature Ψ0 = 1.
We initialize heating parameter ψ such that a decrease in
solution quality of δobj will be accepted with probability p = 0.5 after κ iterations.
As proposed by Kilby (2013), we can use Equation (26) for computing an acceptance thresh-
old I prior to the construction of a solution. An insertion step can be stopped preemptively
when the maximum achievable priority value I of a solution is less than I.
We therefore
25

maintain an upper bound on the objective value of GCorTOP, which is computed as follows:
I =
X
i∈V
ui −
X
i∈N u
(ui −min{ui,
X
j∈Ci\N u
wjiui})
(27)
The upper bound in Equation (27) corresponds to the sum of all priorities reduced by the sum
of “lost” priority values, i.e., the proportion of priorities associated with locations in N u that
cannot be covered by any of the locations in N p and N o, respectively.
8
Experimental study
This section provides an in-depth evaluation of the proposed models and solution approaches. It
is dedicated to two main aspects: (1) The evaluation of the performance of the solution approach
considering solution quality, robustness, and computation times, and (2) the assessment of the
validity of the proposed models to the mission planning problem introduced in Section 4.
8.1
MPPES benchmark instances
Our 2MLS heuristic addresses speciﬁc features of the GCorTOP, however, it is still applicable to
TOP instances. For comparing our approach to state-of-the-art algorithms for related problems,
we solve benchmark instances proposed by Chao, Golden, and Wasil (1996) and Dang, Guibadj,
and Moukrim (2013) and compare them to the best approaches in terms of solution quality and
runtime.
We furthermore propose new benchmark instances for MPPES based on the practical use
case introduced in Section 2. An overview of the parameters of the benchmark instances is given
in Table 2. In this study, we consider 5 diﬀerent target area sizes. For every target area size,
we generate 90 instances by varying the assigned priorities, the number of UAVs and maximum
ﬂight time as indicated in the table. This leads to a total of 450 benchmark instances.
Target areas and priorities
We vary target area size between 1.5×1.5 km2 and 2.5×2.5 km2.
Smaller aﬀected areas either do not require airborne surveillance or can be surveyed in their
entirety within the available ﬂight time limit. We do not consider larger areas, as they are not
within the UAVs’ operation range. For the MPPES benchmarks, we select target areas within
the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia at random. For each area, we determine priorities
using the corresponding data on population density published by the Federal Statistical Oﬃce
based on data collected in the 2011 census (Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis) 2018). This
Parameter
Values
Cruise speed vmax (in m/s)
7
Acceleration a (in m/s2)
2
Sensing time τi (in s)
2
Available UAVs
{1; 2; 3}
Mission duration T max (in s)
{600; 900; 1200; 1500; 1800}
Target area sizes (km2)
{1.5 × 1.5; 1.5 × 2; 2 × 2; 2.5 × 2; 2.5 × 2.5}
Table 2: Parameter settings for MPPES benchmarks
26

dataset provides georeferenced information on population density in a resolution of 100×100 m,
which is suﬃcient for our use case.
Vehicles
In our study, we consider UAV systems similar to those used in the BigGIS project
(see Section 2.1). We generate instances with 1 to 3 UAVs. The starting and ending position for
each UAV is selected at random among the locations at the border of the target area. To obtain
insights on the trade-oﬀbetween ﬂight time and information gain, we vary the maximum ﬂight
time T max between 10 and 30 minutes. We assume a maximum cruise speed vmax = 7 m/s
(approx. 25 km/h), which is realistic when taking payload weight and environmental inﬂuences
into account. Once a target location is reached, the observations are made at a standstill. Hence,
the time required for accelerating and decelerating between targets needs to be considered when
computing total travel time. For simplicity, we assume that UAVs accelerate and decelerate
with a constant horizontal acceleration rate a = 2 m/s2. Then, travel time τij between any two
points i and j can be determined depending on the traveled distance dij as follows:
τij =



2
q
dij
a
if dij < (vmax)2
a
dij
vmax + vmax
a
otherwise
(28)
We furthermore require a ﬁxed sensing time τi = 2 s. This is necessary as the UAVs need
to verify their position via GPS, their ﬂight needs to be stabilized at the target location, and
several observations are performed and processed before traveling further.
Sensor equipment
In our experiments, we assume that UAVs are equipped with a hyper-
spectral sensor with a resolution of 1000 × 1000 pixels and a focal length of 12 mm. Based on
experiments in the BigGIS project, we consider a ground sampling resolution of 0.01 m2/pixel to
be acceptable. Given this information, we can determine the covered ground area of 100×100 m
per image at a ﬂight altitude of approximately 120 m. Candidate sampling locations, which
represent the center of an image taken by the UAVs, are located at 100 m distance to one an-
other. Given the target area sizes discussed above, this results in 15×15 = 225 to 25×25 = 625
candidate target locations.
Spatial distribution of contaminants
The applicability of the proposed model largely de-
pends on the predictive quality that can be achieved for the distribution of hazardous substances.
In order to assess this aspect, we generate spatially autocorrelated random ﬁelds that represent
distributions of contaminants across the target area. For this purpose, we deﬁne a Gaussian
process ZV and create artiﬁcial distributions by drawing samples from this distribution (see
Section 3.2). For each instance, this yields simulated values Z(i) for all i ∈V that follow the
speciﬁed covariance matrix of the GP. We normalize these values such that Z(i) ∈[0, 100] for
all i with a mean value of 50. The covariance functions used in the GP are based on Stachniss,
Plagemann, and Lilienthal (2009) who use an exponential kernel as well as a Mat´ern covariance
function for modeling and predicting gas distributions. We alternate between these two kernel
functions when generating random ﬁelds. Exemplary distributions are depicted in the visual
interpretation of results at the end of this section.
27

8.2
Model conﬁgurations
We compare three modeling variants: The TOP, which only considers priorities, CorTOP (Equa-
tion (15)) as a predecessor to our model with a lower emphasis on covering aspects, and ﬁnally,
the GCorTOP model (Equation (16)).
In case of the latter two models, we have to specify the weights that deﬁne the objective
function. For CorTOP, these are based on the approximation used by Yu, Schwager, and Rus
(2014), see Equation (12), with the covering neighborhood Ci of location i made up of its
immediate neighbors. For GCorTOP, our model is based on Equation (14) with ¯w = 0.5 and
dmin = 100 m. The radius of the covering neighborhood is limited to 400 m, as the impact of
including locations at larger distances in the covering neighborhood is negligible.
8.3
Results
The 2MLS is implemented in C++. The dynamic programming approach is implemented in
Python 3. All evaluations are performed on an Intel Xeon 2.6GHz processor machine with 119
GB RAM running a 64-bit version of Windows Server 2012. Except for the parameter tuning,
each instance was solved 10 times.
8.3.1
Parameter Tuning
To determine good parameter settings, we performed a series of preliminary experiments on
a subset of 60 randomly selected instances among the TOP and MPPES instances. The idea
behind this approach is to ﬁnd reasonable parametrizations that perform well on a diverse set
of instances. For each instance and parameter conﬁguration, we ran the 2MLS three times.
The performance of diﬀerent conﬁgurations are compared based on the gap to the best known
solution (BKS) averaged over all instances.
Based on the results, we propose two parametrizations of the 2MLS: a “regular” conﬁgura-
tion achieving good results (2MLS), and a particularly fast parametrization denoted as 2MLS-f.
This distinction allows us to gain insights into the trade-oﬀbetween computation time and
solution quality. Furthermore, using the fast version, we can evaluate how the algorithm per-
forms in a practical setting where computation times are strictly limited. Table 3 gives the
parameter settings for the two conﬁgurations. For the ALNS procedure, with the exception of
the parameters explicitly mentioned, we follow the settings proposed by Pisinger and Ropke
(2007).
8.3.2
Results on TOP benchmarks
We compare results of the 2MLS with other approaches representing the state of the art with
respect to computation time or solution quality on TOP benchmark instances. We selected two
approaches delivering acceptable solutions in relatively short run times, the fast path relinking
(FPR), proposed by Souﬀriau et al. (2010) and the multi-start local search (MS-LS) presented
by Vidal et al. (2015), Furthermore, we show the results of three approaches aiming for very
good solution quality at the cost of longer run times, the particle swarm optimization-inspired
algorithm (PSOiA) proposed by Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013), uniﬁed hybrid genetic
28

Parameter
2MLS-f
2MLS
Strategy for Phase 1
Vehicle decomposition
Aggregation
Number of multi-starts
4
4
ALNS limit in Phase 1
100 iterations
100 iterations
ALNS limit in Phase 2
2000 iterations
2000 iterations
ALNS segment size
200 iterations
600 iterations
Convergence limit
100 iterations
300 iterations
Neighborhood size limits
nh−= max{0.05|V|, 10}
nh+ = min{0.2|V|, 100}
nh−= max{0.1|V|, 10}
nh+ = min{0.3|V|, 100}
Priority ratio factor q
{1, 2}
{1, 2}
Segment length υ
[0.1 |S|
|M|, 0.25 |S|
|M|]
[0.15 |S|
|M|, 0.35 |S|
|M|]
Randomization factor prand
0.05
0.05
Regret parameter n
2
2
Determinism parameter det
6
6
Heating parameter κ
400 iterations
400 iterations
Table 3: Search conﬁgurations for computational experiments
search (UHGS) proposed by Vidal et al. (2015), and pareto mimic algorithm (PMA) by Ke
et al. (2016). With the exception of two newer machines used by Vidal et al. (2015) and Ke
et al. (2016), the processors used are of a similar generation as ours and can provide a rough
indication of computation times.
Table 4 gives an overview of the results, showing the average and best deviation to the BKS
over 10 runs and the average computation time. Please note that we selected the instances
commonly used in literature2.
Compared to the approaches striving for quality, 2MLS comes with a slightly worse solution
quality, achieving a best gap of 0.17 % and an average gap of 1.04 %. 2MLS-f has a best gap
of 0.43 % and an average gap of 2.03 %. However, with an average computation time of 2.8 s,
it is faster than any of the other approaches. The best gap slightly improves on FPR. For
the instances of Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013), the best solutions found by 2MLS are
close to the BKS, with an average gap of 1.03 % and a best gap of 0.19 %, averaged over all
instances. These gaps are slightly higher when considering the 82 more diﬃcult instances but
still remains below 2 % on average. For 2MLS-f, the average gap of these instances is less than
3 %. Compared to the two other published approaches, this increase in average gap comes with
a considerable improvement in terms of computation time: 2MLS is more than ten times faster
than PMA, and 2MLS-f reduces average computation time by a factor of 30. Both variants use
less than 1 % of the computation time required for PSOiA.
8.3.3
Optimality gap on small MPPES benchmark instances
The exact solution approach is only applicable for small problem instances. We were unable
to solve any of the large-scale MPPES instances to optimality within reasonable computation
time. We therefore generated a set of smaller instances with 16 to 49 target locations in a
rectangular grid based on the same parameters as depicted in Table 2, except for T max, which
2The publications by Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013) and Ke et al. (2016) that report on the newer
instances limit their study to a subset of 82 “diﬃcult” instances in the benchmark set. The comparison of results
on the entire benchmark set is based on the results reported on the website of the authors of the second journal
paper (http://gr.xjtu.edu.cn/web/keljxjtu/download, accessed 23.09.2018)
29

FPR1
PSOiA2
UHGS3
MS-LS3
PMA4
2MLS-f
2MLS
Chao et al.
avg.
–
0.11 %
0.05 %
1.52 %
0.32 %
3.18 %
1.75 %
set 4
best
0.73 %
0.00 %
0.01 %
0.21 %
0.00 %
0.90 %
0.36 %
t(s)
8.6
226.7
236.3
15.9
113.1
4.5
22.6
avg.
–
0.03 %
0.01 %
0.48 %
0.09 %
1.67 %
0.64 %
set 5
best
0.23 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.06 %
0.00 %
0.14 %
0.09 %
t(s)
2.9
73.9
138.0
3.4
32.3
1.3
12.0
avg.
–
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.34 %
0.29 %
1.10 %
0.10 %
set 6
best
0.11 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.03 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
t(s)
2.1
37.3
91.0
2.0
24.8
0.8
7.3
avg.
–
0.03 %
0.02 %
1.11 %
0.13 %
1.29 %
0.88 %
set 7
best
0.54 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.14 %
0.00 %
0.28 %
0.05 %
t(s)
6.3
130.3
228.0
9.8
68.6
2.7
22.1
avg.
–
0.06 %
0.03 %
0.99 %
0.20 %
2.03 %
1.04 %
all
best
0.47 %
0.00 %
0.00 %
0.13 %
0.00 %
0.43 %
0.17 %
t(s)
5.0
138.4
192.0
9.3
69.3
2.8
18.0
Dang et al.
avg.
–
0.50 %
–
–
0.42 %
2.86 %
1.86 %
sel. 82
best
–
0.04 %
–
–
0.00 %
1.13 %
0.55 %
t(s)
–
11031.0
–
–
999.2
25.8
70.5
avg.
–
0.13 %
–
–
0.13 %
1.62 %
1.03 %
all
best
–
0.01 %
–
–
0.00 %
0.42 %
0.19 %
t(s)
–
4379.4
–
–
343.9
10.7
32.8
1 tested on an Intel Xeon 2.5GHz processor machine
2 tested on an AMD Opteron 2.6GHz CPU
3 tested on an Intel Xeon 3.07GHz CPU
4 tested on an Intel Core i5 3.2GHz CPU
Table 4: Results on Chao, Golden, and Wasil (1996) and Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013)
instances
30

varies between 100 s and 250 s due to the smaller target areas. The maximum runtime for the
exact approach has been limited to 10000 seconds.
We brieﬂy give the main results of this evaluation: In the single-vehicle case, we were able
to ﬁnd optimal solutions for instances that include around 40 locations or less. Instances with
two or more UAVs quickly become intractable for around 20 target locations. This is consistent
with the performance of the MIQP model proposed by Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) for
solving the CorTOP. Unfortunately, a direct comparison of these approaches is not possible,
as Yu, Schwager, and Rus (2014) have not published their instances. Compared to the known
optimal results, 2MLS-f has an average gap of 0.1 % with an average computation time of 0.22 s.
2MLS has an average gap of 0.0005 % at a computation time of 1.98 s. Both variants are able
to ﬁnd the optimal solution in 53 out of the 55 cases for which we know the exact solution.
Furthermore, for 51 out of 55 instances, 2MLS ﬁnds the optimal solution in all ten runs.
8.3.4
Solution quality and robustness
Moving on to the large-scale instances proposed in Section 8.1, we investigate the running time
behavior of the proposed solution approach to verify its applicability in practice. Our project
partners estimate that approximately two minutes are available after the arrival of the response
personnel for preparing the UAV missions in order not to delay the surveillance and rescue
operation. The results on the larger instances by Dang, Guibadj, and Moukrim (2013) indicate
that even though 2MLS scales better than other solution approaches, it is still associated with
high computational eﬀort for large instances. This is particularly obvious for the 82 diﬃcult
instances. These instances comprise on average 240 candidate locations. The largest instances
in our study, are almost three times as large. Hence, in the following, we focus on the 2MLS-f.
As optimal solutions to the large MPPES instances are not available, Table 5 reports the
average gap to the best found solution. The minimum average gap is achieved for the small-
est instances with high resource availability, i.e., instances with 225 and 300 target locations
involving multiple UAVs and long mission durations. In these instances, the objective value is
generally close to the total sum of priorities P
i∈V ui. This means that it is comparatively easy
for the solution approach to determine a solution with high coverage, and the solutions found
during the search are mostly distinguished by their total duration rather than overall coverage.
The eﬀect is exactly opposite in case of limited resources, i.e., single-vehicle instances with tight
duration constraints. In these situations, eﬃcient use of the available resources is crucial, and
exchanging some locations in a solution can have a signiﬁcant impact on the objective value.
Consequently, the highest gap of 2.9 % is observed in the instances with 625 candidate locations
and a single vehicle.
8.3.5
Runtime analysis
Table 6 gives the results in terms of computation time for 2MLS-f. The average computation
time over all instances is approximately 56 s, i.e., slightly less than a minute and well within
the allowed range in our application. Increasing the number of target locations is almost always
associated with an increase in computational eﬀort.
Whereas 24 s suﬃce for the smallest
instances involving 225 targets, this is increased to 96 s on average for the largest set with 625
31

|V|
|M|
T max (in s)
all
600
900
1200
1500
1800
225
1
1.8 %
1.1 %
0.5 %
0.3 %
0.1 %
0.7 %
2
0.8 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.2 %
3
0.2 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.9 %
0.4 %
0.2 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.3 %
300
1
2.6 %
2.7 %
1.5 %
0.9 %
0.6 %
1.7 %
2
1.6 %
0.5 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.5 %
3
1.1 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.2 %
1.8 %
1.1 %
0.5 %
0.3 %
0.2 %
0.8 %
400
1
1.5 %
1.9 %
1.5 %
1.0 %
0.7 %
1.3 %
2
0.7 %
0.9 %
0.4 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.4 %
3
0.3 %
0.3 %
0.1 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.1 %
0.8 %
1.0 %
0.6 %
0.4 %
0.2 %
0.6 %
500
1
1.4 %
1.7 %
1.6 %
1.5 %
1.1 %
1.5 %
2
0.8 %
1.0 %
0.7 %
0.4 %
0.2 %
0.6 %
3
0.4 %
0.6 %
0.2 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.3 %
0.9 %
1.1 %
0.9 %
0.6 %
0.5 %
0.8 %
625
1
2.0 %
2.4 %
2.9 %
2.0 %
1.8 %
2.2 %
2
1.2 %
1.6 %
1.2 %
0.6 %
0.5 %
1.0 %
3
0.8 %
1.0 %
0.4 %
0.2 %
0.1 %
0.5 %
1.4 %
1.7 %
1.5 %
0.9 %
0.8 %
1.2 %
all
1.2 %
1.1 %
0.7 %
0.5 %
0.3 %
0.8 %
Table 5: Average gap to the best found solution on the MPPES benchmark instances
locations. The convergence criterion means that search is stopped when the objective value is
comparatively high, which leads to lower computation times in case of several UAVs and high
ﬂight times.
8.3.6
Model evaluation and comparison
In this section, we study the results that are obtained using this approach from a practical point
of view, i.e., we seek to determine whether valuable information can be obtained during the
UAV missions.
Covered priorities
The relative importance of target locations is considered in form of the
priorities ui. In order to account for information about neighboring locations, we measure direct
and indirect coverage using a distance-dependent coverage measure PCovd
PCovd(S) =
P
i∈V:∃j∈S with dij≤d ui
P
i∈V ui
,
(29)
which gives the proportion of priorities that are within distance d to a sampled location. This
criterion is independent of I(S), thus allowing a comparison of all discussed models.
In Table 7, we report the average percentage of priorities visited directly by the UAVs
(PCov0) or within 100 m or 300 m of a visited location (PCov100 and PCov300). Considering
only direct coverage, we can see that TOP clearly performs best. This meets our expectations,
32

|V|
|M|
T max (in s)
all
600
900
1200
1500
1800
225
1
30.2
36.7
33.5
27.1
21.8
29.8
2
39.3
28.4
16.6
16.3
17.3
23.6
3
33.1
15.1
14.9
15.0
14.4
18.5
34.2
26.7
21.7
19.5
17.8
24.0
300
1
30.9
44.7
51.0
48.8
37.6
42.6
2
53.1
54.0
39.9
27.6
20.2
39.0
3
60.5
37.9
21.9
19.0
20.6
32.0
48.1
45.5
37.6
31.8
26.1
37.8
400
1
38.3
47.9
55.6
59.7
57.6
51.8
2
54.8
68.6
58.7
50.3
37.3
53.9
3
47.6
59.6
43.9
29.4
26.6
41.4
46.9
58.7
52.7
46.5
40.5
49.1
500
1
42.3
52.9
69.7
80.0
71.6
63.3
2
72.1
90.1
97.4
83.6
70.2
82.7
3
83.2
104.0
71.2
56.5
43.6
71.7
65.9
82.3
79.4
73.4
61.8
72.6
625
1
46.2
57.8
77.3
92.6
99.2
74.6
2
81.4
101.8
134.1
115.2
106.2
107.7
3
107.7
134.7
121.4
92.9
72.1
105.7
78.5
98.1
110.9
100.2
92.5
96.0
all
54.7
62.3
60.5
54.3
47.8
55.9
Table 6: Average computation time of 2MLS-f on the MPPES benchmark instances
as this model does not involve any trade-oﬀbetween spatial coverage and priorities of directly
visited locations.
Results obtained using CorTOP are similar to these results, whereas the
GCorTOP yields the overall lowest values for PCov0. This changes when accounting for covered
priorities in the vicinity of the UAV missions. GCorTOP consistently outperforms the two other
models with respect to the PCov100 and PCov300 measures. Even though fewer high-priority
target locations are directly visited, more of them are at least close to a UAV’s sensing location.
Prediction quality
We now investigate the prediction quality that can be achieved using the
samples taken during the UAV missions. To this end, we apply GP regression approaches (see
Section 3, which are computationally too expensive for evaluating interim solutions during the
search. The planned UAV mission determines the set of sampling locations S. The observed
values Z(i) for all i ∈S are taken from the simulated spatial distribution of contaminants. We
condition a Gaussian process on these samples. For ﬁtting the covariance function of this GP
to the sample data, we use the Python scikit-learn package (Pedregosa et al. 2011). The
GP posterior then yields predicted values bZ(i) for all i ∈V. To measure the quality of this
prediction, we determine the deviation of the predicted values from the “true” distribution of
contaminants, i.e., the initially generated distribution. In this study, we use three measures:
33

|V|
|M|
PCov0
PCov100
PCov300
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
1
58.1 %
56.2 %
46.1 %
71.9 %
79.9 %
85.2 %
83.5 %
89.7 %
95.5 %
225
2
84.7 %
79.0 %
62.9 %
92.3 %
94.8 %
96.7 %
97.2 %
98.4 %
99.7 %
3
93.4 %
88.9 %
75.4 %
97.2 %
98.4 %
99.1 %
99.4 %
99.7 %
100.0 %
1
42.5 %
40.3 %
34.8 %
56.8 %
63.1 %
71.4 %
73.5 %
78.7 %
87.8 %
300
2
69.6 %
65.9 %
42.7 %
83.2 %
87.2 %
90.8 %
93.8 %
95.6 %
98.3 %
3
83.5 %
78.5 %
60.0 %
91.5 %
93.9 %
96.3 %
96.8 %
98.1 %
99.7 %
1
42.9 %
41.4 %
33.2 %
55.9 %
61.6 %
70.0 %
68.5 %
74.4 %
85.8 %
400
2
68.4 %
64.8 %
46.2 %
81.0 %
84.4 %
88.6 %
89.3 %
91.4 %
94.7 %
3
81.7 %
76.6 %
53.9 %
89.2 %
91.7 %
93.5 %
93.4 %
94.5 %
95.8 %
1
37.4 %
36.4 %
29.0 %
49.3 %
56.0 %
63.1 %
62.3 %
69.1 %
80.0 %
500
2
60.7 %
57.4 %
45.7 %
75.3 %
79.3 %
84.2 %
86.0 %
88.7 %
93.4 %
3
75.1 %
70.7 %
56.6 %
85.1 %
87.9 %
90.9 %
91.3 %
92.6 %
95.1 %
1
25.8 %
25.0 %
19.9 %
35.0 %
40.2 %
48.4 %
47.6 %
53.9 %
67.1 %
625
2
46.5 %
44.0 %
34.9 %
63.7 %
68.8 %
74.7 %
78.7 %
83.7 %
89.4 %
3
63.1 %
59.8 %
43.4 %
77.6 %
81.7 %
86.4 %
87.5 %
90.4 %
93.8 %
all
62.2%
59.0%
40.2%
73.7%
77.9%
82.6%
83.2%
86.6%
91.7%
Table 7: Average values for PCov0, PCov100 and PCov300 depending on target area size, number
of vehicles, and modeling approach. Best values for each set are indicated in bold.
The mean absolute error (MAE)
MAE(S) = 1
|V|
X
i∈V
| bZ(i) −Z(i)|
(30)
allows to compare overall accuracy of the predictions. The mean error (ME), which is deﬁned
as
ME = 1
|V|
X
i∈V
( bZ(i) −Z(i)),
(31)
indicates whether or not the selected samples lead to a systematic deviation in the prediction,
e.g., a systematic underestimation or overestimation of the contamination. Finally, we also
determine the weighted mean absolute error (WMAE)
WMAE =
1
P
i∈V ui
X
i∈V
ui · | bZ(i) −Z(i)|
(32)
which also accounts for priorities.
This way, we can evaluate the trade-oﬀbetween overall
prediction quality and the accuracy at highly prioritized locations.
Table 8 gives the results with respect to all three measures. We can see that with respect
to MAE, the GCorTOP model invariably achieves the lowest values, i.e., it yields the most
accurate predictions. Compared to TOP, MAE is reduced by approximately 43 % on average.
Even compared to the CorTOP model, which already incorporates aspects of spatial coverage,
MAE is reduced by 33 %. The prediction bias (ME) is within a reasonable range for all models,
and largely negligible for the GCorTOP when several UAVs are available.
The WMAE measure is less than MAE for all models. This is a consequence of the inte-
gration of priorities, as the focus on samples at prioritized locations ensures that predictions
34

|V|
|M|
MAE
ME
WMAE
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
TOP
CorTOP
GCorTOP
225
1
10.67
8.41
6.00
0.97
0.82
0.43
5.24
3.95
4.64
2
5.45
3.85
2.06
0.53
0.48
-0.03
1.40
1.87
1.19
3
3.12
1.83
1.16
0.49
0.36
-0.07
0.47
0.44
0.90
300
1
9.62
9.07
6.14
1.12
0.62
0.56
7.72
6.00
5.91
2
6.37
4.81
3.84
-0.14
0.21
0.07
2.42
2.09
2.69
3
4.17
2.71
2.17
-0.44
-0.07
-0.02
1.16
0.96
1.46
400
1
12.56
11.22
7.83
1.15
1.36
1.41
6.37
5.69
4.92
2
6.83
6.44
3.80
0.34
0.23
0.18
2.24
2.10
1.93
3
4.26
3.71
2.07
0.27
0.19
-0.03
1.04
1.24
0.88
500
1
11.56
10.91
8.57
1.64
1.38
0.83
6.46
5.53
4.34
2
6.55
6.14
3.41
0.46
0.44
0.32
2.20
1.93
1.90
3
4.58
4.31
2.49
0.44
0.47
0.18
1.16
1.06
1.08
625
1
13.53
12.64
9.28
0.33
0.60
0.80
9.52
8.23
5.69
2
7.23
6.49
5.17
1.27
1.31
1.36
3.28
2.56
2.27
3
4.98
4.42
2.88
1.27
1.14
0.32
1.56
1.41
1.22
all
7.03
6.46
5.09
0.65
0.64
0.49
3.42
2.96
2.80
Table 8: Average prediction quality measures depending on target area size, number of vehicles,
and modeling approach. Best values for each set are indicated in bold.
are comparatively good in the corresponding areas. Despite this, TOP does not yield the best
WMAE. This is due to two reasons: First, the overall reduction in MAE that is achieved by
incorporating correlations also helps to reduce WMAE. Second, routes planned using TOP are
often very narrow, leaving out some areas with high priorities that do not justify a detour when
coverage is not considered. This is also demonstrated in the visual comparison in the ﬁnal part
of this section.
From a practical point of view, these are promising results. While predictions are by no
means ﬂawless, for most areas of the target region, predicted values are at least close to the
true distribution. As the WMAE indicates, high prediction accuracy can be achieved at least
for crucial areas, even given comparatively limited ﬂight times and large target areas.
8.3.7
Visual comparison
In a last step, we give a visual indication of the impact that considering coverage aspects has on
the solutions. To this end, we compare results for two instances. The ﬁrst example is depicted
in Figure 4. We indicate priorities on the left-hand side and the simulated “true” distribution
of contaminants on the right.
Missions obtained using the three modeling variants are given in Figures 5 to 7. These
routes are planned for a single UAV with a maximum ﬂight time of T max = 1500. Flights start
and end at position (0, 400). For each solution, we indicate the planned mission on the left-hand
side, superposed on the priorities that are the basis for this plan. On the right-hand side, we
give the predicted distribution. Note that the grey areas indicate that the associated predicted
value is equal or close to the mean value of the samples that are taken. Predictions converge to
this value as the distance to the next sampling location increases and no local information that
can indicate a deviation from the mean is available.
The TOP results in the narrow route given in Figure 5. The UAV traverses a region with
35

x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
priorities
(a) Priorities in the target area
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
contamination (normalized)
(b) Simulated distribution of gases
Figure 4: Base data of the benchmark instance for example 1
high utilities but leaves major parts of the target region entirely unexplored.
The mission
planned using the CorTOP (Figure 6) is broader in comparison with the TOP, but follows a
similar trajectory. Finally, the GCorTOP determines a mission that diﬀers strongly from the
two other models. The UAV travels further to gather more information at the regions with
higher priorities that are indicated in the right part of the ﬁgure. This signiﬁcantly improves
prediction quality.
The second instance is indicated in Figure 8. Compared to the previous example, we can
see that the simulated distribution of values is more coarse, i.e., it changes more quickly with
distance, and is therefore more challenging to predict. UAV missions are planned for one vehicle
with a ﬂight duration limit of T max = 1200 s, departing from position (0, 1400).
The TOP solution in Figure 9 clearly mirrors the shape determined by the priorities and
successfully covers almost all of the highly prioritized target locations. Even though, the pre-
diction is comparatively imprecise due to the coarse spatial distribution, which means that
prediction quality deteriorates quickly even in short distance to a sampling location. The Cor-
TOP model leads to a very similar result, both in terms of vehicle trajectory and prediction
quality. The GCorTOP further emphasizes spatial interdependencies, yielding a much broader
route compared to the two other solutions (Figure 11). While prediction quality still suﬀers
due to the coarse distribution, this is the only model to indicate higher contamination values at
the right-hand side of the target area. These are severely underestimated using the two other
modeling approaches.
9
Conclusion
This paper presents a novel approach for modeling spatial correlations when planning informa-
tive missions for UAVs. These missions include a number of sampling locations, based on which
we can predict the distribution of these contaminants across the aﬀected area. We formalize
the mission planning problem for emergency surveillance (MPPES) and introduce a new model
that considers both the information on spatial interdependencies as well as priorities within the
target region in order to provide accurate data at locations that are particularly relevant for
the emergency services. For solving this planning problem, we propose a two-phase multi-start
36

x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 5: TOP results for example 1
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 6: CorTOP results for example 1
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 7: GCorTOP results for example 1
37

x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
priorities
(a) Priorities in the target area
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
contamination (normalized)
(b) Simulated distribution of gases
Figure 8: Base data of the benchmark instance for example 2
adaptive large neighborhood search. In order to quickly determine good solutions, Phase 1 fo-
cuses on exploration by planning missions based on reduced problem representations. In Phase
2, the missions are improved further using the complete problem instance.
We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed model and scalability of our solution ap-
proach in an extensive study based on MPPES benchmark instances derived from a real-world
use case. We furthermore propose several evaluation criteria speciﬁcally addressing the needs
of this use case. Using MPPES instances and performance measures, we can show that the
proposed model can adequately capture spatial correlations. The obtained routes are wider and
explore larger areas, leading to major improvements in prediction quality. From a practical
point of view, we can plan UAV missions that allow identifying aﬀected areas in case of emer-
gency, even in the face of large target areas of multiple square kilometers. In future work, we
investigate the MPPES in a dynamic setting, in which factors such as wind vary over time. This
requires progress in two areas: Firstly, we need to incorporate process models that account for
temporal interdependencies. This means that observations lose value over time, and additional
measurements may have to be taken at or close to locations that have been surveyed earlier.
Secondly, we derive adaptive methods that can incorporate this information to adjust the UAV
paths based on updated process models while the mission is in progress.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under
grant number 01IS14012.
References
Aasen H, Burkart A, Bolten A, Bareth G, 2015 Generating 3D hyperspectral information with lightweight
UAV snapshot cameras for vegetation monitoring: From camera calibration to quality assurance.
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 108:245–259.
Allahyari S, Salari M, Vigo D, 2015 A hybrid metaheuristic algorithm for the multi-depot covering tour
vehicle routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research 242(3):756–768.
38

x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 9: TOP results for example 2
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 10: CorTOP results for example 2
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(a) Planned mission
x coordinate [m]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
y coordinate [m]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
flight altitude [in m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b) Predicted distribution
Figure 11: GCorTOP results for example 2
39

Archetti C, Carrabs F, Cerulli R, 2018 The set orienteering problem. European Journal of Operational
Research 267(1):264–272.
Arthur D, Vassilvitskii S, 2007 k-means++: The advantages of careful seeding. Proceedings of the Eigh-
teenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms 1027—-1035.
BBK, 2016 Recommendations on sampling for hazard control in civil protection.
BBK,
2018
Chemische
Gefahren.
https://www.bbk.bund.de/DE/AufgabenundAusstattung/
CBRNSchutz/Chemie/ChemGef/chemgef_node.html, online; accessed 14.05.2019.
Binney J, Krause A, Sukhatme GS, 2010 Informative path planning for an autonomous underwater
vehicle. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
Binney J, Sukhatme GS, 2012 Branch and bound for informative path planning. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation 2147–2154.
Boccardo P, Chiabrando F, Dutto F, Tonolo FG, Lingua A, 2015 UAV deployment exercise for mapping
purposes: Evaluation of emergency response applications. Sensors 15(7):15717–15737.
Caselton WF, Zidek JV, 1984 Optimal monitoring network designs. Statistics & Probability Letters
2(4):223–227.
Chao IM, Golden B, Wasil E, 1996 The team orienteering problem. European Journal of Operational
Research 88:464–474.
Copernicus EMS, 2018 Copernicus emergency management service. http://emergency.copernicus.
eu/, online; accessed 15.05.2019.
Cressie NA, Wikle C, 2011 Statistics for Spatio-Temporal Data (John Wiley & Sons).
Curran PJ, Atkinson PM, 1998 Geostatistics and remote sensing. Progress in Physical Geography
22(1):61–78.
Current JR, Schilling DA, 1989 The covering salesman problem. Transportation Science 23(3):208–213.
Dang DC, Guibadj RN, Moukrim A, 2013 An eﬀective PSO-inspired algorithm for the team orienteering
problem. European Journal of Operational Research 229(2):332–344.
Das A, Kempe D, 2008 Algorithms for subset selection in linear regression. Proceedings of the fortieth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 45–54.
Flanigan DF, 1996 Short history of remote sensing of chemical agents. Electro-Optical Technology for
Remote Chemical Detection and Identiﬁcation, volume 2763, 2–18.
FwDV
100,
1999
Feuerwehr-Dienstvorschrift
100.
F¨uhrung
und
Leitung
im
Ein-
satz.
F¨uhrungssystem.
https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/
FIS/DownloadsRechtundVorschriften/Volltext_Fw_Dv/FwDV%20100.pdf?__blob=
publicationFile, online; accessed 14.05.2019.
Gendreau M, Laporte G, Semet F, 1997 The covering tour problem. Operations Research 45(4):568 –
576.
Golden B, Naji-Azimi Z, Raghavan S, Salari M, Toth P, 2012 The generalized covering salesman problem.
INFORMS Journal on Computing 24(4):534 – 553.
Gunawan A, Lau HC, Vansteenwegen P, 2016 Orienteering problem: A survey of recent variants, solution
approaches and applications. European Journal of Operational Research 255(2):315–332.
H`a MH, Bostel N, Langevin A, Rousseau LM, 2013 An exact algorithm and a metaheuristic for the
multi-vehicle covering tour problem with a constraint on the number of vertices. European Journal
of Operational Research 226(2):211–220.
Hachicha M, Hodgson MJ, Laporte G, Semet F, 2000 Heuristics for the multi-vehicle covering tour
problem. Computers & Operations Research 27(1):29–42.
40

Harig R, Rusch P, 2011 Infrarot-Gefahrstoﬀkamera. Forschung im Bev¨olkerungsschutz 14.
Hollinger GA, Sukhatme GS, 2014 Sampling-based robotic information gathering algorithms. The Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research 33(9):1271–1287.
Irnich S, Toth P, Vigo D, 2014 The family of vehicle routing problems. Vehicle Routing: Problems,
Methods, and Applications, Second Edition, 1–33 (SIAM).
Ke L, Zhai L, Li J, Chan FTS, 2016 Pareto mimic algorithm: An approach to the team orienteering
problem. Omega 61:155–166.
Kilby
P,
2013
Constraint
programming
for
the
vehicle
routing
problem.
Retrieved
from:
http://cp2013.a4cp.org/slides/t3.pdf.
Krause A, McMahan HB, Guestrin C, Gupta A, 2008 Robust submodular observation selection. Journal
of Machine Learning Research 9(Dec):2761–2801.
Krause A, Singh A, Guestrin C, 2008 Near-optimal sensor placements in Gaussian processes: Theory,
eﬃcient algorithms and empirical studies. Journal of Machine Learning Research 9(Feb):235–284.
Mayﬁeld HT, Eastwood D, Burggraf LW, 2000 Infrared spectral classiﬁcation with artiﬁcial neural net-
works and classical pattern recognition. Chemical and Biological Sensing, volume 4036, 54–66.
Naji-Azimi Z, Renaud J, Ruiz A, Salari M, 2012 A covering tour approach to the location of satel-
lite distribution centers to supply humanitarian aid. European Journal of Operational Research
222(3):596–605.
Ozbaygin G, Yaman H, Karasan OE, 2016 Time constrained maximal covering salesman problem with
weighted demands and partial coverage. Computers & Operations Research 76.
Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss
R, Dubourg V, Vanderplas J, Passos A, Cournapeau D, Brucher M, Perrot M, Duchesnay E, 2011
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12:2825–2830.
Pˇeniˇcka R, Faigl J, Saska M, 2019 Variable neighborhood search for the set orienteering problem and
its application to other orienteering problem variants. European Journal of Operational Research
276(3):816–825.
Pisinger D, Ropke S, 2007 A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Computers & Operations
Research 34(8):2403–2435.
Rasmussen C, Williams C, 2006 Gaussian processes for machine learning, volume 1 (MIT press, Cam-
bridge).
Righini G, Salani M, 2008 New dynamic programming algorithms for the resource constrained elementary
shortest path problem. Networks: An International Journal 51(3):155–170.
Singh A, Kaiser W, Batalin M, Krause A, Guestrin C, 2007 Eﬃcient planning of informative paths for
multiple robots. IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2204–2211.
Singh A, Krause A, Guestrin C, Kaiser WJ, 2009 Eﬃcient informative sensing using multiple robots.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 34:707–755.
Souﬀriau W, Vansteenwegen P, Berghe GV, Van Oudheusden D, 2010 A path relinking approach for the
team orienteering problem. Computers & Operations Research 37(11):1853–1859.
Stachniss C, Plagemann C, Lilienthal AJ, 2009 Learning gas distribution models using sparse Gaussian
process mixtures. Autonomous Robots 26(2-3):187–202.
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis), 2018 Ergebnisse des Zensus 2011. https://www.zensus2011.de/
DE/Home/Aktuelles/DemografischeGrunddaten.html?nn=3066576, online; accessed 14.05.2019.
Tsiligirides T, 1984 Heuristic methods applied to orienteering. Journal of the Operational Research Society
797–809.
41

Vansteenwegen P, Souﬀriau W, Van Oudheusden D, 2011 The orienteering problem: A survey. European
Journal of Operational Research 209(1):1–10.
Vidal T, Maculan N, Ochi LS, Vaz Penna PH, 2015 Large neighborhoods with implicit customer selection
for vehicle routing problems with proﬁts. Transportation Science 50(2):720–734.
Yu J, Schwager M, Rus D, 2014 Correlated orienteering problem and its application to informative path
planning for persistent monitoring tasks. IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems 342–349.
42