TITLE: Branch-and-Price for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows and Scheduled Lines
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0798
---

Branch-and-price for the pickup and delivery problem with
time windows and scheduled lines
Citation for published version (APA):
Ghilas, V., Cordeau, J.-F., Demir, E., & van Woensel, T. (2018). Branch-and-price for the pickup and delivery
problem with time windows and scheduled lines. Transportation Science, 52(5), 1191-1210.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0798
Document license:
TAVERNE
DOI:
10.1287/trsc.2017.0798
Document status and date:
Published: 01/09/2018
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

This article was downloaded by: [131.155.151.8] On: 29 October 2018, At: 07:48
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Transportation Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Branch-and-Price for the Pickup and Delivery Problem
with Time Windows and Scheduled Lines
Veaceslav Ghilas, Jean-François Cordeau, Emrah Demir, Tom Van Woensel
To cite this article:
Veaceslav Ghilas, Jean-François Cordeau, Emrah Demir, Tom Van Woensel (2018) Branch-and-Price for the Pickup and Delivery
Problem with Time Windows and Scheduled Lines. Transportation Science 52(5):1191-1210. https://doi.org/10.1287/
trsc.2017.0798
Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2018, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE
Vol. 52, No. 5, September–October 2018, pp. 1191–1210
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/trsc/
ISSN 0041-1655 (print), ISSN 1526-5447 (online)
Branch-and-Price for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time
Windows and Scheduled Lines
Veaceslav Ghilas,a Jean-François Cordeau,b Emrah Demir,c Tom Van Woensela
a Data Strategy and Analytics, Schenker AG, 45128 Essen, Germany; b HEC Montréal and CIRRELT, Montréal, Québec H3T 2A7, Canada;
c Panalpina Centre for Manufacturing and Logistics Research, CardiﬀBusiness School, CardiﬀUniversity, CardiﬀCF10 3EU, United Kingdom
Contact: veaceslav.ghilas@dbschenker.com,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2574-4781 (VG); jean-francois.cordeau@hec.ca,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4963-1298 (J-FC); demire@cardiﬀ.ac.uk,
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4726-2556 (ED);
t.v.woensel@tue.nl (TVW)
Received: March 8, 2016
Revised: December 24, 2016; July 10, 2017
Accepted: July 21, 2017
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
June 29, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0798
Copyright: © 2018 INFORMS
Abstract. The Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows and Scheduled Lines
(PDPTW-SL) consists of routing and scheduling a set of vehicles, by integrating them with
scheduled public transportation lines, to serve a set of freight requests within their time
windows. This paper presents an exact solution approach based on a branch-and-price
algorithm. A path-based set partitioning formulation is used as the master problem, and a
variant of the elementary shortest path problem with resource constraints is solved as the
pricing problem. In addition, the proposed algorithm can also be used to solve the PDPTW
with transfers (PDPTW-T) as a special case. Results of extensive computational experi-
ments conﬁrm the eﬃciency of the algorithm: it is able to solve small- and medium-size
instances to optimality within reasonable execution time. More speciﬁcally, our algorithm
solves the PDPTW-SL with up to 50 requests and the PDPTW-T with up to 40 requests on
the considered instances.
Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge funds provided by Dinalog, the Dutch Institute for
Advanced Logistics [Grant “Cargo Hitching,” 2011 4 086R], and by the Canadian Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council [Grant 04959-2014].
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0798.
Keywords:
pickup and delivery problem • freight transportation • column generation • scheduled lines
1. Introduction
A successful integration of freight and public trans-
portation creates a seamless movement for both people
and goods. This integration achieves socially desirable
and economically viable transport options in urban
areas (Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel 2016b), as it
reduces congestion and air pollution (Demir, Bektaş,
and Laporte 2014, Demir et al. 2015). There have been
several practical attempts to investigate the poten-
tial beneﬁts of such integrated systems. MULI was a
demonstration project in Germany between 1996 and
1999 (Trentini and Malhene 2010). Special-design buses
were used to transport both passengers and small-
size parcels. The aim of the project was to achieve the
environmental and economic beneﬁts of the integrated
transport system, but a major impediment to imple-
mentation proved to be passenger acceptance. City
Cargo Amsterdam was set up as a pilot experiment in
2007 (Cargo Tram 2012). Two cargo trams were used
to transport packages into the city center of Amster-
dam. In 2009, the project was abandoned because of a
lack of public funds. More recently, Masson et al. (2017)
investigated an integrated freight and public transport
distribution system in the French city of La Rochelle.
The results showed that an integrated transportation
system can lead to improved vehicle utilization and
reduced operational costs. In our view, the aforemen-
tioned projects did not succeed because of a number
of practical challenges such as inappropriate decision
support, low passenger acceptance rate, deﬁcient infor-
mation sharing between involved parties, and insuf-
ﬁcient funding for upgrading existing transportation
systems.
This paper focuses on opportunities to make use of
available public transportation as part of the freight
journey from a routing and scheduling (i.e., decision
support) point of view. It is assumed that each consid-
ered public transport vehicle, which operates accord-
ing to predetermined routes and schedules, has a ﬁnite
carrying capacity for freight requests apart from avail-
able spaces destined for passengers. Therefore, trans-
ferring freight requests to available scheduled line (SL)
services may beneﬁt the whole transportation system.
With the possibility of using SL services, there can be
two delivery options for serving the transport requests.
These include direct and indirect (via SL) deliveries.
The ﬁrst one implies that the origin and destination
points of a request are visited by using only one pickup
and delivery (PD) vehicle. The second type of deliv-
ery implies that a request is picked up by a PD vehi-
cle and transported to a transfer node. From there,
1191

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1192
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Figure 1. (Color online) An Illustration of the Integrated
Transportation Network
Origin of package x
Destination of package x
Depot
Station-hub x
ox
dx
Tx
PD service
Fixed line service
d1
o2
T2
d2
o1
T1
the request continues its journey on scheduled lines.
Afterwards, the request is picked up again by another
PD vehicle to be delivered to its destination point. In
this paper, we denote this speciﬁc transportation prob-
lem as the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Win-
dows and Scheduled Lines (PDPTW-SL). Note that the
PDPTW-SL contains the Pickup and Delivery Problem
with Time Windows and Transfers (PDPTW-T) as a special
case, where transfers are allowed between PD vehi-
cles at predeﬁned nodes. A schematic overview of the
associated network is provided in Figure 1. This ﬁgure
presents two requests that have their pickup and deliv-
ery points close to two diﬀerent transfer nodes. Thus,
it would make sense to use the scheduled line service
that connects these two transfer nodes instead of using
a PD vehicle as in classical pickup and delivery sys-
tems. Hence, travel time savings for PD vehicles and
operational cost reductions can be expected with the
proposed integrated system.
The existing literature on the PDPTW mainly focuses
on heuristic algorithms (see, e.g., Nanry and Barnes
2000, Røpke and Pisinger 2006). However, there are
also a few studies that have introduced exact solution
algorithms (see, e.g., Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis
1991, Savelsbergh and Sol 1995, Røpke and Cordeau
2009, Baldacci, Bartolini, and Mingozzi 2011a). To solve
the PDPTW-SL, this paper proposes a branch-and-
price (B&P) algorithm. We formulate the problem as
a path-based mixed-integer program (MIP). Since it
is prohibitively time-consuming to generate all possi-
ble routes and consequently solve the formulation, the
proposed algorithm uses column generation to con-
struct promising routes. The column generator solves
the Elementary Shortest Path Problem with Resource and
Precedence Constraints (ESPPRPC), which is the natu-
ral pricing problem for the PDPTW-SL, to generate
promising routes. Precedence Constraints mean that a
request must be picked up from either its pickup, or a
transfer node, and subsequently delivered to its deliv-
ery location, or a transfer node.
The contributions of this paper are threefold: (i) we
formulate the PDPTW-SL as a path-based MIP, (ii) we
develop a B&P algorithm to solve small to medium-
size PDPTW-SL instances, and (iii) we show how the
algorithm can be applied to the PDPTW-T.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 provides a brief review of related work.
Section 3 introduces the MIP formulation for the
PDPTW-SL, which is followed by the proposed solu-
tion methodology in Section 4. Section 5 reports the
results obtained from extensive computational experi-
ments. Conclusions are given in Section 6.
2. Literature Review
In this section, we ﬁrst review existing studies on
pickup and delivery problems (PDPs) with transfers,
which are the most closely related to the PDPTW-SL.
Then, we present recent studies on column generation
algorithms applied to PDPs.
2.1. Pickup and Delivery Problem with Transfers
One of the ﬁrst studies to investigate the dial-a-ride
problem (DARP) with scheduled line services was done
by Liaw, White, and Bander (1996). The authors pro-
posed a heuristic algorithm and solved instances with
up to 120 requests. The results show that signiﬁcant
operating cost savings can be achieved due to trans-
fer opportunities. Later, Aldaihani and Dessouky (2003)
considered an integrated DARP (IDARP) with pub-
lic transportation services and proposed a two-stage
heuristic algorithm, i.e., construction and improve-
ment stages. The authors concluded that shifting some
requests to public transportation services reduces the
total traveled distance by PD-vehicles and the overall
trip time of requests. Häll et al. (2009) introduced an
arc-based MIP formulation to solve the IDARP without
considering the corresponding schedules of the public
transportation. The authors managed to solve instances
with up to four requests. In the context of integrated
passenger and freight transportation systems, Trentini
et al. (2012) investigated a two-echelon vehicle routing
problem with transshipment (VRPT) to public trans-
portation. The authors developed an adaptive large
neighborhood search (ALNS) heuristic to solve VRPT
instances with up to 50 customers.
Cortes, Matamala, and Contardo (2010) proposed
an exact branch-and-cut (B&C) algorithm for the
PDPTW-T, which makes use of combinatorial Ben-
ders cuts. The proposed cuts provided signiﬁcant CPU
time savings, but the algorithm was limited to solving
instances with up to six requests. Moreover, Masson,
Lehuede, and Peton (2012, 2014) proposed an ALNS
algorithm to solve both the PDP-T and DARP-T. The
authors developed a constant-time feasibility check

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1193
mechanism for the interdependent vehicle routes. In
both cases, real-life instances with up to 193 requests
were solved, yielding operational cost savings of up
to 9%. In addition, Rais, Alvelos, and Carvalho (2013)
introduced a new MIP formulation for the PDP-T,
where transfers are allowed at any request node. The
authors used a general-purpose MIP solver to tackle
small-size instances with up to seven requests and
observed 7% cost savings due to transfer opportunities.
The problem variant studied here was ﬁrst intro-
duced by Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b),
who proposed an arc-based MIP formulation for
the PDPTW-SL. The model was tightened using sev-
eral families of valid inequalities. The authors solved
instances with up to 11 requests using a general-
purpose MIP solver. More recently, Ghilas, Demir, and
Van Woensel (2016a) introduced an ALNS algorithm to
tackle the PDPTW-SL and reported results on instances
with up to 100 requests. Finally, the authors concluded
that signiﬁcant operating cost savings can be achieved
(i.e., up to 20%) with the use of scheduled lines. Ghilas,
Demir, and Van Woensel (2016c) extended the ALNS
and embedded it into a sample average approxima-
tion framework to solve the PDPTW-SL with stochastic
demands. The authors concluded that making use of
SLs is still a promising alternative in uncertain envi-
ronments, if the uncertainty is taken into account in the
planning process.
2.2. Column Generation Algorithms
For a detailed overview of column generation algo-
rithms, we refer the reader to Lübbecke and Desrosiers
(2005). The ﬁrst B&P algorithm for the PDPTW was
proposed by Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis (1991).
In their formulation, a set-partitioning master prob-
lem considers columns that represent feasible routes.
The resulting pricing problem is a shortest path prob-
lem with resource and precedence constraints. Later,
Savelsbergh and Sol (1995) proposed an improved B&P
algorithm by using heuristics in the pricing problem,
by reducing the master problem size (e.g., remov-
ing unused columns), and ﬁnally by applying more
eﬀective branching rules. Xu et al. (2003) and Sigurd,
Pisinger, and Sig (2004) applied column generation to
address variants of the PDPTW arising in long-haul
transportation and in the transportation of live ani-
mals, respectively. Mues and Pickl (2005) proposed
a column generation method for the PDP-T, but the
implementation of this idea was not provided and no
results were reported. In another study, Røpke and
Cordeau (2009) proposed a branch-and-cut-and-price
algorithm to solve the PDPTW and successfully tack-
led large instances with up to 500 requests. The authors
investigated two pricing problems, namely the elemen-
tary shortest path problem with resource and prece-
dence constraints (ESPPRPC) and the nonelementary
variant of the problem (SPPRPC), respectively. They
concluded that solving the SPPRPC as a pricing prob-
lem for the PDPTW does not yield signiﬁcant ben-
eﬁts. This is mainly because SPPRPC is strictly NP-
hard. To speed up the algorithm used to solve the
elementary shortest path problem with resource con-
straints (ESPPRC), Righini and Salani (2006, 2008)
proposed various techniques, including bidirectional
search and decremental state space relaxation meth-
ods. More recently, Baldacci, Bartolini, and Mingozzi
(2011a) proposed another exact approach to solve the
PDPTW. The authors describe a bounding procedure
that combines heuristics with a cut-and-column gen-
eration procedure. Relying on the calculations of high
quality lower and upper bounds, the algorithm can
sometimes enumerate all columns with a negative
reduced cost that may belong to an optimal solution.
If this proves impossible, a branch-and-cut-and-price
method is used. This algorithm has outperformed pre-
vious ones and was able to solve many previously
unsolved instances.
Even though there were several attempts to develop
exact solution algorithms for the PDPTW with trans-
fers, solving medium to large-size instances remains
challenging. To our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst
attempt to apply column generation to the PDPTW-SL
and PDPTW-T.
3. Description of the PDPTW-SL
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the notations and
assumptions used in the rest of the paper. We
then present the set partitioning formulation of the
PDPTW-SL.
3.1. Deﬁnitions and Assumptions
Let P and D denote the sets of pickup and delivery
nodes, respectively. We consider a set of n requests,
where each request is associated with a pickup node
r ∈P and a delivery node r + n ∈D. We refer to a spe-
ciﬁc request r by its pickup node, e.g., r ∈P. Each
request r is associated with two desired time win-
dows: one for the origin ([lr, ur]), and one for the des-
tination ([lr+n, ur+n]). In addition, each request r has a
demand dr. Let V denote the set of vehicles. Each vehi-
cle v ∈V has a carrying capacity Qv and an assigned
depot o(v) ∈O with a time window ([lo(v), uo(v)]).
The set of all physical transfer nodes is given by S,
while the set E contains all physical scheduled lines.
Line (i, j) ∈E is represented by a directed arc between
the start and the end of the line, and it has a set Kij of
indices w for the departure times pw
ij from terminal i.
We note that each SL may have a diﬀerent frequency;
thus, the size of the sets Kij may diﬀer. Furthermore,
it is assumed that SL vehicles are designed to carry a
limited number of requests, thus implying a carrying
capacity Qij for every (i, j) ∈E.

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1194
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Figure 2. Physical and Virtual Scheduled Lines
(a)
2
1
1a
1b
2a
2b
(b)
Source. Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b).
To model the waiting times of the PD vehicles and to
allow multiple visits at transfer nodes, each physical SL
(i, j) ∈E is replicated n times as in Häll et al. (2009). The
set of all replicated SLs is denoted by F . In addition, to
reduce the number of decision variables, each request r
is assigned one replication of each SL (i, j) ∈E. The
set of replicated SLs associated with request r is given
by F r. Note that the replication process implies that
each physical transfer node in S is replicated n times.
The set of all replicated transfer nodes is denoted by T .
To simplify the modeling, we also introduce the fol-
lowing additional notation. Let ψ(t), ∀t ∈T , be the
physical transfer node represented by t (i.e., ψ(t) ∈S).
Set T r represents the replicated transfer nodes asso-
ciated with request r. In addition, E−
t gives the set of
physical scheduled lines that start at transfer node t
and E+
t represents the set of physical scheduled lines
that end at transfer node t.
Figure 2 illustrates the one-SL replication for two
requests. For the considered example, E ≡{(1, 2),
(2, 1)} (Figure 2(a)) and F ≡{(1a, 2a), (2a, 1a), (1b, 2b),
(2b, 1b)} (Figure 2(b)). Furthermore, S ≡{1, 2} and T ≡
{1a, 2a, 1b, 2b}, T a ≡{1a, 2a}, F a ≡{(1a, 2a), (2a, 1a)}
and ψ(1a)  ψ(1b)  1.
We also make the following practical assumptions:
(i) a storage space for packages that need to be shipped
on an SL is available at each physical transfer node (see,
e.g., DHL-Packstation 2015), and these automatic lock-
ers may be used to temporarily store the packages from
a transfer node; (ii) as multiple freight carriers may be
using SL services, each of these carriers is assigned a
part of the storage space and SL-vehicle capacity (e.g.,
contract-based agreement); (iii) the cost ηij per unit
shipped on the SL (i, j) includes transportation, han-
dling (transshipment), and storage costs.
To formulate the PDPTW-SL as a set-partitioning
problem, we let Ωdenote the set of all feasible routes
(paths) satisfying precedence, elementarity, time win-
dows, and PD-vehicle capacity constraints. Moreover,
we let Ωv be the set of feasible paths that can be exe-
cuted by PD vehicle v ∈V . A path is feasible if it
satisﬁes the precedence and capacity constraints (see
Section 4.1.1 for more details on the feasibility of PD
vehicle routes). The routing cost of each path p ∈Ω
is given by cp. In addition, constant zi
p takes value 1
if node i ∈P ∪D is visited in path p, 0 otherwise.
Constant a
ij
p takes value 1 if path p contains arc (i, j),
0 otherwise. Finally, mit
p is a parameter taking value 1
if request node i ∈P ∪D and replicated transfer node
t ∈T are visited in path p by respecting precedence
constraints, 0 otherwise.
The decision variables used to represent the routing
and scheduling of the PD vehicles, along with the tim-
ing of the requests, are given as follows. Binary vari-
able xp takes value 1 if path p ∈Ωis in the solution,
0 otherwise. If request r departs on the SL (i, j) at
scheduled departure time pw
ij, binary variable qrw
ij takes
value 1, otherwise 0. Continuous variables βi, γi, and
αv indicate the departure time of a vehicle from node i,
the departure time of request r from transfer node i,
and the time at which vehicle v returns to its depot,
respectively.
Finally, the PDPTW-SL can be deﬁned on a digraph
G  (N , A), where N is the set of nodes (i.e, N ≡O ∪
P ∪D ∪T ) and A ≡A1 ∪A2 ∪A3 ∪A4 is the set of arcs
deﬁned as follows:
A1  ((P ∪D)) × (P ∪D))\{(r + n, r): r ∈P};
A2  {(i, j): i ∈O, j ∈P} ∪{(i, j): i ∈D, j ∈O} ∪(O × T );
A3  ((P ∪D)) × T )\({(j, r): r ∈P, j ∈T r} ∪{(r + n, j):
r ∈P, j ∈T r});
A4  {(i, j): i, j ∈T , (ψ(i), ψ(j)) < E}.
This deﬁnition of the set of arcs considers all possible
connections except those that would be infeasible (e.g.,
direct paths from a depot to a delivery node). Figure 3
presents an example with one depot, two requests,
and one SL along with all corresponding arcs. Sets A1
and A2 are given in Figure 3(a), whereas sets A3 and A4
are given in Figure 3(b). Finally, each arc (i, j) ∈A has
a deterministic travel time tij, and service time at node
i ∈N is given by si.
3.2. A Set-Partitioning Formulation
The PDPTW-SL can be formulated as the following set-
partitioning problem:
Minimize
X
p∈Ω
cpxp +
X
r∈P
X
(i, j)∈E
X
w∈Kij
ηijdrqrw
ij
(1)
subject to
X
p∈Ωv
xp ≤1
∀v ∈V ,
(2)
X
p∈Ω
zi
pxp 1
∀i ∈P ∪D,
(3)
X
p∈Ω
mrt
p xp ≤
X
p∈Ω
X
t1∈T r\{t}
m
r+n, t1
p
xp
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r,
(4)
X
p∈Ω
mrt
p xp +
X
(i, j)∈E+
ψ(t)
X
w∈Kij
qrw
ij 
X
p∈Ω
mr+n, t
p
xp
+
X
(i, j)∈E−
ψ(t)
X
w∈Kij
qrw
ij
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r,
(5)
X
r∈P
drqrw
ij ≤Qij
∀(i, j) ∈E, w ∈Kij,
(6)

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1195
Figure 3. An Example Network with Two Requests and One SL
(a)
1a
1b
2a
2b
oa
ob
da
db
ov
(b)
A1
A2
1a
1b
2a
2b
oa
ob
da
db
ov
A3
A4
X
w∈Kψ(i), ψ(j)
qrw
ψ(i), ψ(j) 1 ⇒γr
j ≥γr
i + tij + sj
∀r ∈P, (i, j) ∈F r, (7)
X
p∈Ω
a
ij
p xp 1 ⇒βj ≥βi + tij + sj
∀i ∈N , j ∈P ∪D∪T ,
(8)
X
p∈Ωv
ai, o(v)
p
xp 1 ⇒αv ≥βi + ti, o(v) + so(v)
∀i ∈P ∪D∪T , v ∈V , (9)
βr+n ≥βr + tr, r+n + sr+n
∀r ∈P,
(10)
li ≤βi −si ≤ui
∀i ∈P ∪D,
(11)
lo(v) ≤αv ≤uo(v)
∀v ∈V ,
(12)
qrw
ψ(i), ψ(j) 1 ⇒γr
i  pw
ψ(i), ψ(j)
∀r ∈P, (i, j) ∈F r, w ∈Kψ(i), ψ(j),
(13)
X
(i, j)∈E+
ψ(t)
X
w∈Kij
qrw
ij 1 ⇒γr
t  βt
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r, (14)
βt ≤γr
t
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r,
(15)
xp ∈{0,1}
∀p ∈Ω,
(16)
qrw
ij ∈{0,1}
∀r ∈P, (i, j) ∈E, w ∈Kij,
(17)
βi ≥0
∀i ∈N ,
(18)
γr
i ≥0
∀r ∈P, i ∈T ,
(19)
αv ≥0
∀v ∈V .
(20)
The objective (1) is the sum of two cost functions. The
ﬁrst function is related to routing, and the second one
considers SL-related costs. Constraints (2) assure that
each PD vehicle is used at most once. Constraints (3)
ensure that every request node (pickup or delivery) is
visited exactly once. Constraints (4) enforce the visit of
transfer nodes if the pickup and delivery nodes of a
request are visited in diﬀerent paths (vehicle routes).
Constraints (5) are the ﬂow balance constraints for each
transfer node. In other words, a request can travel from
a transfer node either on an SL or on a PD vehicle.
The capacity of the SLs is considered in constraints (6),
and these consider each speciﬁc scheduled departure
time. Constraints (7) assure timing at transfer nodes if
there is a request ﬂow on the corresponding SL. The
scheduling of the PD vehicles is considered in con-
straints (8) and (9). Constraints (10) assure that the
pickup node is visited earlier than the associated deliv-
ery node. Constraints (11) and (12) force time windows
to be respected. The timetabling of the available SLs is
considered in constraints (13). In particular, these con-
straints link the request ﬂows on the SLs with the corre-
sponding timing variables. Constraints (14) assure that
a request departs from a destination transfer node at
the same time as a PD vehicle. Constraints (15) make
sure a request departs from a transfer node no earlier
than the arrival of a PD vehicle at that node. Note that
constraints (7)–(9) and (13)–(14) are written as impli-
cations, and standard linearization techniques can be
used to express them as one or two linear inequalities.
We note that physical transfer nodes (S) as well as
replicated transfer nodes (T ) are needed in the pre-
sented model to assure capacity constraints (6) on the
SLs. The capacity constraints apply to each physical SL
and to each scheduled departure time. Therefore, deci-
sion variables qrw
ij consider both the request ﬂow on the
physical SLs and the scheduled departure times. In this
case, the SL ﬂow is performed between physical trans-
fer nodes, whereas replicated transfer nodes are used
to consider timing of the requests on SLs and PD vehi-
cles, considering waiting times and pickup/delivery
operations at the same physical transfer node.

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1196
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
4. Branch-and-Price Algorithm
In this section, we introduce the B&P algorithm used
to solve the PDPTW-SL. We ﬁrst describe the column
generation method, which includes the pricing prob-
lem deﬁnition, the labeling algorithm used to solve it,
and some acceleration techniques. Then, we present
the branching strategy to explore the enumeration
tree, and we discuss potential improvements to the
algorithm.
4.1. Column Generation
Column generation is used to solve the linear program-
ming (LP) relaxation in each node of the branch-and-
bound tree. A lower bound (LB) on the optimal value
of the PDPTW-SL can be calculated by solving the
LP relaxation of (1)–(20), which is obtained by replac-
ing the integrality constraints (16) and (17) with the
following:
0 ≤xp ≤1
∀p ∈Ω,
(21)
0 ≤qrw
ij ≤1
∀r ∈P, (i, j) ∈E, w ∈Kij.
(22)
Since the size of Ωis usually very large, it is almost
impossible to solve or even to explicitly represent
model (1)–(20). Instead, a restricted master problem
(RMP) is obtained by considering a subset of paths
¯Ω⊆Ωin each iteration. Because ¯Ωmight not yield a
feasible solution, artiﬁcial variables with a large cost
are added to the RMP to ensure that primal and dual
solutions can be obtained. Once the RMP is solved,
its dual solution is used to deﬁne the objective func-
tion of the pricing subproblems. The subproblem for
each PD vehicle aims to generate negative reduced cost
variables (columns) xp with respect to this dual solu-
tion. If such variables are found, they are added to the
RMP, which is then solved again to start a new iter-
ation. Otherwise, when no subproblem can ﬁnd any
such column, the column generation process stops and
the obtained solution to the current RMP is optimal for
the master problem.
4.1.1. Pricing Problem Formulation. The pricing prob-
lem of the PDPTW-SL is a variant of the ESPPRPC.
The main diﬀerence in the ESPPRPC for the PDPTW-
SL and for the classical PDPTW is that in the former
problem, each request can be served in two ways: direct
(i.e., by one vehicle from its origin to its destination) or
indirect (i.e., using a scheduled line as part of the jour-
ney, thus the vehicle needs to visit a transfer node). In
particular, in each of the generated paths, the requests
are served in one of the following three ways: (i) clas-
sical way—ﬁrst visit the pickup node r ∈P, and then
deliver the request to node r + n ∈D; (ii) ﬁrst visit
the pickup node r ∈P, and consequently deliver the
request to a replicated transfer node e.g., t1 ∈T r. At
this point, the labeling algorithm does not assure that
this request is re-collected by another route. The syn-
chronization takes place in the master problem in con-
straints (4). Consider a request r that uses a scheduled
line. Hence, constraints (4) make sure that if a route,
which ﬁrst visits pickup node r ∈P and then a trans-
fer node t1 ∈T r (related to r), is chosen, then a dif-
ferent route (performed by another vehicle), in which
another replicated transfer node t2 ∈T r\{t1} (related
to r) is visited before its corresponding delivery node
r + n ∈D, must be selected. Finally, in (iii) a request r
is picked up from a transfer node, e.g., t2 ∈T r, and is
subsequently delivered to node r + n ∈D. The pricing
problem does not assure the synchronization between
the routes, but only the precedence and capacity con-
straints. Since each physical transfer node is replicated
for each request, it is possible that all requests can be
transferred at or picked up from a transfer point by
visiting the corresponding replicated transfer nodes
sequentially. Figure 4 illustrates the possible delivery
options in the pricing problem, where the ﬂow from t1
to t2 is assured in the master problem only.
Note that the triangle inequality in terms of reduced
cost does not hold for the pricing problem, mean-
ing that ¯cr, r+n may be larger than ¯cr, t1 + ¯ct2, r+n + ηt1, t2,
where ¯cij is the reduced cost of arc (i, j), ∀r ∈P, t1,
t2 ∈T r.
Since the vehicles may be heterogeneous and mul-
tiple depots are available, the ESPPRPC can be solved
for each PD vehicle v. We note that the set of nodes
considered in the pricing problem is N ≡P ∪D ∪T ∪
{o(v)} ∪{o(v′)}, where o(v′) is a replicated depot of
vehicle v. The aim of the ESPPRPC is to generate a least
reduced cost elementary shortest path from node o(v)
to o(v′) by considering the available resources, such as
time windows and capacity.
Let xij be a binary variable that takes value 1 if arc
(i, j) is in the path, and 0 otherwise. In addition, let qi
be a continuous decision variable, which indicates the
total load of vehicle v after visiting node i ∈N . The
pricing problem can now be formulated for each PD
vehicle v ∈V as the following MIP:
Minimize
X
(i, j)∈A
¯cijxij
(23)
subject to
X
i∈N
xo(v), i 
X
i∈N
xi, o(v′)  1,
(24)
X
j∈N
xij 
X
j∈N
xji
∀i ∈P ∪D ∪T ,
(25)
Figure 4. An Illustration of Possible Shipment Options
r
r + n
t1
t2

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1197
X
i∈N
xir ≤
X
i∈N
X
t∈T r xit +
X
i∈N
xi, r+n
∀r ∈P,
(26)
X
i∈N
xi, r+n ≤
X
i∈N
X
t∈T r xit +
X
i∈N
xir
∀r ∈P,
(27)
xij  1 ⇒βj ≥βi + tij + sj
∀i, j ∈N ,
(28)
X
i∈N \T r xir  1
and
X
i∈N
xit  1
⇒βt ≥βr + trt + st
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r,
(29)
X
i∈N \{r}
xi, r+n  1
and
X
i∈N \{r}
xit  1
⇒βr+n ≥βt + tt, r+n + sr+n
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r,
(30)
βr+n ≥βr + tr, r+n + sr+n
∀r ∈P,
(31)
li ≤βi −si ≤ui
∀i ∈N ,
(32)
X
i∈N \T r xir  1
and
xjt  1 ⇒qv
t  qv
j −dr
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r, j ∈N , (33)
X
i∈N \{r}
xi, r+n  1
and
xjt  1 ⇒qv
t  qv
j + dr
∀r ∈P, t ∈T r, j ∈N , (34)
xir  1 ⇒qv
r  qv
i + dr
∀r ∈P, i ∈N ,
(35)
xi, r+n  1 ⇒qv
r+n  qv
i −dr
∀r ∈P, i ∈N ,
(36)
qv
i ≤Qv
∀i ∈P ∪D ∪T ,
(37)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈N ,
(38)
βi ≥0
∀i ∈N ,
(39)
qi ≥0
∀i ∈N .
(40)
The objective function (23) minimizes the reduced
cost of a path. Constraints (24) assure that there is
exactly one outgoing arc from o(v) and one incom-
ing arc to o(v′). The ﬂow balance for each node is
given in constraints (25). Precedence constraints are im-
posed by (26) and (27). These constraints make sure
that each request can be picked up either (i) from its
pickup node, and consequently delivered to its de-
livery node or to one of the related transfer nodes, or
(ii) from one of the related transfer nodes and trans-
ferred to its delivery node. Time windows are en-
forced in constraints (28)–(32). Capacity constraints are
imposed by (33)–(37). For brevity, some constraints
are written as implications and can be linearized by
using big-M techniques. In addition, expressions (23)
and (41) can be made equivalent by adding additional
decision variables in the model and linearizing the con-
straints written as implications.
Let Av, Bi, Cr
t, Dr
t , Eij, and Fv
i be the dual variables
associated with constraints (2)–(5), (8), and (9), respec-
tively. Moreover, let r(j) ∈P be the request related to
node j ∈P ∪D ∪T . In addition, Mij are large coef-
ﬁcients used in the linearized form of constraints (8)
and (9). The reduced cost of a path p can be calculated
as follows:
¯cv
p cp −Av −
X
i∈N
X
j∈P∪D
a
ij
p (Bj +MijEij)−
X
i∈N
X
j∈T
a
ij
p
·

MijEij +m
r(j), j
p
C
rj
j −
X
k∈T r(j): j,k
m
r(j)+n,k
p
C
r(j)
k
+m
r(j), j
p
·D
r(j)
j
−m
r(j)+n, j
p
D
r(j)
j

−
X
i∈P∪D∪T
ai,o(v)
p
(Mi,o(v)Fv
i ),
∀v ∈V , p ∈Ωv,
(41)
where constants a
p
ij and mi, t
p
were deﬁned in Sec-
tion 3.1. Recall that constant a
p
ij ∀i, j ∈N has value 1
if arc (i, j) is traversed in path p, 0 otherwise. In addi-
tion, mi, t
p
∀i ∈P, t ∈T is a constant with value 1 if
pickup node i is visited before visiting transfer node t
in path p, 0 otherwise. Constant mi+n, t
p
∀i ∈P, t ∈T has
value 1 if the delivery node i + n is visited after visiting
transfer node t in path p, 0 otherwise.
Resource constrained shortest path problems used
in column generation approaches are usually solved
using dynamic programming methods called label-
setting (or labeling) algorithms. In Section 4.1.2, we
explain how the ESPPRPC can be solved by using the
proposed labeling algorithm.
4.1.2. Labeling Algorithm. The objective of the ESP-
PRPC is to ﬁnd a cheapest path from a source node s
to a sink node t in a graph G  (N , A). Every arc in this
graph is associated with a cost, and the cost of a path
is the sum of the costs of all arcs traversed by the path.
The path must satisfy the available resources, such
as cost, capacity, and time, used between the source
node and the sink node. An overview of resource
constrained shortest path problems and of appropri-
ate solution methodologies was given by Irnich and
Desaulniers (2005).
Labeling algorithms build partial paths in graph G.
Each such path starts at s and ends at any node i ∈N .
Existing partial paths are extended along the arcs leav-
ing the end node of the partial path. In general, labeling
algorithms generate all possible feasible paths in the
graph. To speed up the labeling algorithm, dominated
paths can be removed during the process. A path p
dominates another path p′ if both end at the same node
i ∈N , resource consumption (including the cost) in p is
smaller than or equal to what it is in p′, and all feasible
extensions of p′ by a partial path to the sink node are
also feasible for p. Hence, suﬃcient conditions can be
used to determine dominance criteria. The conditions
used in this paper are discussed in the corresponding
sections below. Partial paths are represented by labels
that contain information about resource consumption
at the end node of the partial path, and dominance is
veriﬁed in terms of the labels.

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1198
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
In this section, we introduce a new labeling algo-
rithm for the ESPPRPC that takes advantage of re-
stricted dominance conditions, since the triangle in-
equality does not hold for the cost. We assume that
the source and sink nodes are o(v) and o(v′), ∀v ∈V ,
respectively. To speed up the labeling algorithm, a
bidirectional search is performed where labels are
extended both forward from o(v) to its successors and
backward from o(v′) to its predecessors. Both forward
and backward labels are not allowed to cross a certain
threshold (e.g., the middle of the planning horizon).
At the end, forward and backward labels are merged
to construct entire feasible paths. It has been observed
that a bidirectional search may, in practice, lead to sub-
stantially shorter running times for the related ESPPRC
as discussed by Righini and Salani (2006, 2008) and by
Dabia, Demir, and Van Woensel (2015).
The Forward Labeling Algorithm. In the forward label-
ing algorithm, labels are extended from the source
(i.e., o(v)) to its successor nodes. For each forward
label (L f ), we store the following data:
η last node of the partial path;
t departure time from the last node;
q total load after visiting the last node;
c accumulated cost (initialized c = 0);
O set of requests that have been started but not com-
pleted (i.e., the request has been picked up either
from the pickup node or from a transfer node but
not delivered to its delivery or transfer node);
C set of completed requests (i.e., C ∩O ≡);
OT set of started requests from a transfer node, such
that OT ⊆O.
We also store the reference of the parent label in
each label. The resources are t, q, c, O, OT, and C. Note
that the resources are initialized as follows: t  0, q  0,
c  0, and ﬁnally, O ≡OT ≡C ≡. The notation tL f is
used to refer to the departure time in forward label L f
and similar notation is used for the rest of the resources
(e.g., ηL f , qL f , etc.).
When extending a forward label L f along an arc
(ηL f , j), the extension is feasible if
tL f + tηL f , j ≤uj,
(42)
qL f + dj ≤Qv,
(43)
where tηL f , j is the traveling time between nodes ηL f
and j, and uj is the upper bound of node j’s time win-
dow. Moreover, dj is the demand of node j, and Qv is
the capacity of PD vehicle v.
The capacity constraints are satisﬁed by expres-
sion (43). We note that time window constraints are
satisﬁed in the master problem due to synchroniza-
tion constraints between multiple routes. In the sub-
problem, time windows are used to eliminate infeasi-
ble label extensions and to reduce the solution space.
Moreover, L f and j must satisfy one of the following
ﬁve conditions, which ensure that the extension is fea-
sible with the sets O, OT, and C:
j ∈P ∧j < OL f ∧j < CL f ,
(44)
j ∈D ∧j −n ∈OL f ,
(45)
j ∈T ∧r(j) < OL f ∧r(j) < CL f ,
(46)
j ∈T ∧r(j) ∈OL f \OT
L f ∧r(j) < CL f ,
(47)
j  o(v′) ∧OL f ∈.
(48)
Expression (44) states that visiting a pickup node
j ∈P is feasible if request j is not started (has not been
picked up earlier in the partial path from either a trans-
fer node t ∈T j or from the pickup node j ∈P), and if
this request is not completed (has not been served) in
this partial path. Expression (45) implies that the exten-
sion to a delivery node j is feasible if the correspond-
ing request is started (has been picked up, either from
its origin node j −n ∈P, or from a replicated trans-
fer node t ∈T j−n). In addition, expression (46) implies
that the extension to a replicated transfer node t is fea-
sible if the request related to t is not started (has not
been picked up in the partial path) and the request is
not completed. In this case, the request related to the
transfer node t will be picked up from t. Furthermore,
expression (47) states that the extension to a transfer
node t is feasible if the request related to t is started
from its pickup node, and not from a transfer node,
and it is not completed. In this case, the request will be
transferred to t. Finally, expression (48) assures that no
partial path ends before all started requests are served.
The above conditions assure that a path is feasible in
terms of precedence, capacity, and time-window con-
straints. We note that timing is synchronized in the
master problem. However, to reduce the complexity of
the pricing problem, we assure timing (time window
constraints) for each individual path generated, irre-
spective of other paths.
When label ηL f and node j satisfy conditions (42)
and (43), along with one of the following conditions,
the corresponding updates on sets O, OT, and C are
performed as follows:
• expression (44): OL f ←OL f ∪{j};
• expression (45): CL f ←CL f ∪{j −n}, OL f ←OL f
\{j−n}, and OT
L f ←OT
L f \{j−n};
• expression (46): OL f ←OL f ∪{r(j)} and OT
L f ←OT
L f
∪{r(j)};
• expression (47): CL f ←CL f ∪{r(j)} and OL f ←OL f
\{r(j)};
• expression (48).
The following dominance criteria are valid for the
PDPTW-SL.
Proposition 1 (Dominance 1). A label L2
f is dominated by
label L1
f if
1. ηL1
f  ηL2
f ,
2. tL1
f ≤tL2
f ,

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1199
3. cL1
f ≤cL2
f ,
4. OL1
f ≡OL2
f ,
5. CL1
f ⊆CL2
f .
The aforementioned conditions make sure that any
feasible extension of L2
f is also feasible for L1
f and
resource consumption in any extension of L2
f is larger
than or equal to the corresponding consumption in L1
f .
The dominance criteria proposed here are inspired
from those of Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis (1991)
and Røpke and Cordeau (2009). We note that the trian-
gle inequality in terms of reduced costs does not hold
for the pricing problem of the PDPTW-SL, since there
is the possibility of serving requests in two ways. In
other words, a transfer node can either be an origin
node for a request r (i.e., r ∈OL f and {r} < CL f ) or can
be a destination node for r (i.e., {r} ∈CL f ). Therefore,
the dominance criteria (1)–(5) are restrictive.
Proof of Proposition 1. Let L1
f and L2
f be two labels
that satisfy the ﬁve conditions in Proposition 1. In addi-
tion, let RL1
f and RL2
f be the sets of all feasible extensions
of labels L1
f and L2
f , respectively. We show that any fea-
sible extension L of L2
f is also a feasible extension of L1
f
(i.e., RL2
f ⊆RL1
f ) and for any feasible extension L of L2
f
we have that cL1
f ⊕L ≤cL2
f ⊕L.
(i) Because of an elementarity assumption and con-
ditions (2), (4), and (5) of the dominance test, the rela-
tion between the sets of all feasible extensions of L1
f
and L2
f implies that RL2
f ⊆RL1
f .
(ii) Because of condition (3) of the dominance test,
the best extension of L1
f will never be worse than the
best extension of L2
f . Hence, L1
f dominates label L2
f .
Finally, we note that it is not necessary to consider
the load q in the dominance test because of condi-
tion (4).
□
The Backward Labeling Algorithm. The backward label-
ing algorithm is an inverted analogue of the forward
labeling. The main changes needed to adapt the for-
ward labeling algorithm are as follows:
• Labels are extended from the sink node to its pre-
decessors (e.g., arcs are reversed).
• In the considered paths, delivery (destination)
transfer nodes are visited before corresponding pickup
(origin) transfer nodes.
The label extension function and dominance crite-
ria of the backward labeling algorithm can be adapted
similarly to their forward analogue. More details on
the backward labeling algorithm can be found in the
online appendix.
Merging Forward and Backward Labels. When all for-
ward and backward labels are generated, they are
merged to construct feasible paths with negative
reduced cost. A forward label L f and a backward
label Lb can be merged if the following conditions are
satisﬁed:
OL f ≡OLb ,
(49)
OT
L f ∩OT
Lb ≡,
(50)
CL f ∩CLb ≡,
(51)
tL f + tηL f , ηLb + sηLb ≤tLb.
(52)
Condition (49) assures that the started (but not com-
pleted) requests in the forward label are the same as
the ﬁnished (but not started) requests in the back-
ward label. Expression (50) makes sure that a request
cannot be picked up at a transfer node and deliv-
ered to another transfer node within the same route.
Condition (51) makes sure that no request is served
twice (once in each of the forward and backward
labels) in the considered route. Finally, condition (52)
assures that merging the two labels leads to feasible
scheduling.
Since we use the dominance test, not all feasible
paths may be generated. However, a path that mini-
mizes the reduced cost will be created. Labels are dis-
carded only if another label exists that can be extended
in the same way as the discarded label. Hence, the
extension of the dominating label will always lead to a
path with lower or equal reduced cost compared to the
same extension of the discarded label.
4.1.3. Acceleration Techniques. To speed up the col-
umn generation, in addition to the bidirectional search
in the labeling algorithm, we apply the following ideas.
Pricing problem heuristics. The performance of the
B&P algorithm can be accelerated by using heuristics to
solve the pricing problem. Heuristics search for easy-
to-ﬁnd negative-reduced cost paths and add them to
the master problem. When heuristics fail to ﬁnd any
such path, the exact algorithm is used. Ideally, for every
node in the branching tree, the exact algorithm should
be called only once to prove optimality, i.e., that no
more paths with negative reduced cost exist. In our
B&P algorithm, we employ two heuristic algorithms.
First, H1 is a truncated labeling algorithm as in
Dabia, Demir, and Van Woensel (2015), in which only
a limited number of labels (with the best cost) for each
node are stored and considered for possible extension.
Here, we store only 50 labels at each node.
Second, H2 uses the proposed labeling algorithm
with stronger dominance criteria. Speciﬁcally, for both
the forward and backward labeling algorithms, we
use the same dominance criteria as before except con-
dition (5).
Preprocessing and label elimination. In this section,
we provide some important problem-speciﬁc prepro-
cessing techniques that improve the performance of
the algorithm. These are valid under the assumption

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1200
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
that triangle inequality holds in terms of travel time,
namely, tr, r+n ≤tr, k + tk, r+n.
Let r ∈P and t ∈T r be a destination transfer node
of r; then Ed
t is the earliest arrival time at t on a sched-
uled line as a destination transfer node. It is computed
as follows:
Ed
t  argmin
k∈O, (i, j)∈F t

⌈(argmax{tk, r + sr; lr + sr} + tr, i + si)⌉
+ ti, j + sj
 
,
(53)
where F t is the set of replicated scheduled lines that
have the destination node t.
In addition, let Lo
t be the latest feasible departure
time of request r on a scheduled line from transfer
node t, ∀r ∈P, t ∈T r. It is computed as follows:
Lo
t  argmin
(i, j)∈F t

⌊(ur+n + sr+n −tj, r+n −sj −ti, j)⌋
 
,
(54)
where F t is the replicated scheduled line set that con-
tains SLs that have the origin in node t.
Note that Ed
t and Lo
t are both used in the labeling
algorithm to restrict the solution space. In other words,
if, e.g., arrival time at a destination transfer node is
smaller than Ed
t , then the departure time is set to Ed
t .
Similarly, if the arrival time at an origin transfer node
is larger than Lo
t , than this extension is considered as
infeasible.
Moreover, for each request r and each replicated
transfer node t ∈T r, the time window of node t is
updated as follows:
lt  argmin
k∈O
{(argmax{tk, r + sr; lr + sr} + tr, t)},
(55)
ut  argmax
k∈O

(argmin{uk −tr+n, k −sr+n; ur+n + sr+n}
−tt, r+n −st)
 
.
(56)
We note that if Lo
t < lt and Ed
t > ut or ut < lt, there is
no feasible solution by visiting node t. Therefore, any
label extension to node t can be eliminated. In addition,
any arc related to t is also eliminated from the graph.
As in Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis (1991), we in-
vestigate all requests r ∈OL f . If there is at least one
request r that cannot be delivered from ηL f to its deliv-
ery node r + n by satisfying its time window, then the
forward label is eliminated. Similarly, if there is at least
one request r ∈OLb that cannot be picked up before ηLb
within its time window, then the backward label is
removed.
In addition, for each replicated transfer node, label
extension is reduced by breaking the symmetry for
replicated transfer nodes. For example, consider a label
that represents a replicated transfer node t. Let the
other replicated transfer node t1 represent the same
physical transfer node as t (i.e., ψ(t)  ψ(t1)) and let t1
have the same functionality as t (origin or destination
transfer node). Then, the extension from t to t1 is valid
only if t1 > t. This is done to avoid symmetric sequences
of nodes visited within the paths (e.g., [. . . , t, t1, . . .]
and [. . . , t1, t, . . .], ∀t, t1 ∈T , such that ψ(t)  ψ(t1) and
t, t1 have the same functionality, i.e., origin or destina-
tion transfer nodes).
Infeasible arcs can be eliminated from the graph by
considering time windows. A simple analysis leads to
the following observations:
• arcs (o(v), i+n), (i, o(v)), and (i+n, i) are infeasible
for i ∈P, v ∈V ;
• arc (i, j) with i, j ∈P ∪D ∪T is infeasible if li +
si + tij > uj.
More relaxed versions of the elimination rules pro-
posed by Dumas, Desrosiers, and Soumis (1991) for
PDPTW are also valid for the PDPTW-SL as follows:
• arcs (i, j) and (j, i + n) are infeasible if i ∈P, j ∈
P ∪D ∪T \{i + n} and path {i, j, i + n} is infeasible.
4.2. Two-Paths Cuts
In this section we present the valid inequalities used to
strengthen the LP relaxation of the master problem. We
adapt the two-paths cuts for the PDPTW-SL, as these
helped improve the lower bounds the most for the clas-
sical PDPTW (Røpke and Cordeau 2009). In particular,
let set H ⊆P ∪D, be such that it cannot be served by
one vehicle. The following inequality is then valid for
the PDPTW-SL:
X
i∈H
X
j∈N \H
X
p∈Ω
a
p
ijxp ≥2.
(57)
To determine whether set H can be served by one
vehicle, we solve a variant of the traveling sales-
man problem (TSP) with time windows, capacity, and
pickup and delivery. In this problem variant, the pick-
ups and deliveries can also be performed at transfer
nodes, and the tour must satisfy the capacity, time win-
dows, and precedence constraints by entering and leav-
ing set H exactly once. Note that in the case of hetero-
geneous vehicles, the TSP must be solved for all vehicle
types, considering depots and capacities.
Let δ+(H) ⊆P ∪T be the corresponding nodes that
must be visited before nodes in H. In this tour, a request
can be picked up from its pickup node or one of the
corresponding transfer nodes. In addition, let δ−(H) ⊆
D ∪T be the corresponding nodes that need to be vis-
ited after visiting set H. In other words, a request can be
delivered to its delivery node or one of the correspond-
ing transfer nodes. If a feasible path cannot be found,
then set H deﬁnes a valid inequality (57). We separate
the two-path cuts in a similar manner as Røpke and
Cordeau (2009), using an adapted labeling algorithm.
4.3. Branching
The branch and bound (B&B) tree is explored using
the best bound strategy. The algorithm ﬁrst branches
on arcs (i, j). It imposes two branches: P
p∈Ωa
ij
p xp ≥1

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1201
and P
p∈Ωa
ij
p xp ≤0. Strong branching is used, i.e., the
impact of branching on several candidates is investi-
gated every time a branching decision has to be made.
For each candidate, we estimate the lower bound in the
two child nodes by solving the associated LP relaxation
using a quick pricing heuristic, namely H1. The branch
that maximizes the lower bound in the weakest of the
two child nodes is chosen. We consider 10 branching
candidates at every node. When all arcs have inte-
ger values (i.e., P
p∈Ωa
ij
p xp  1 or P
p∈Ωa
ij
p xp  0, ∀(i, j)
∈A), the following might happen: ∃p ∈Ω| 0 < xp < 1
(i.e., some xp has a fractional value), as the same route
can be traversed by multiple vehicles (e.g., path p can
be assigned to vehicles v1 and v2, respectively, both
with value 0.5). In this case, the algorithm looks for an
arc (i, j) ∈A traversed by a vehicle v that has a fractional
value and imposes two branches: P
p∈Ωv a
ij
p xp ≥1 and
P
p∈Ωv a
ij
p xp ≤0. Finally, if xp ∈{0, 1}, ∀p ∈Ω(i.e., all xp
variables have integer values), then the MIP formula-
tion (1)–(20) is solved for the considered routes (i.e.,
for xp that have value 1) only. Let ¯Ωx be the restricted
set of routes, which may not necessarily be feasible in
terms of time windows (by considering time synchro-
nization between routes) and SL-capacity constraints.
If the considered MIP model ﬁnds a feasible solution,
then the solution is accepted. Otherwise, the following
valid inequality is added to the formulation to disre-
gard this solution:
X
p∈¯Ωx
xp ≤| ¯Ωx| −1.
(58)
The inequality is similar to a combinatorial Benders
cut, where a solution that is not feasible is discarded
from the search tree. Thus, at most | ¯Ωx| −1 of the
considered paths can be a part of the solution. In the
path-based formulations, adding such inequalities to
the model will make the considered paths regenerate
in the following column generation iteration. There-
fore, expression (58) should be reformulated in terms
of arcs, consequently pricing out the considered arcs
within the paths in the subproblem. Hence, the expres-
sion (58) can be reformulated to
X
p∈¯Ωx
νpxp ≤
X
p∈¯Ωx
νp −µ,
(59)
where νp represents the number of arcs in path p and µ
is the number of arcs within the path p ∈¯Ωx that visits
the fewest nodes.
Proposition 2. Inequality (59) is equivalent to (58) in
terms of integer feasible solutions.
Proof of Proposition 2. Let x be an infeasible routing
solution in terms of time windows or SL capacity.
These routes are infeasible due to the inter-route syn-
chronization constraints, time or load. In addition,
let ¯Ωx be the set of the infeasible combination of the
considered routes (paths), where each PD vehicle is
used at most once. Furthermore, let νp be the number
of arcs within path p ∈¯Ωx and µ  argminp∈¯Ωx{νp}.
Expression (58) assures that at least one path p ∈¯Ωx
will take value zero. This means that at least µ arcs
from the considered paths p ∈¯Ωx will take value zero,
since the path that visits the fewest nodes involves µ
arcs. Thus, (59) is equivalent to (58) in terms of integer
feasible solutions.
□
The dual information of inequalities (59) is consid-
ered in the pricing problem for each considered arc
in ¯Ωx. Generally, this procedure is performed to avoid
branching on q variables, which is time consuming and
leads to a slow convergence of the algorithm.
4.4. Potential Improvements
We note that two stabilization techniques have been
tested in our implementation. These include the
smoothing method proposed by Pessoa et al. (2013)
and the box method introduced by Marsten, Hogan,
and Blankenship (1975). The use of these techniques
did not provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts to the overall per-
formance of the algorithm; therefore, no stabilization
is used in the computational experiments presented in
Section 5.
Recently, Desaulniers, Lessard, and Hadjar (2008)
and Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti (2011b) suggested
to relax the elementarity conditions of the pricing prob-
lem to speed up the labeling algorithm for certain
types of VRPs. The elementarity constraints are then
imposed in the master problem. Allowing cycles in the
pricing problem may lead to an easier problem to solve,
for which pseudo-polynomial algorithms are known
(see, for example, Desrochers, Desrosiers, and Solomon
1992). We implemented and tested the ng-path relax-
ation of Baldacci, Mingozzi, and Roberti (2011b), but
it did not show promising results. According to Røpke
and Pisinger (2007), the shortest path problem with
pairing and precedence constraints is still an NP-hard
problem.
5. Computational Experiments
We implemented the B&P algorithm in Java. Since the
subproblems deﬁned on each PD vehicle are indepen-
dent from each other, they are solved in parallel using
four threads. All experiments were conducted on a
2.6 GHz Intel Core i5 processor with 4 GB RAM. The
LP relaxations of the restricted master problems were
solved with CPLEX 12.3. We note that a limit of three
hours has been imposed on the solution time. For the
experiments we used generated datasets, which can
be found at http://www.smartlogisticslab.nl. Instances
with 6 to 12 requests, along with those that contain 25
and 50 requests have been used in Ghilas, Demir, and

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1202
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Van Woensel (2016a, b). Additional instances (i.e., with
15, 20, 40, and 60 requests) were generated in the same
way as in Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b).
Three sets of instances, namely R, C, and RC, are
used in this section. Each instance considers 1 to 3
available scheduled lines in a triangular topology and
a departure frequency of 30 time units. The instances
are classiﬁed with respect to the geographical loca-
tions of the nodes. For example, C involves clustered
nodes around transfer nodes, R considers uniform-
randomly distributed request nodes, and ﬁnally RC
involve randomly clustered nodes. More speciﬁcally,
C and RC have the nodes positioned within at most
30, respectively 80, time units to one of the three avail-
able transfer nodes. In addition, up to 60 requests (i.e.,
60 pickup and 60 delivery nodes) over 200 × 200 units
on a Euclidean space are considered. Instances follow
a naming convention of G_n_sl_v, where G is the geo-
graphic distribution of the customers, n is the number
of requests that need to be served, sl is the number of
SLs, and v is the number of available vehicles. In all
cases, two depots with eight heterogeneous PD vehi-
cles are considered.
The considered planning horizon is 600 time units.
The widths of the time windows are uniform-ran-
domly generated between 30 and 90 time units. Ser-
vice times are considered to be up to three time units.
Each demand is assigned between one and three units.
The capacity of each PD vehicle is randomly chosen
between 6 and 20 units. The carrying capacity on the
considered SLs is assumed to be 15 demand units.
We assume the driving cost of the PD vehicles to
be 0.5 per time unit, unless indicated. The cost of SL
service per demand unit is equal to 1.
5.1. The Impact of Two-Path Cuts
In this section, we test the performance of the algo-
rithm with and without two-paths cuts. Table 1
presents the results obtained. The columns are self-
explanatory.
According to these results, two-paths cuts helped
improve the overall performance of the algorithm. In
particular, the root node lower bounds improved by up
to 1.07% (i.e., R_25_2_8). For instances that could not be
solved by the algorithm in either setting, valid inequal-
ities helped get improved best bounds. Finally, in terms
of CPU time, two-path cuts helped achieve better per-
formance. We note that two-path cuts are used in the
rest of the computational experiments described below.
5.2. Bidirectional vs. Monodirectional
Labeling Algorithm
In this section, we study the beneﬁts of using a bidi-
rectional search over the monodirectional search. The
detailed results can be found in the online appendix.
The bidirectional labeling algorithm performs better
than the monodirectional version: the lower bounds
obtained within the imposed time limit by the bidirec-
tional labeling algorithm are better over all instances.
Unlike the monodirectional algorithm, the bidirec-
tional search found lower bounds for all instances
within the time limit. This is mainly because the num-
ber of labels that need to be processed in the bidi-
rectional labeling algorithm is considerably smaller
compared with the monodirectional version. Last, bidi-
rectional search proved to be approximately twice as
fast as monodirectional search, based on instances that
were optimally solved by both algorithms.
5.3. The Impact of Acceleration Techniques
In this section, we investigate the eﬀect of the pre-
processing, label elimination techniques and the pro-
posed valid inequality on the overall performance of
the algorithm. More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne three algo-
rithmic setups, as follows: S1—without preprocessing
and label elimination, but with the cut proposed in Sec-
tion 4.1.3, S2—with the preprocessing and label elim-
ination, but without the valid inequality, and ﬁnally
All—with all acceleration techniques described in this
paper. Table 2 presents the obtained results within
a three-hour time limit. Columns “¯z” and “¯z” indi-
cate the best lower and upper bounds found within
a three-hour time limit. “Nodes” indicate the num-
ber of branch-and-bound nodes explored during the
search and “Time” indicates the computational times
in seconds.
The preprocessing and label elimination signiﬁ-
cantly improve the overall performance of the algo-
rithm. The former tightens the formulation (i.e., better
root lower bounds by, on average, 9.56%), and thus
leads to fewer nodes to be processed in the search
tree. In addition, it reduces the solution space of the
problem, hence decreasing the computational eﬀort
needed. The latter (i.e., label elimination) has a positive
impact on the CPU time to process each B&B node. As
can be seen in Table 2, S1 could solve only 3 out of
18 instances, compared to S2 and All setups, with 13
and 14, respectively. Finally, the cut proposed in Sec-
tion 4.1.3 helped close the gap for one instance (i.e.,
C7_6_4). In addition, the cut decreased the number of
explored nodes in the B&B tree and improved the best
lower bound found within the time limit.
Table 3 presents the root node values for the formu-
lation given in Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b)
and the solution approach presented in this paper
(both exact approaches). Column “Root” reports the
root node lower bound and “Timeroot” presents the time
needed to obtain this lower bound. In addition, column
“Gap” presents the relative optimality gap between
the obtained root lower bound and the optimal solu-
tion, which is given in column “¯z.” The best lower
bound found within the imposed three-hour time limit

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1203
Table 1. The Impact of Two-Paths Cuts
No two-paths cuts
With two-paths
Instance
Root
¯z
¯z
Time (sec)
Root
Cuts
¯z
¯z
Time (sec)
C6_2_4
369.36
369.36
369.36
0
369.36
0
369.36
369.36
0
C7_2_4
390.31
390.31
390.31
0
390.31
0
390.31
390.31
0
C8_2_4
416.93
446.35
446.35
21
416.93
0
446.35
446.35
21
C9_2_4
441.20
471.16
471.16
117
441.20
3
471.16
471.16
146
C10_2_4
471.40
510.01
510.01
67
471.40
12
510.01
510.01
55
C11_2_4
498.14
522.85
522.85
9
498.14
10
522.85
522.85
27
C12_2_4
541.60
541.60
541.60
4
541.60
16
541.60
541.60
4
C15_2_6
649.93
649.93
649.93
13
649.93
6
649.93
649.93
21
C20_2_8
745.38
751.23
751.23
83
745.38
26
751.23
751.23
69
C25_2_8
874.93
879.94
879.94
2,114
878.90
55
879.94
879.94
1,215
C40_2_8
1,199.31
1,199.31
—
10,800
1,202.13
118
1,202.13
—
10,800
RC6_2_4
572.76
572.76
572.76
0
572.76
0
572.76
572.76
0
RC7_2_4
575.95
575.95
575.95
0
575.95
0
575.95
575.95
0
RC8_2_4
585.32
585.32
585.32
1
585.32
0
585.32
585.32
1
RC9_2_4
593.70
593.70
593.70
1
593.70
0
593.70
593.70
1
RC10_2_4
599.95
599.95
599.95
1
599.95
0
599.95
599.95
1
RC11_2_4
624.48
624.48
624.48
1
624.48
0
624.48
624.48
1
RC12_2_6
662.03
662.03
662.03
1
662.03
0
662.03
662.03
1
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
1,068.16
0
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
RC20_2_8
1,200.36
1,200.36
1,200.36
6
1,200.36
6
1,200.36
1,200.36
3
RC25_2_8
1,528.02
1,530.43
1,530.43
28
1,528.02
18
1,530.43
1,530.43
33
RC40_2_12
1,955.79
1,969.45
1,969.45
738
1,965.08
65
1,969.45
1,969.45
682
RC50_2_14
2,199.79
2,200.88
2,200.88
1,235
2,200.88
60
2,200.88
2,200.88
921
RC60_2_16
2,611.51
2,636.18
—
10,800
2,625.76
102
2,636.22
—
10,800
R6_2_4
416.16
416.16
416.16
0
416.16
0
416.16
416.16
0
R7_2_4
458.28
473.06
473.06
1
459.33
3
473.06
473.06
1
R8_2_4
547.45
558.17
558.17
0
547.45
0
558.17
558.17
2
R9_2_4
607.48
632.42
632.42
2
607.48
8
632.42
632.42
1
R10_2_4
619.83
636.05
636.05
1
619.83
6
636.05
636.05
3
R11_2_4
746.03
748.29
748.29
1
746.03
5
748.29
748.29
4
R12_2_6
897.60
913.68
913.68
2
897.60
9
913.68
913.68
7
R15_2_6
1,058.97
1,083.50
1,083.50
15
1,062.97
2
1,083.50
1,083.50
13
R20_2_8
1,533.21
1,542.93
1,542.93
12
1,533.21
25
1,542.93
1,542.93
15
R25_2_8
1,613.81
1,636.12
1,636.12
50
1,631.29
50
1,636.12
1,636.12
24
R40_2_12
1,948.56
1,969.77
1,969.77
895
1,967.15
42
1,969.77
1,969.77
589
R50_2_14
2,592.15
2,595.14
2,595.14
580
2,592.15
56
2,595.14
2,595.14
543
R60_2_16
2,854.99
2,858.69
—
10,800
2,855.24
52
2,871.13
—
10,800
Average
1,007.32
1,016.64
177
1,009.29
1,017.05
130
is given in “¯z.” Finally, “No. of columns” indicates the
number of columns that were generated to compute
the valid lower bound using B&P.
Note that the proposed set-partitioning formula-
tion solved by B&P signiﬁcantly outperforms the arc-
based formulation proposed in Ghilas, Demir, and
Van Woensel (2016b) in terms of root lower bounds,
hence in terms of relative optimality gap. The lower
bounds obtained within a three-hour time limit are
signiﬁcantly stronger than those reported by Ghi-
las, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b). Finally, more
instances with three SLs could be solved using B&P,
within shorter computing times.
5.4. Lower Bound Values
Table 4 provides the results of the root nodes for
the PDPTW-SL with homogeneous and heterogeneous
routing costs (see the online appendix for explana-
tions). Column “Root” provides the lower bound at the
root node, and “No. of columns” indicate the num-
ber of columns generated to solve the LP relaxation of
the problem. Column “Timeroot” shows the CPU time
needed to solve the root node, and “Gap” presents
the relative optimality gap of the lower bound from
the known optimal solution. Finally, “¯z” indicates the
value of the known optimal solution.
Regarding the lower bounds obtained, on aver-
age, they are 1.51% away from the optimal solutions.
For instances with homogeneous routing costs, the
lower bounds are slightly tighter than for the instances
with heterogeneous costs. Also, according to the CPU
times, instances with heterogeneous costs were more
time consuming to solve. These facts indicate that hav-
ing heterogeneous costs adds extra complexity to the

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1204
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Table 2. The Impact of Acceleration Techniques
S1
S2
All
Instance
¯z
¯z
Nodes
Time (sec)
¯z
¯z
Nodes
Time (sec)
¯z
¯z
Nodes
Time (sec)
C6_6_4
282.51
—
3,105
10,800
310.85
310.85
7,767
5,183
310.85
310.85
567
2,437
C7_6_4
263.92
—
1,804
10,800
313.37
—
7,542
10,800
313.41
313.41
951
4,890
C8_6_4
279.70
—
721
10,800
336.33
—
5,239
10,800
337.12
—
2,975
10,800
C9_6_4
300.02
—
15
10,800
355.56
—
2,025
10,800
356.36
—
3,531
10,800
C10_6_4
—
—
—
10,800
364.82
—
1,313
10,800
364.82
—
1,317
10,800
C11_6_4
—
—
—
10,800
380.08
—
935
10,800
380.08
—
947
10,800
RC6_6_4
520.11
520.11
1
2
520.11
520.11
1
1
520.11
520.11
1
0
RC7_6_4
482.55
—
2,804
10,800
539.08
539.08
3
1
539.08
539.08
1
0
RC8_6_4
482.94
—
1,432
10,800
548.45
548.45
3
1
548.45
548.45
1
1
RC9_6_4
488.64
—
226
10,800
552.71
552.71
3
3
552.71
552.71
1
1
RC10_6_4
558.96
558.96
3
1,181
558.96
558.96
3
2
558.96
558.96
1
1
RC11_6_4
585.72
—
1
10,800
585.72
585.72
7
11
585.72
585.72
1
2
R6_6_4
416.16
416.16
123
125
416.16
416.16
1
0
416.16
416.16
1
0
R7_6_4
452.74
—
2,123
10,800
470.15
470.15
21
12
470.15
470.15
12
7
R8_6_4
465.92
—
621
10,800
490.77
490.77
3
1
490.77
490.77
1
3
R9_6_4
510.59
—
62
10,800
579.38
579.38
7
5
579.38
579.38
1
1
R10_6_4
511.93
—
14
10,800
584.89
584.89
7
4
584.89
584.89
1
2
R11_6_4
—
—
—
10,800
687.36
687.36
3
5
687.36
687.36
1
2
problem. On average, solving the root node took the
same amount of time in both cases.
5.5. PDPTW-SL vs. PDPTW
This section discusses the computational results ob-
tained when solving the PDPTW-SL (with one SL)
and PDPTW instances using the proposed algorithm.
A similar comparison was made by Ghilas, Demir,
and Van Woensel (2016a, b) but the results were opti-
mal only for small instances (up to 11 requests) and
heuristic for larger instances. In this section, we con-
ﬁrm that the previously found conclusions still hold for
Table 3. Root Node Values
Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016b)
B&P
Instance
Root
Timeroot
Gap (%)
¯z
¯z
Time
Root
No. of columns
Timeroot
Gap (%)
¯z
¯z
Time
C6_6_4
238.08
1
23.41
267.91
310.85
10,800
303.34
160
1
2.42
310.85
310.85
2,437
C7_6_4
213.69
1
31.82
275.41
480.21
10,800
308.50
198
1
1.57
313.41
313.41
4,890
C8_6_4
231.40
3
—
290.15
670.24
10,800
333.05
194
1
—
337.12
—
10,800
C9_6_4
253.72
9
—
305.71
—
10,800
353.54
396
4
—
356.36
—
10,800
C10_6_4
262.07
15
—
307.33
—
10,800
362.80
667
12
—
364.82
—
10,800
C11_6_4
272.42
20
—
316.95
—
10,800
378.93
892
16
—
380.08
—
10,800
RC6_6_4
417.61
0
19.71
520.11
520.11
8
520.11
70
0
0.00
520.11
520.11
0
RC7_6_4
414.58
0
23.09
539.08
539.08
18
539.08
88
0
0.00
539.08
539.08
0
RC8_6_4
420.09
0
23.40
548.45
548.45
33
548.45
124
1
0.00
548.45
548.45
1
RC9_6_4
434.28
1
21.43
552.71
552.71
52
552.71
140
1
0.00
552.71
552.71
1
RC10_6_4
449.03
1
19.67
558.95
558.95
109
558.96
152
1
0.00
558.96
558.96
1
RC11_6_4
472.00
3
19.42
585.72
585.72
786
585.72
222
2
0.00
585.72
585.72
2
R6_6_4
363.40
0
12.68
416.16
416.16
3
416.16
116
0
0.00
416.16
416.16
0
R7_6_4
388.52
0
17.36
470.15
470.15
13
453.62
120
0
3.52
470.15
470.15
7
R8_6_4
427.69
0
12.85
490.77
490.77
63
490.77
180
3
0.00
490.77
490.77
3
R9_6_4
466.08
1
19.55
579.38
579.38
616
579.38
238
1
0.00
579.38
579.38
1
R10_6_4
463.54
1
20.75
584.89
584.89
4,998
584.89
282
2
0.00
584.89
584.89
2
R11_6_4
571.62
2
16.84
632.97
—
10,800
687.36
286
2
0.00
687.36
687.36
2
Average
20.06
0.51
the optimal solutions of larger instances. The detailed
results are given in the online appendix.
According to the results, PDPTW-SL solutions
proved to be cheaper compared to the PDPTW solu-
tions. However, the cost savings are dependent on the
relative positioning of the request nodes and SLs, time
windows, and available capacities. More speciﬁcally,
C instances provided the most savings, and R instances
provided the least. Overall, the results support the ﬁnd-
ings of Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016a, b):
the use of SLs beneﬁts the pickup and delivery net-
work. To maximize the beneﬁts of such systems, tactical

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1205
Table 4. Lower Bounds
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Instance
Root
No. of columns
Timeroot
Gap (%)
¯z
Root
No. of columns
Timeroot
Gap (%)
¯z
C6_2_4
369.36
92
0
0.00
369.36
385.49
83
0
0.00
385.49
C7_2_4
390.31
92
0
0.00
390.31
410.76
89
0
0.00
410.76
C8_2_4
416.93
162
1
6.59
446.35
437.67
142
0
6.54
468.30
C9_2_4
441.20
212
1
6.36
471.16
464.39
214
1
6.30
495.64
C10_2_4
471.40
312
1
7.57
510.01
494.39
204
1
7.59
535.01
C11_2_4
498.14
262
2
4.73
522.85
523.83
261
2
4.51
548.55
C12_2_4
541.60
416
4
0.00
541.60
568.30
343
4
0.00
568.30
C15_2_6
649.93
920
9
0.00
649.93
961.25
592
6
1.96
980.46
C20_2_8
745.38
1,232
8
0.78
751.23
886.49
888
13
0.40
890.02
C25_2_8
878.90
4,485
261
0.12
879.94
1,330.48
1,863
235
0.00
1,330.48
C40_2_8
1,202.13
6,524
9,660
—
—
1,441.80
5,379
10,217
—
—
RC6_2_4
572.76
54
0
0.00
572.76
593.52
54
0
0.00
593.52
RC7_2_4
575.95
72
0
0.00
575.95
596.89
74
0
0.00
596.89
RC8_2_4
585.32
88
0
0.00
585.32
606.78
85
0
0.00
606.78
RC9_2_4
593.70
96
1
0.00
593.70
615.50
91
1
0.00
615.50
RC10_2_4
599.95
100
1
0.00
599.95
621.75
94
1
0.00
621.75
RC11_2_4
624.48
104
1
0.00
624.48
646.28
97
1
0.00
646.28
RC12_2_6
662.03
194
1
0.00
662.03
693.75
178
1
0.00
693.75
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
178
1
0.00
1,068.16
1,586.84
179
1
0.00
1,586.84
RC20_2_8
1,200.36
532
3
0.00
1,200.36
1,639.68
562
7
0.00
1,639.68
RC25_2_8
1,528.02
1,140
9
0.16
1,530.43
2,395.89
697
6
0.33
2,403.87
RC40_2_12
1,965.08
2,659
175
0.22
1,969.45
3,033.48
2,381
185
3.57
3,145.84
RC50_2_14
2,200.88
4,782
921
0.00
2,200.88
3,432.43
2,897
1,652
0.29
3,442.28
RC60_2_16
2,625.76
7,044
1,341
—
—
3,977.42
3,267
545
—
—
R6_2_4
416.16
64
0
0.00
416.16
416.16
87
0
0.00
416.16
R7_2_4
459.33
82
0
2.90
473.06
458.28
119
0
3.12
473.06
R8_2_4
547.45
118
0
1.92
558.17
547.45
146
0
1.92
558.17
R9_2_4
607.48
136
0
3.94
632.42
607.48
226
0
3.94
632.42
R10_2_4
619.83
150
1
2.55
636.05
619.83
188
0
2.55
636.05
R11_2_4
746.03
150
1
0.30
748.29
746.03
173
1
0.30
748.29
R12_2_6
897.60
300
1
1.76
913.68
929.70
316
0
1.78
946.53
R15_2_6
1,062.97
300
2
1.89
1,083.50
1,345.53
407
1
2.29
1,377.04
R20_2_8
1,533.21
683
5
0.63
1,542.93
1,817.17
567
3
1.21
1,839.34
R25_2_8
1,631.29
908
10
0.30
1,636.12
1,992.37
647
2
0.97
2,011.86
R40_2_12
1,967.15
3,733
151
0.13
1,969.77
2,511.39
2,206
137
0.26
2,518.05
R50_2_14
2,592.15
4,276
358
0.12
2,595.14
3,168.85
2,131
445
0.42
3,182.19
R60_2_16
2,855.24
4,672
2,034
—
—
3,465.54
3,767
3,465
—
—
Average
855
1.26
567
1.48
decisions, such as conﬁguration of the SLs, storage
areas at transfer nodes, and redesign of the SL vehicles,
must be properly considered.
5.6. PDPTW-SL with Multiple Scheduled Lines
This section illustrates the eﬀect of having multiple
available SLs on the operational costs of the system.
The results obtained when solving the instances with
one, two (i.e., two connected lines), and three (i.e., tri-
angular network) available SLs within a three-hour
time limit are given in the online appendix. The routing
costs are assumed to be homogeneous. As expected,
the complexity drastically increases with the number
of available SLs as the increase in graph size makes the
pricing problem more diﬃcult to solve. As a side eﬀect,
more SLs lead to signiﬁcantly slower convergence dur-
ing the search. The results support the observations
made by Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016a, b)
for similar settings: more SLs lead to more cost savings
compared to PDPTW solutions.
5.7. Comparison to Other Algorithms
In this section, we present a computational comparison
of the proposed B&P algorithm to the methodologies
used by Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel (2016a, b):
the arc-based MIP solved by CPLEX with the valid
inequalities given in Ghilas, Demir, and Van Woensel
(2016b) along with the preprocessing introduced in
Section 4.1.3, and the proposed ALNS (the best out of
10 runs). Table 5 indicates the results obtained by the
diﬀerent methodologies. The Gap column indicates the
relative optimality gap between the best lower bound
found and the optimal solution.
The results indicate that the proposed B&P performs
signiﬁcantly better than CPLEX. The lower bounds
obtained by CPLEX within the time limit proved to be

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1206
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Table 5. Comparison Between Algorithms
B&P
CPLEX
ALNS
Instance
¯z
¯z
Time (sec)
¯z
¯z
Gap (%)
Time (sec)
¯z
Time (sec)
Gap (%)
C6_2_4
369.36
369.36
0
369.36
369.36
0.00
68
369.36
1
0.00
C7_2_4
390.31
390.31
0
390.31
390.31
0.00
160
390.31
1
0.00
C8_2_4
446.35
446.35
3
446.35
446.35
0.00
365
446.35
2
0.00
C9_2_4
471.16
471.16
178
471.16
471.16
0.00
6,351
472.68
2
0.32
C10_2_4
510.01
510.01
73
501.25
536.50
1.72
10,800
510.01
2
0.00
C11_2_4
522.85
522.85
37
453.44
528.08
13.27
10,800
522.84
2
0.00
C12_2_4
541.60
541.60
4
470.04
—
13.21
10,800
541.60
2
0.00
C15_2_6
649.93
649.93
32
546.29
—
19.95
10,800
659.30
3
1.42
C20_2_8
751.23
751.23
79
544.95
—
27.46
10,800
751.23
4
0.00
C25_2_8
879.94
879.94
2,627
—
—
—
10,800
879.94
8
0.00
C40_2_8
1,202.13
—
10,800
—
—
—
10,800
1,226.77
8
—
RC6_2_4
572.76
572.76
0
572.76
572.76
0.00
3
572.75
1
0.00
RC7_2_4
575.95
575.95
0
575.95
575.95
0.00
3
575.95
1
0.00
RC8_2_4
585.32
585.32
0
585.32
585.32
0.00
5
585.32
1
0.00
RC9_2_4
593.70
593.70
1
593.70
593.70
0.00
5
593.69
2
0.00
RC10_2_4
599.95
599.95
1
599.95
599.95
0.00
8
599.94
2
0.00
RC11_2_4
624.48
624.48
1
624.48
624.48
0.00
8
624.47
2
0.00
RC12_2_6
662.03
662.03
1
662.03
662.03
0.00
11
662.03
2
0.00
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
1,068.16
1,068.16
0.00
65
1,068.16
1
0.00
RC20_2_8
1,200.36
1,200.36
3
1,062.37
—
11.50
10,800
1,203.98
2
0.30
RC25_2_8
1,530.43
1,530.43
40
1,085.66
—
29.06
10,800
1,530.43
2
0.00
RC40_2_12
1,969.45
1,969.45
1,063
—
—
—
10,800
1,988.36
6
0.95
RC50_2_14
2,200.88
2,200.88
1,199
—
—
—
10,800
2,214.09
10
0.60
RC60_2_16
2,636.22
—
10,800
—
—
—
10,800
2,646.34
13
—
R6_2_4
416.16
416.16
0
416.16
416.16
0.00
4
416.16
1
0.00
R7_2_4
473.06
473.06
1
473.06
473.06
0.00
4
473.05
1
0.00
R8_2_4
558.17
558.17
2
558.17
558.17
0.00
4
558.17
1
0.00
R9_2_4
632.42
632.42
6
632.42
632.42
0.00
39
632.41
1
0.00
R10_2_4
636.05
636.05
3
636.05
636.05
0.00
24
636.05
2
0.00
R11_2_4
748.29
748.29
3
748.29
748.29
0.00
39
748.29
2
0.00
R12_2_6
913.68
913.68
6
913.68
913.68
0.00
182
934.73
2
2.30
R15_2_6
1,083.50
1,083.50
14
1,083.50
1,083.50
0.00
317
1,083.50
1
0.00
R20_2_8
1,542.93
1,542.93
19
1,280.74
—
16.99
10,800
1,542.93
1
0.00
R25_2_8
1,636.12
1,636.12
59
1,326.77
—
18.91
10,800
1,638.42
1
0.14
R40_2_12
1,969.77
1,969.77
606
—
—
—
10,800
1,969.77
5
0.00
R50_2_14
2,595.14
2,595.14
1,634
—
—
—
10,800
2,595.14
7
0.00
R60_2_16
2,871.13
—
10,800
—
—
—
10,800
2,890.34
12
—
Average
226
4,673
2
0.18
relatively weak, i.e., on average 7.58% from the optimal
solution. The proposed B&P algorithm solved 34 out of
37 instances, and CPLEX could solve only 22 of them.
In addition, B&P solved the instances that were solved
by CPLEX signiﬁcantly faster.
The ALNS performs relatively well, compared to the
proposed B&P. More speciﬁcally, the ALNS found the
optimal solutions for 27 out of 37 instances. The opti-
mality gap did not exceed 2.3% for the 10 instances
for which the ALNS found suboptimal solutions. As
expected, the heuristic is signiﬁcantly faster than B&P.
5.8. Sensitivity Analyses
In this section, we present some computational results
to shed some light on how the algorithm’s performance
changes with some instance parameters, such as the
width of the time windows, number of PD vehicles,
and PD vehicle capacity.
Table 6 presents the results considering modiﬁed
time windows. Instances C15_2_6, C20_2_8, RC15_2_6,
RC25_2_8, R15_2_6, and R20_2_8 are tested. All these
instances could be solved optimally within a three-
hour time limit and all had at least one feasible solution
in all considered settings. In particular, each request
node is assigned a time window [l1
i , u1
i ], such that
(u1
i −l1
i )  (ui −li)ρ and |u1
i −ui|  |l1
i −li|, where ρ ∈
{0.5, 1, 1.5, 2}. Note that column “No. via SLs” indi-
cates the number of demand units that were shipped
using available SLs.
The time window width plays an important role in
the algorithm’s performance. Generally, the wider the
time windows, the more diﬃcult it is to solve the root
node (i.e., “Timeroot” column). More speciﬁcally, the
pricing problem becomes more diﬃcult as more labels
need to be processed, thus increasing the time needed
to solve each B&B node. However, no relationship

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1207
Table 6. Impact of Time-Window Width
No. of
Timeroot
Time
No. via
No. of
Instance
Root
columns
(sec)
Cuts
¯z
¯z
Nodes
(sec)
SLs
vehicles
Gap (%)
ρ  0.5
C15_2_6
735.03
572
3
2
736.08
736.08
9
11
8
5
0.14
C20_2_8
848.52
958
3
21
848.52
848.52
1
3
9
7
0.00
RC15_2_6
1,078.91
140
1
0
1,078.91
1,078.91
1
1
0
6
0.00
RC25_2_8
1,620.10
629
4
32
1,642.97
1,642.97
9
18
4
8
1.39
R15_2_6
1,130.87
237
1
0
1,130.87
1,130.87
1
1
0
6
0.00
R20_2_8
1,573.60
540
1
8
1,573.60
1,573.60
1
1
0
8
0.00
ρ  1.0
C15_2_6
649.93
920
9
6
649.93
649.93
3
21
8
4
0.00
C20_2_8
745.38
1,232
8
26
751.23
751.23
5
69
2
5
0.78
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
178
1
0
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
1
0
6
0.00
RC25_2_8
1,528.02
1,140
9
18
1,530.43
1,530.43
3
33
6
8
0.16
R15_2_6
1,062.97
300
2
2
1,083.50
1,083.50
5
13
0
6
1.89
R20_2_8
1,533.21
683
5
25
1,542.93
1,542.93
3
15
0
8
0.63
ρ  1.5
C15_2_6
639.81
933
9
19
649.93
649.93
91
315
8
4
1.56
C20_2_8
728.60
1,262
11
30
747.46
747.46
41
302
4
5
2.52
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
181
1
0
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
1
0
6
0.00
RC25_2_8
1,473.40
1,242
13
8
1,473.40
1,473.40
1
13
4
7
0.00
R15_2_6
1,044.94
351
2
4
1,058.99
1,058.99
11
14
2
5
1.33
R20_2_8
1,519.42
698
5
25
1,526.97
1,526.97
5
16
1
8
0.49
ρ  2.0
C15_2_6
628.73
1,274
23
24
649.12
649.12
49
318
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
712.89
1,310
30
54
713.74
713.74
3
73
4
5
0.12
RC15_2_6
1,068.16
187
1
0
1,068.16
1,068.16
1
1
0
6
0.00
RC25_2_8
1,415.60
1,429
22
15
1,415.60
1,415.60
23
78
4
7
0.00
R15_2_6
993.80
359
2
8
993.80
993.80
1
2
0
5
0.00
R20_2_8
1,511.98
698
5
6
1,526.97
1,526.97
7
17
1
8
0.98
between the root node optimality gap and the width
of the time windows can be observed. In most cases,
tighter time windows lead to stronger lower bounds.
In some exceptional cases with ρ  2.0 (i.e., R15_2_6)
the problem is solved in the root node, thus leading to
a shorter overall CPU time than in cases with smaller
values for ρ. Finally, as expected, wider time windows
lead to lower operating costs compared to cases with
tight time windows.
Table 7 shows the impact of the PD vehicle capac-
ities on the performance of the algorithm. Let µ be a
factor by which the PD vehicle capacities are modi-
ﬁed; i.e., µ × Qv ∀v ∈V . We investigate ﬁve settings:
µ ∈{0.3, 0.7, 1.0, 1.3, 1.7}. To assure feasibility in all
settings, time windows are assumed to be twice as
wide compared to original case (i.e., ρ  2.0). Only
instances C15_2_6, C20_2_8, RC20_2_8, and R12_2_6
have at least one feasible solution in all considered
setups. Therefore, only their corresponding results are
presented in Table 7.
Surprisingly, smaller capacities do not necessarily
lead to easier instances. For more constrained in-
stances, the root nodes are solved faster by generating
fewer columns. However, the resulting optimality gaps
may not necessarily be tighter than in less constrained
instances. This may lead to longer overall CPU times.
Finally, tighter vehicle capacities lead to higher operat-
ing costs in optimal solutions, compared to instances
with larger capacities.
Table 8 presents the eﬀect of the number of avail-
able vehicles on the algorithm’s performance. In par-
ticular, it indicates the results obtained by solving the
following instances: C15_2_6, C20_2_8, RC20_2_8, and
R12_2_6. Not all instances were feasible in all of the
considered setups. To make more instances feasible, we
consider larger time windows (i.e., ρ  2.0) than in the
original case (i.e., ρ  1). The order in which the vehi-
cles are removed is by the corresponding ID (largest
ID ﬁrst).
Intuitively, the fewer vehicles available, the tighter
the problem tends to be and hence easier to solve.
However, it is not always the case, as removing certain
(heterogeneous) vehicles may lead to diﬀerent problem
structures that may result in more diﬃcult problems.
For example, C20_2_4 can be generated by remov-
ing four vehicles from the original instance (C20_2_8)
according to the given vehicle order in the data set. In
the instances with fewer vehicles, the root lower bound
and the optimal solution values are at least as high
as in the corresponding instances with more vehicles.
Note that fewer vehicles do not always lead to smaller
computing times.

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1208
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Table 7. Impact of PD Vehicle Capacities
Instance
No. of
Timeroot
Time
No. via
No. of
setting
Root
columns
(sec)
Cuts
¯z
¯z
Nodes
(sec)
SLs
vehicles
Gap (%)
ρ  2, µ  0.3
C15_2_6
718.83
654
3
11
742.04
742.04
85
115
11
5
3.13
C20_2_8
866.08
1,029
6
20
872.75
872.75
29
85
9
6
0.76
RC20_2_8
1,551.85
665
2
7
1,563.37
1,563.37
631
1,244
8
8
0.74
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
ρ  2.0, µ  0.7
C15_2_6
628.73
1,031
13
30
649.12
649.12
117
501
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
713.12
1,121
16
30
713.74
713.74
3
37
4
5
0.09
RC20_2_8
1,142.33
684
2
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
2
4
6
0.00
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
ρ  2.0, µ  1.0
C15_2_6
628.73
1,274
23
24
649.12
649.12
49
318
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
712.89
1,310
30
54
713.74
713.74
3
73
4
5
0.12
RC20_2_8
1,142.33
747
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
ρ  2.0, µ  1.3
C15_2_6
628.73
1,369
38
33
649.12
649.12
37
305
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
712.89
1,722
47
50
713.74
713.74
3
96
4
5
0.12
RC20_2_8
1,142.33
1,102
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
ρ  2.0, µ  1.7
C15_2_6
628.73
1,373
39
33
649.12
649.12
95
610
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
712.89
1,798
48
53
713.74
713.74
3
120
4
5
0.12
RC20_2_8
1,142.33
1,120
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
Table 8. Impact of Number of Available PD Vehicles
No. of
Timeroot
Time
No. via
No. of
Instance
Root
columns
(sec)
Cuts
¯z
¯z
Nodes
(sec)
SLs
vehicles
Gap (%)
Original case
C15_2_6
628.73
1,274
23
24
649.12
649.12
49
318
8
4
3.14
C20_2_8
712.89
1,310
30
54
713.74
713.74
3
73
4
5
0.12
RC20_2_8
1,142.33
747
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_6
866.23
282
1
0
866.23
866.23
1
1
0
4
0.00
Without one vehicle
C15_2_5
628.73
869
11
17
649.12
649.12
83
484
8
4
3.14
C20_2_7
712.89
1,066
16
13
713.74
713.74
3
75
4
5
0.12
RC20_2_7
1,142.33
725
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_5
871.58
235
1
0
871.58
871.58
1
1
0
4
0.00
Without two vehicles
C15_2_4
631.23
960
48
27
649.12
649.12
59
433
8
4
2.76
C20_2_6
712.99
1,313
28
27
713.74
713.74
3
57
4
5
0.11
RC20_2_6
1,142.33
679
4
0
1,142.33
1,142.33
1
4
4
6
0.00
R12_2_4
871.58
182
1
0
871.58
871.58
1
1
0
4
0.00
Without three vehicles
C15_2_3
651.89
787
18
31
652.59
652.59
25
186
5
3
0.11
C20_2_5
712.99
996
25
55
713.74
713.74
7
134
4
5
0.11
Without four vehicles
C20_2_4
724.89
944
35
57
748.73
748.73
25
472
2
4
3.18
5.9. PDPTW with Transfers
As a by-product, we can simplify the proposed set par-
titioning master problem and solve the PDPTW-T. In
this context, transfers among PD vehicles can be made
only at predeﬁned locations. For a formal description of
the problem, we refer the reader to Cortes, Matamala,
and Contardo (2010). From the modeling perspective,
each transfer node can be considered as an SL with zero
traveling time (i.e., the same physical location) and with
no imposed schedule and capacity constraints. In other
words, PDPTW-T is a special case of PDPTW-SL, where
multiple individual SLs of line network topology can

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
1209
Table 9. Comparison Between PDPTW-T and PDPTW
PDPTW-T
PDPTW
No. via
No. of
Time
Savings
No. of
Time
Instance
Root
¯z
¯z
SLs
vehicles
(sec)
(%)
Root
¯z
¯z
vehicles
(sec)
20_2_8
1,237.84
1,256.04
1,256.04
10
7
362
2.84
1,292.80
1,292.80
1,292.80
7
3
20_2_10
1,326.29
1,326.29
1,326.29
7
7
22
11.77
1,503.16
1,503.16
1,503.16
8
5
20_2_10.1
1,477.37
1,477.37
1,477.37
1
9
17
2.27
1,511.71
1,511.71
1,511.71
9
3
25_2_10
1,623.77
1,623.77
1,623.77
6
9
398
7.93
1,763.54
1,763.54
1,763.54
9
4
25_2_8
1,440.71
1,463.86
1,463.86
3
8
659
6.05
1,532.16
1,558.08
1,558.08
8
48
25_2_10.1
1,373.89
1,409.90
1,409.90
14
8
6,127
5.31
1,476.11
1,489.00
1,489.00
8
34
30_1_12
1,829.70
1,829.70
1,829.70
1
9
77
2.63
1,864.49
1,879.07
1,879.07
9
15
30_2_10
1,830.57
1,831.37
1,831.37
8
9
381
4.84
1,924.51
1,924.51
1,924.51
9
9
30_1_12.1
1,838.15
1,838.15
1,838.15
10
10
77
4.06
1,915.98
1,915.98
1,915.98
10
6
35_1_10
1,812.72
1,838.17
1,838.17
7
9
8,146
5.57
1,946.68
1,946.68
1,946.68
10
9
35_1_12
2,084.32
2,084.32
2,084.32
6
10
138
3.44
2,158.53
2,158.53
2,158.53
11
4
35_1_12.1
1,979.09
1,986.74
1,986.74
3
9
3,104
2.21
2,015.85
2,031.65
2,031.65
10
44
40_1_12
2,118.97
2,120.48
2,120.48
12
11
1,367
6.30
2,263.00
2,263.00
2,263.00
11
11
40_1_12.1
2,139.45
2,146.15
2,146.15
4
11
291
5.54
2,271.95
2,271.95
2,271.95
12
7
40_1_12.2
2,124.26
2,135.27
—
—
—
10,800
—
2,195.56
2,195.56
2,195.56
11
9
50_1_14
2,428.42
2,445.66
—
—
—
10,800
—
2,501.05
2,501.05
2,501.05
12
33
50_1_16
2,415.18
2,439.23
—
—
—
10,800
—
2,469.07
2,469.07
2,469.07
12
18
50_1_14.1
2,554.16
2,559.78
—
—
—
10,800
—
2,588.02
2,590.23
2,590.23
13
155
Average
1,722.35
1,730.88
1,730.88
6.57
9.00
1,512
5.05
1,817.18
1,822.12
1,822.12
9.36
14
exist. However, certain service times at these nodes exist
(i.e., loading/unloading operations).
Unfortunately, the instances previously used in the
literature are not available. In addition, the authors
of the related articles used random elements in their
instance generators; thus, we could not recreate the
same instances to compare the performances of the
algorithms. Therefore, we have generated a new set of
instances with up to 50 requests, 2 depots, and 2 transfer
nodes (available at http://www.smartlogisticslab.nl).
The request nodes were randomly generated on a 200 ×
200 Euclidean space. Transfer nodes were positioned in
the center of the considered area. Time windows, ser-
vice times, and PD-vehicle capacities were randomly
generated. Instances follow a naming convention of
pdptwt_n_m_v, where n is the number of requests, m is
the number of transfer nodes, and v is the number of
vehicles.
To remove the SL scheduling part from the model,
variables qrw
ij
are simpliﬁed to qr
ij, binary variables
taking value 1 if request r is transferred at node i, and
0 otherwise ∀r ∈P, (i, j) ∈E. The objective function of
the PDPTW-T represents only the ﬁrst term of expres-
sion (1), i.e., minimize routing costs. The constraints of
the restricted master problem remain the same as in
formulation (2)–(20), without constraints (6) and (13).
The results are reported in Table 9.
The results indicate that PDPTW-T instances with
up to 40 requests can be solved to optimality. The
lower bounds proved to be relatively strong (i.e., 0.37%
for both problems). Speciﬁcally, the root node lower
bounds for the PDPTW-T (i.e., 0.64%) are slightly worse
than the ones for the PDPTW (i.e., 0.37%). The rea-
son is that the PDPTW-T is more complicated than the
PDPTW due to the transfer opportunity. Similar to the
PDPTW-SL, transfer opportunities lead to cost savings,
compared to the PDPTW solutions. More speciﬁcally,
an average savings of 5% can be achieved with one
or two available transfer nodes. In addition, a slight
decrease in the number of vehicles used is observed.
6. Conclusions
We have proposed a B&P algorithm to solve the
PDPTW-SL. To fully evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the
algorithm, we have used a library of PDPTW-SL
instances. We have shown that small to medium-size
instances, with up to 50 freight requests, can be opti-
mally solved by the proposed algorithm. Moreover, an
average savings of 8% can be achieved by using avail-
able SLs to perform the deliveries, compared to the cor-
responding PDPTW solutions. Additionally, a special
case of the problem, the PDPTW-T, is solved using the
proposed algorithm. Instances with up to 40 requests
provided an average operational savings of 5% com-
pared to the PDPTW solutions.
In addition to the computational complexity of the
problem discussed in this paper, there are practical
challenges as well that need to be overcome. First,
transfer points require appropriate infrastructure for
storing the packages securely until their departure
(e.g., DHL-Packstation 2015). Additionally, handling
the transfer operations (i.e., loading/unloading pack-
ages) can be a signiﬁcant cost element of using SLs,
which needs to be carefully accounted for. In the
PDPTW-SL it is assumed that all resources needed to
integrate freight and public transportation are avail-
able. However, many of them may have setup costs.

Ghilas et al.: Branch-and-Price for the PDPTW-SL
1210
Transportation Science, 2018, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1191–1210, © 2018 INFORMS
Hence, before implementing such a system, strategic/
tactical level decisions need to be investigated. In par-
ticular, the trade-oﬀs between the number of SLs, the
number of redesigned SL vehicles, SL capacity, and SL
frequency have to be considered.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the associate editor and the two anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable comments that helped im-
prove the paper.
References
Aldaihani M, Dessouky M (2003) Hybrid scheduling methods for
paratransit operations. Comput. Indust. Engrg. 45(1):75–96.
Baldacci R, Bartolini E, Mingozzi A (2011a) An exact algorithm for
the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Oper. Res.
59(2):414–426.
Baldacci R, Mingozzi A, Roberti R (2011b) New route relaxation and
pricing strategies for the vehicle routing problem. Oper. Res.
59(5):1269–1283.
Cargo Tram (2012) Delivering goods by cargo tram in Ams-
terdam (Netherlands). http://www.eltis.org/index.php?id13
&study_id1547.
Cortes E-C, Matamala M, Contardo C (2010) The pickup and deliv-
ery problem with transfers: Formulation and a branch-and-cut
solution method. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 200(3):711–724.
Dabia S, Demir E, Van Woensel T (2015) An exact approach for
a variant of the pollution-routing problem. Transportation Sci.
51(2):607–628.
Demir E, Bektaş T, Laporte G (2014) A review of recent research
on green road freight transportation. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 237(3):
775–793.
Demir E, Huang Y, Scholts S, Van Woensel T (2015) A selected review
on the negative externalities of the freight transportation: Mod-
eling and pricing. Transportation Res. Part E: Logist. Transportation
Rev. 77:95–114.
Desaulniers G, Lessard F, Hadjar A (2008) Tabu search, partial
elementarity, and generalized k-path inequalities for the vehi-
cle routing problem with time windows. Transportation Sci.
42(3):387–404.
Desrochers M, Desrosiers J, Solomon M (1992) A new optimization
algorithm for the vehicle routing problem with time windows.
Oper. Res. 40(2):342–354.
DHL-Packstation (2015) DHL-Packstation. http://www.dhl.de/en/
paket/pakete-empfangen/packstation.html.
Dumas Y, Desrosiers J, Soumis F (1991) The pickup and delivery
problem with time windows. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 54(1):7–22.
Ghilas V, Demir E, Van Woensel T (2016a) An adaptive large neigh-
borhood search heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem
with time windows and scheduled lines. Comput. Oper. Res.
72:12–30.
Ghilas V, Demir E, Van Woensel T (2016b) The pickup and deliv-
ery problem with time windows and scheduled lines. INFOR:
Inform. Systems Oper. Res. 54(2):147–167.
Ghilas V, Demir E, Van Woensel T (2016c) A scenario-based planning
for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows, sched-
uled lines and stochastic demands. Transportation Res. Part B:
Methodological 91:34–51.
Häll CH, Andersson H, Lundgren JT, Varbrand P (2009) The inte-
grated dial-a-ride problem. Public Transportation 1(1):39–54.
Irnich S, Desaulniers G (2005) Shortest path problems with resource
constraints. Desaulniers G, Desrosiers J, Solomon M, eds. Col-
umn Generation (Springer, Boston), 33–65.
Liaw C-F, White C, Bander J (1996) A decision support system for the
bimodal dial-a-ride problem. IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, Cyber-
netics, Part A 26(5):552–565.
Lübbecke ME, Desrosiers J (2005) Selected topics in column genera-
tion. Oper. Res. 53(6):1007–1023.
Marsten R, Hogan W, Blankenship J (1975) The boxstep method for
large-scale optimization. Oper. Res. 23(3):389–405.
Masson R, Lehuede F, Peton O (2012) An adaptive large neighbor-
hood search for the pickup and delivery problem with transfers.
Transportation Sci. 47(3):1–12.
Masson R, Lehuede F, Peton O (2014) The dial-a-ride problem with
transfers. Comput. Oper. Res. 41:12–23.
Masson R, Trentini A, Lehuede F, Malhene N, Peton O, Tlahig H
(2017) Optimization of a city logistics transportation system
with mixed passengers and goods. Eur. J. Transportation Logist.
6(1):81–109.
Mues C, Pickl S (2005) Transshipment and time windows in vehi-
cle routing. 8th Internat. Sympos. Parallel Architectures, Algorithms
Networks, Las Vegas, NV, 113–119.
Nanry W, Barnes W (2000) Solving the pickup and delivery problem
with time windows using reactive tabu search. Transportation
Res. Part B: Methodological 34(2):107–121.
Pessoa AA, Sadykov R, Uchoa E, Vanderbeck F (2013) In-out separa-
tion and column generation stabilization by dual price smooth-
ing. Bonifaci V, Demetrescu C, Marchetti-Spaccamela A, eds.
Experiment. Algorithms, SEA 2013, Lecture Notes Comput. Sci.,
Vol. 7933 (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg), 354–365.
Rais A, Alvelos F, Carvalho MS (2013) New mixed integer-program-
ming model for the pickup-and-delivery problem with trans-
shipment. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 235(3):530–539.
Righini G, Salani M (2006) Symmetry helps: Bounded bi-directional
dynamic programming for the elementary shortest path prob-
lem with resource constraints. Discrete Optim. 3(3):255–273.
Righini G, Salani M (2008) New dynamic programming algorithms
for the resource constrained elementary shortest path problem.
Networks 51(3):155–170.
Røpke S, Cordeau J-F (2009) Branch and cut and price for the pickup
and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Sci.
43(3):267–286.
Røpke S, Pisinger D (2006) An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time win-
dows. Transportation Sci. 40(4):455–472.
Røpke S, Pisinger D (2007) Complexity of shortest path problems
arising in column generation for vehicle routing problems with
pairing and precedence constraints. Technical report, Technical
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
Savelsbergh M, Sol M (1995) The general pickup and delivery prob-
lem. Transportation Sci. 29(1):17–29.
Sigurd M, Pisinger D, Sig M (2004) Scheduling transportation of
live animals to avoid the spread of diseases. Transportation Sci.
38(2):197–209.
Trentini A, Malhene N (2010) Toward a shared urban transport sys-
tem ensuring passengers and goods cohabitation. Trimestrale del
Laboratorio Territorio Mobilita e Ambiente - TeMALab 4:37–44.
Trentini A, Masson R, Lehuédé F, Malhéné N, Péton O, Tlahig H
(2012) A shared “passenger and goods” city logistics system.
4th Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems, Logist. Supply Chain, Québec,
Canada.
Xu H, Chen Z-L, Rajagopal S, Arunapuram S (2003) Solving a practical
pickup and delivery problem. Transportation Sci. 37(3): 347–364.