TITLE: Robotic Sorting Systems: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies Analysis
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1053
---

EUR Research Information Portal
Robotic sorting systems
Published in:
Transportation Science
Publication status and date:
Published: 31/08/2021
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1287/trsc.2021.1053
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
Zou, B., de Koster, R., Gong, Y., Xu, X., & Shen, G. (2021). Robotic sorting systems: Performance estimation and operating
policies analysis. Transportation Science, 55(6), 1430-1455. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1053
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
 • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
 • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

This article was downloaded by: [145.5.180.37] On: 10 January 2022, At: 02:19
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA
Transportation Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Robotic Sorting Systems: Performance Estimation and
Operating Policies Analysis
Bipan Zou, René De Koster, Yeming Gong, Xianhao Xu, Guwen Shen
To cite this article:
Bipan Zou, René De Koster, Yeming Gong, Xianhao Xu, Guwen Shen (2021) Robotic Sorting Systems: Performance Estimation
and Operating Policies Analysis. Transportation Science 55(6):1430-1455. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1053
Full terms and conditions of use: https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-Terms-and-
Conditions
This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use
or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.
The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.
Copyright © 2021, INFORMS
Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages
With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations research (O.R.)
and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning opportunities for individual
professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use O.R. and analytics tools and methods to
transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org

Robotic Sorting Systems: Performance Estimation and
Operating Policies Analysis
Bipan Zou,a Ren´e De Koster,b Yeming Gong,c Xianhao Xu,d Guwen Shene
aSchool of Business Administration, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan 430073, China; bRotterdam School of Management,
Erasmus University, 3000 DR Rotterdam, Netherlands; cEMLYON Business School, 69134 Ecully Cedex, France; dSchool of Management,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China; eDeppon Express, Shanghai 201702, China
Contact: zbp0307@126.com,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2908-9163 (BZ); rkoster@rsm.nl,
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1740-7822 (RDK);
gong@em-lyon.com,
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9270-5507 (YG); xxhao@hust.edu.cn (XX); 474827034@qq.com (GS)
Received: August 7, 2019
Revised: June 3, 2020; December 6, 2020;
January 20, 2021
Accepted: January 23, 2021
Published Online in Articles in Advance:
August 31, 2021
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1053
Copyright: © 2021 INFORMS
Abstract. Many distribution centers use expensive, conveyor-based sorting systems that
require large buildings to house them. In areas with tight space, robotic sorting systems
offer a new type of solution to sort parcels by destination. Such systems are highly ﬂexible
in throughput capacity and are now gradually being introduced, particularly in express
companies. This paper studies robotic sorting system with two layouts. The ﬁrst layout
has two tiers: robots drive on the top tier and sort parcels by destination on spiral convey-
ors connected to roll containers at the lower tier. The second layout has a single tier with
input and output points located at the perimeter, connected by robots. For each layout, we
consider both the shortest path topology via dual-lane aisles and the detour path topology
via single-lane aisles. We build closed queueing networks for performance estimation, de-
sign an iterative procedure to investigate robot congestion in the two-tier layout, and use
a trafﬁc ﬂow function to estimate robot congestion in the single-tier layout. Random, clos-
est, dedicated, and shortest-queue robot-to-loading-station assignment rules are exam-
ined. We validate analytical models by both simulation and a real case of Deppon Express
and analyze the optimal system size and operating policies for throughput capacity and
operating cost. The results show that the system throughput capacity is signiﬁcantly af-
fected by robot congestion in the single-tier layout with the detour path topology, but it is
only slightly affected in the other systems. A square layout ﬁts the shortest path and a rect-
angular layout ﬁts the detour path. Both the random assignment rule and the shortest-
queue assignment rule are superior for a large number of robots, whereas the dedicated
assignment rule is superior for a small number of robots. We apply these insights at Dep-
pon Express for different allocations in peak and off-peak hours. Our analysis shows that
a robotic sorting system typically has lower overall annual cost than a traditional cross-
belt sorting system when the required throughput capacity is not too large.
Funding: This research is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
[Grants 71801225, 72171233, 71620107002, and 71821001], the Hubei Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China [Grant 2018CFB160], and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law [Grant 2722021BZ026], Basic and Ap-
plied Basic Research Foundation of Guangdong Province [Grant 2019A1515111195].
Supplemental Material: The online appendix is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1053.
Keywords:
automated warehouse • queueing network • performance estimation • simulation • robotic sorting
1. Introduction
Warehouses are increasingly using robotic technologies
to help pick and deliver large volumes of customer or-
ders, with short response times. These new technologies
include vehicle-based solutions, such as autonomous
vehicle storage and retrieval system systems (AVS/RS),
robotic mobile fulﬁlment systems (RMFS), robotic com-
pact storage and retrieval systems (RCSR) and puzzle-
based storage systems. In all such systems, robotic au-
tonomous vehicles transport the loads (see Azadeh, De
Koster, and Roy 2019 for a detailed description). Sorting
is a new application of robotic autonomous vehicles, in
which robotic vehicles sort parcels and transport them
from any origin to any destination point (see the solu-
tions of Tompkins 2020). As examples, STO and Deppon
Express, two of the biggest express delivery companies
in Hangzhou and Shanghai, China, have implemented
such systems on two vertical tiers (Wang 2016, You
2019). The upper tier is a mezzanine with evenly distrib-
uted holes (Figure 1(a)), the drop-off points, each of
which corresponds to a delivery destination. Each hole
is connected through a spiral conveyor with a roll con-
tainer installed at the lower tier that collects the items
per destination (Figure 1(b)). Loading stations located at
1430
TRANSPORTATION SCIENCE
Vol. 55, No. 6, November–December 2021, pp. 1430–1455
ISSN 0041-1655 (print), ISSN 1526-5447 (online)
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/trsc

the system perimeter insert the items that need to be
sorted. Autonomous robots are also used to sort items
on the same tier, that is, a single tier system, including
the Amazon Xanthus and Pegasus fulﬁllment robots
(Ames 2019) and the baggage sorting robots used in Rot-
terdam The Hague Airport (Airport RTH 2018). Such ro-
botic sorting systems (RSSs) have the following advan-
tages compared with traditional conveyor-based high-
speed sorting solutions:
1. The layout is ﬂexible: the system can activate or
deactivate input points based on sorting demands and
change the assignment of destinations to outputs in
control software.
2. The throughput capacity is scalable by adding or
retracting robots and workers from the system.
3. They need much less ﬂoor space and built area.
There are also some disadvantages, such as the fact
that expensive robots and complex control software are
needed to control the many freely moving robots in a
small area, without deadlocks or too much congestion.
At the design stage of an RSS, various factors should
be evaluated, which determine whether the system
meets the required throughput capacity at a minimum
investment. This paper aims to develop models to rap-
idly estimate the throughput capacity of an RSS for a
given layout and path topology with given equipment.
In turn, such models can be used to optimize the sys-
tem layout and evaluate different robot operating poli-
cies, such as the robot-to-loading-station assignment,
or to minimize the equipment needed, to achieve a cer-
tain throughput capacity. Because many robots operate
in a compact area, it is vital to incorporate the impact
of robot congestion on performance. We evaluate the
following layouts and operating policies:
• System layout. Single-tier and two-tier layouts. In
the single-tier layout, both input and output points are
located at the perimeter, connected by autonomous
robots. In the two-tier layout, input points are located
at the perimeter and output points in the middle. Au-
tonomous robots sort parcels on the top tier and release
them into the roll containers at the lower tier.
• Robot-to-loading-station assignment rule. It deter-
mines to which loading station a robot should go when
it ﬁnishes its order. We evaluate (1) a random assign-
ment rule under which a robot will travel back to a ran-
dom loading station, (2) the closest assignment rule un-
der which a robot will travel back to the closest loading
station, (3) the dedicated assignment rule under which
the robot will travel back to its dedicated loading sta-
tion, and (4) the shortest-robot-queue assignment rule
under which a robot will travel back to the loading sta-
tion with the minimum number of waiting robots.
• Robot path topology. We evaluate a shortest path
topology via dual-lane aisles and a detour path topolo-
gy via single-lane unidirectional aisles. In the system
with the shortest path topology, each aisle and cross-
aisle have two lanes with opposite driving directions,
allowing shortest path travel. When each aisle and
cross-aisle has a single unidirectional lane, a robot may
need to take a detour to travel between loading stations
and drops-off points.
We aim to answer the following research questions:
1. How to build accurate and efﬁcient throughput ca-
pacity estimation models for an RSS while taking robot
congestion into account?
2. Which robot-to-loading-station assignment rule
gives the highest throughput capacity?
3. What layout performs the best, with which robot
path topology, in terms of throughput capacity and op-
erating cost? While the shortest path topology might
yield shorter paths, it requires more space than the de-
tour path topology, due to the multiple paths per aisle.
Figure 2 summarizes the different combinations of lay-
outs, robot path topologies, and robot-to-loading-station
Figure 1. (Color online) Robotic Sorting System
Notes. (a) Main view. (b) Sorting robot.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1431

assignment rules studied in this paper. We build closed
queueing networks (CQN) for these conﬁgurations to
estimate the performance of an RSS. To investigate the
effect of robot congestion in the two-tier layout, we cap-
ture the effective velocity of a robot by modeling each
drop-off point as a single server and by approximating
its expected utilization using an iterative algorithm. In
the single-tier layout, we use a trafﬁc ﬂow function to
estimate the effective velocity of a robot. We use the ap-
proximate mean value method to analyze the CQN and
validate the analytical models by both simulation and a
real case of Deppon Express. The results show that our
analytical models can accurately estimate the maxi-
mum throughput capacity of the different RSSs. Then,
we use the performance estimation model to analyze
and optimize the system conﬁguration and operating
policies for throughput capacity and operating cost.
Moreover, we also use a semiopen queueing network
to obtain both the order cycle time and the expected
waiting time of parcels for robots and validate it by
simulation.
The results show that the effective velocity of robots
decreases only slightly because of robot congestion in
the two-tier RSS with shortest path and detour path to-
pologies and in the single-tier RSS with the shortest
path topology but decreases signiﬁcantly in an RSS with
the detour path topology, when the number of robots
increases. A square layout ﬁts the shortest path topolo-
gy better and a rectangular layout ﬁts the detour path
topology better. Furthermore, when the number of ro-
bots exceeds a critical point, assigning a robot to either a
random loading station or the loading station with the
shortest robot queue provides a larger throughput ca-
pacity, otherwise, the closest and dedicated assignment
rules are better. We apply these results to improve the
performance in peak and off-peak hours at the sorting
centre of Deppon Express in Shanghai. Moreover, the
cost analysis shows that the detour path topology needs
lower investment than the shortest path topology when
the required throughput capacity is below a critical
point. We also show that, below a critical required
throughput capacity, an RSS is cheaper than a tradition-
al cross-belt sorter system, due to savings in space and
sorter equipment.
Our contributions are twofold. We develop accurate
closed queueing networks to estimate system perfor-
mance for this new application, taking robot path to-
pology and congestion into consideration. We then
analyze system layouts, robot path topologies, and the
robot-to-loading-station
assignment
rules
both
in
terms of throughput capacity and operating cost, and
indicate which RS conﬁguration is the better choice,
for example. compared with a traditional cross-belt
sorter system.
2. Literature Review
Sorting items or parcels occurs in the order consolida-
tion area or shipping area of warehouses or transship-
ment centers, typically by automated conveyor-based
sorters (Boysen, Briskorn, and Fedtke 2019). Items to
be sorted are supplied to the sorter machine through
manual or automated induction stations, are uniquely
identiﬁed, and then sorted onto different exit lanes (or
chutes), from where items are collected for packing
(item sorting) or shipping (parcel sorting). Depending
on the items or parcels to be handled and the through-
put capacity to be achieved, different sorting technolo-
gies are available, for example, cross-belt, bomb-bay,
Figure 2. Scenarios Investigated in This Paper
System Layout
Two tiers system with input
points at the perimeter and
output points in the middle
Shortest path
Path topology
Detour path
Single tier system with
input and output
points at the perimeter
Shortest path
Single-ring path
•
Random
•
Closest
•
Dedicated
•
Shortest-robot-queue
•
Random
•
Closest
•
Dedicated
•
Random
•
Closest
•
Dedicated
•
Random rule
•
Shortest-robot-queue
•
Shortest-robot-queue
Robot-to-loading-
station assignment
rule
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1432
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

tilt-tray, and sliding-shoe sorters. We here focus on
studies of automated sorting systems that deal with
the tactical level problems of throughput performance
estimation and analysis of operating policies.
Bozer and Sharp (1985) build a simulation model of
a closed-loop sorting system to analyze the throughput
impact of the number of output lanes and the degree of
clustering (the probability of a group of incoming items
being destined to a subset of the lanes). Bozer, Quiroz,
and Sharp (1988) investigate the impact of a wave strat-
egy, that is, batching of orders, on the system through-
put of a closed-loop sorting system. Johnson (1997)
study two classes of sorting strategies in a closed-loop
sorting system: a ﬁxed priority rule that sequences
items to be sorted by a given priority and the next
available rule that sequences items serially, in an accu-
mulation sorting system. They ﬁnd that the next avail-
able strategy shows throughput superiority over the
ﬁxed priority strategy in systems with little output lane
blocking. Johnson and Meller (2002) focus on a split-
case sorting system that is used to sort product cases,
originating from batch picking, into orders with indi-
vidual items. They develop a Bernoulli process to esti-
mate the throughput of the induction process that is as-
sumed to be the system bottleneck. Russell and Meller
(2003) build a descriptive model to make the decision
between manual and automated sortation and to de-
sign an automated sorting system with the lowest total
annual cost that meets the required throughput. Gal-
lien and Weber (2010) develop a queueing model to
obtain control guidelines for a continuous (waveless)
release policy and comprehensively compare the per-
formance of a batch (wave) release policy and that of a
waveless release policy. They ﬁnd that the waveless
policy has superior throughput capacity compared
with the wave-based policy that increases with a di-
minishing number of output lanes.
Some studies on automated sorting systems deal
with operational problems involving the optimization
of the consolidation process, such as the sequence opti-
mization of release bins analyzed by Boysen, Fedtke,
and Weidinger (2018) and the scheduling of shipments
on trays studied by Briskorn, Emde, and Boysen
(2017). Several survey papers have been published,
discussing the role of sorters inside facilities and their
planning and control. We particularly refer to the pa-
pers by De Koster, Le-Duc, and Roodbergen (2007),
Gu, Goetschalckx, and Mcginnis (2010), and Boysen,
Briskorn, and Fedtke (2019).
Although a robotic sorting system shares the same
function and objectives with the sorting systems men-
tioned previously, its operations are different. It has
more similarity with some vehicle-based robotic ware-
housing systems transporting items, such as the robotic
mobile fulﬁlment systems (RMFS) or robotic compact
storage and retrieval systems (RCSRS), autonomous
vehicle-based storage and retrieval systems (AVS/RS),
or automated container terminal vehicle systems (CT).
We review studies on robotic and vehicle-based ware-
housing systems that focus on throughput performance
estimation and operating policies, using queueing
models and simulation. Table 1 gives an overview of
key papers, with systems studied and model features.
An RMFS is a parts-to-pickers storage and order-
picking system that uses robots to transport movable
shelves with inventory. Because of its ability to handle
large assortments of small products and to deal with
strong demand ﬂuctuations, the number of implemen-
tations in e-commerce fulﬁllment centers has grown
rapidly. The system was introduced by Amazon in
2012 (Mountz 2012) and now many competing systems
are on the market with implementations all around the
globe. The pioneering paper by Lamballais, Roy, and
De Koster (2017) builds a semiopen queuing network
for performance estimation and investigates the system
layouts and robot zoning strategies. They ﬁnd that sys-
tem performance is insensitive to the width-to-length
ratio but sensitive to the location of loading stations.
Yuan and Gong (2017) develop an open queuing net-
work for performance estimation, considering both
dedicated robot-to-pick station assignment and sharing
protocols.
Several papers analyze operating policies in an
RMFS, based on analytical performance estimation
models. Lamballais, Roy, and De Koster (2020) opti-
mize the inventory allocation by a cross-class matching
multiclass
semi-open
queueing
network
(SOQN).
They ﬁnd that the system performance can be substan-
tially improved by spreading inventory across multi-
ple pods. Zou et al. (2017) investigate the robot-to-
loading-station assignment rules, considering random,
closest, and heuristic-based rules. They show that as-
signing robots to a proper loading station can signiﬁ-
cantly improve system performance. Because the ve-
hicles are battery powered, it is important to take
charging strategies into account in the design and op-
eration. Zou et al. (2018) examine battery recovery by a
SOQN, considering plug-in charging, inductive charg-
ing, and battery swapping strategies. They ﬁnd that
the inductive charging strategy performs the best, fol-
lowed by battery swapping and plug-in charging, in
terms of retrieval transaction throughput time. Besides
queuing network modeling, simulation is also used to
analyze operating policies in an RMFS. Merschfor-
mann et al. (2019) develop simulation models to study
various decision problems in an RMFS, including the
order-to-station assignment, pod selection, and pod
storage assignment problems. Merschformann (2018)
studies active pod repositioning in an RMFS by con-
ducting a simulation-based experiment. The results
show that active repositioning may boost RMFS
throughput
performance,
whereas
the
cost
of
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1433

repositioning is reasonable if the system faces regular idle
periods. All these studies consider detour robot topology
via unidirectional aisles and ignore robot congestion.
Different from an RMFS, an AVS/RS stores inven-
tory items in a multitier storage rack and uses rack-
rail-guided vehicles to transport the loads. In a tier-to-
tier system, vehicles can transfer between tiers by us-
ing lifts. In a tier-captive conﬁguration, a vehicle off-
loads its load onto a lift and stays at the tier. Many pa-
pers have studied both conﬁgurations, using queuing
networks or simulation. They all use shortest path to-
pology via bidirectional aisles and cross-aisles and ig-
nore congestion. Blocking prevention is sometimes
taken into account as in Roy, Gupta, and De Koster
(2016) and Roy and De Koster (2014). Azadeh, Roy,
and De Koster (2019) explicitly consider vehicle con-
gestion in an autonomous guided vehicle storage and
retrieval system where the vehicles can autonomously
move between tiers, without a lift. Malmborg (2002)
build the ﬁrst analytical conceptualizing models for a
tier-to-tier AVS/RS, considering both single and dual-
command cycles. Fukunari and Malmborg (2008)
develop an approximate cycle time model, consider-
ing the random storage and opportunistic pairing of
storage and retrieval transactions. Heragu et al. (2011)
build an open queuing network and use the manu-
facturing system performance analyzer to estimate the
performance of a tier-captive AVS/RS. Marchet et al.
(2012) build an open queuing network to estimate per-
formance of a tier-captive AVS/RS for product totes,
by additionally considering vehicle and lift accelera-
tion and deceleration. These studies all assume se-
quential movements of vehicles and lift. Zou et al.
(2016) consider parallel movements and build a fork-
join queuing network to evaluate performance. Mov-
ing in parallel outperforms moving sequentially in
terms of system throughput time when the retrieval
transaction arrival rate is low.
Compared with a probabilistic travel model or an
OQN model, a SOQN can more accurately capture
the matching of vehicles and orders. Roy et al. (2012)
develop a multiclass SOQN with class switching for
a single-tier tier-to-tier AVS/RS and design a decom-
position-based solution method. They investigate
Table 1. Literature on Performance Estimation and Operating Policies of Autonomous Vehicle–Based Material Handling
Systems
Reference
Functions
Model
Objective
Topology
Congestion
RMFS: Yuan and Gong
(2017)
Storage,
order-picking
OQN, simulation
Throughput
Detour path
×
Lamballais et al. (2017);
Lamballais et al. (2020);
Zou et al. (2017,2018)
Storage,
order-picking
SOQN, simulation
Throughput
Detour path
×
Merschformann (2018);
Merschformann et al.
(2019)
Storage,
order-picking
Simulation
Throughput
Detour path
×
AVS/RS: Malmborg (2002);
Fukunari and Malmborg
(2008); Heragu et al.
(2011); Marchet et al.
(2012); Zou et al. (2016)
Storage,
order-picking
OQN, simulation
Throughput
Shortest path
×
Roy et al. (2012); Cai et al.
(2014); Ekren et al. (2014);
Tappia et al. (2017, 2019);
Azadeh et al. (2019a)
Storage,
order-picking
SOQN, simulation
Throughput
Shortest path
×
Azadeh et al. (2019b)
Storage,
order-picking
SOQN, simulation
Throughput
Shortest path

Ekren and Heragu (2010);
Ekren et al. (2010);
Kumar et al. (2014);
Ekren et al. (2015)
Storage,
order-picking
Simulation
Throughput
Shortest path
×
RCSRS: Becksch¨afer et al.
(2017)
Storage,
order-picking
Simulation
Throughput
Shortest path
×
Zou et al. (2018)
Storage,
order-picking
SOQN, simulation
Throughput; cost
Shortest path
×
CT: Roy et al. (2016); Roy
and De Koster (2014)
Storage
OQN, simulation
Throughput
Detour path

This paper: RSS
Sorting
CQN, simulation
Throughput; cost
Shortest path;
detour path

Note. CQN, closed queueing network; OQN, open queuing network; SOQN, semiopen queuing network.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1434
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

vehicle-to-load assignment rules and the allocation of
vehicles among zones. The results reinforce the efﬁca-
cy of multiple zoning and show that the random vehi-
cle assignment rule and the preferred assignment rule
have similar performance. Cai, Heragu, and Liu
(2014) model a tier-to-tier AVS/RS with a SOQN and
solve it using the approximate matrix-geometric
method. Ekren et al. (2014) also analyze a SOQN for
an AVS/RS, based on the method proposed by Jia
and Heragu (2009). Tappia et al. (2017) study a multi-
deep AVS/RS and develop a SOQN to evaluate the
system performance of both specialized and generic
shuttles and both continuous and discrete lifts. Tappia
et al. (2019) build a SOQN to investigate an integrated
upstream AVS/RS and a downstream picking system.
The results show that an AVS/RS yields investment
savings and provides a lower total throughput time
compared with a crane-based AS/RS. Except analyti-
cal models, several papers also study the design of an
AVS/RS by simulation, including Ekren and Heragu
(2010), Ekren et al. (2010), Kumar, Roy, and Tiwari
(2014), and Ekren, Sari, and Lerher (2015).
An RCSRS (in particular the Autostore system) also
uses vehicles to transport loads, but with much higher
storage density than an RMFS or AVS/RS. It stores in-
ventory items in bins that are organized as stacks in a
grid. A ﬂeet of robots drive on the roof of the system
on a grid. They dig out a requested bin and transport
it to a designated loading station, located at the perim-
eter of system. Becksch¨afer et al. (2017) develop a dis-
crete event simulation model to examine bin storage
policies. Zou, De Koster, and Xu (2018) build a semi-
open queuing network to estimate performance of an
RCSRS, considering both dedicated (one product per
stack, reducing bin reshufﬂing time) and shared (mul-
tiple products per stack) storage policies. Their results
show that the dedicated storage policy outperforms
the shared storage policy in terms of system through-
put time but that the shared storage policy results in
lower system operating cost, due to smaller system
size. For more research on robotic warehouse systems,
we refer the readers to De Koster (2018).
Our literature review shows that robot congestion is
often ignored in robotic warehousing systems. Speciﬁ-
cally, studies on the RMFS assume detour path topolo-
gy via unidirectional aisles to avoid robot blocking and
additionally ignore congestion. Studies on AVS/RS and
RCSRS assume shortest path topology via bidirectional
aisles and ignore blocking and congestion (with the ex-
ception of Azadeh, Roy, and De Koster 2019). However,
when many robots operate in a conﬁned space, robot
congestion cannot be ignored. In fact, in a recent study
of an automated container terminal, Roy, Gupta, and
De Koster (2016) ﬁnd that the system throughput can
decrease by up to 85% due to vehicle congestion, when
vehicles operate in a loop path topology.
3. System Description and
Operating Policies
Section 3.1 describes the system and states the assump-
tions and notations. Section 3.2 introduces the system
layouts and the robot path topologies. Section 3.3
presents the robot-to-loading-station assignment rules.
3.1. System Description, Assumptions,
and Notations
An RSS is a robotic sorting system that uses robots to
transport items from loading stations to drop-off
points to which speciﬁc destinations have been as-
signed. We consider two layouts for such a system: a
two-tier RSS (Figure 3) and a single-tier RSS (Figure 4).
In a two-tier system, the top tier is a mezzanine where
items are placed on robots at loading stations located
at the perimeter. The robots release the items into the
drop-off points located in the middle of the mezza-
nine. The bottom tier stores roll containers that connect
with the drop-off points to collect released items. In a
single-tier system, input points and output points
(equipped with outgoing conveyors) are located at the
perimeter of the system, and the middle area is for ro-
bots traveling, parking, and charging. This study con-
siders a general layout for an RSS with a size W × L (W
drop-off points in the width direction and L drop-off
points in the length direction) and nls loading stations
(nw
ls loading stations on the western and eastern sides
and nn
ls loading stations on the northern and southern
sides). The loading stations can be generally distribut-
ed at the perimeter by adjusting their coordinates.
Drop-off points are evenly distributed over the space,
separated by aisles and cross-aisles.
The following steps are needed to execute a sorting
job:
1. The robot receives the item to be sorted at loading
station lsi,i  1,2, ⋯,nls. Then, it moves along aisles
(indicated as ai in Figure 3) and cross-aisles (indicated
as caj in Figure 3) to the designated drop-off point (rout-
ing path will be speciﬁed in Section 3.2, depending on
the system layout and robot path topology design). The
robot may be blocked in its movement by other robots
that are releasing items, which will cause congestion.
2. When the robot reaches the target drop-off point
(two-tier RSS) or output point (single-tier RSS), it releases
the item into the roll container or onto the conveyor.
3. The robot goes back to loading station lsj,j  1,2, ⋯,
nls and waits there for a next order. The target loading
station depends on the applied robot-to-loading-station
assignment rule. Speciﬁcally, we consider the random,
closest, dedicated and shortest-robot-queue assignment
rules in this study (see Section 3.3).
We make the following assumptions in this study:
1. All lanes in aisles are unidirectional. A robot can
only move in one direction in an aisle with only a
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1435

single-lane while it can move in either direction in
an aisle with dual-lanes by choosing the correct one
(Figures 3 and 4).
2. In a two-tier RSS with detour path topology, an
eastern and western loading station face a rightward
and leftward cross-aisle, respectively, a southern and
northern loading station face an upward and down-
ward aisle, respectively, allowing the shortest path
travel (Figure 3). A robot may ﬁrst take a detour and
then travel by the path depicted in Figure 3(b), if this
assumption is relaxed.
3. Sorting orders designated for drop-off point dx,y
arrive at the system following a Poisson distribution
with an arrival rate λx,y, which is drop-off point
dependent.
4. A robotic sorting system generally handles items
lighter than ﬁve kilograms (Tompkins 2020), a worker
in a loading station can quickly put a parcel on a robot
with the bar code upward for scanning, and a robot
can release an item into a drop-off point by a short time
tlu (assumed to be constant). The operating time in a
loading station (tls) is assumed to follow a uniform
Figure 4. (Color online) Single-Tier RSS
(a)
(b)
O1
O2
O3
O5
O6
OW
. .
.
O4
O7
. . .
. . .
. .
.
Unloaded Robot
I 1
I 2
I i
Loaded Robot
Output point
Input point
y
x
From drop-oﬀpoint to
loading station
From loading station to
drop-oﬀpoint
Shortest path topology
O1
O2
O3
O5
O6
OW
.
.
.
O4
O7
. . .
. . .
.
.
.
Highway
Parking area,
charging area
I i
I 2
I 1
I
Unloaded Robot
Loaded Robot
Output point
Input point
y
x
From drop-oﬀpoint to
loading station
From loading station to
drop-oﬀpoint
Single-ring path topology
Notes. (a) Shortest path topology. (b) Single-ring path topology.
Figure 3. (Color online) Two-Tier RSS
ls5
a1
a2
a3
ana
ca1
ls3
ls4
ls2
Unloaded Robot
Drop-oﬀpoint
Loaded Robot
ca2
canca
ls1
. . .
Robot
Queue
Conveyor
2waisle
2 waisle
wdp
(1,1)
(W, L)
y
x
From drop-oﬀpoint to
loading station
From loading station to
drop-oﬀpoint
Shortest path topology
(a)
(b)
wdp
ca1
ca2
canca
ls5
a3
a2
a1
ana
ls8
ls7
ls6
ls2
ls3
ls4
. . .
Robot
Queue
ls1
Conveyor
Drop-oﬀpoint
Unloaded Robot
Loaded Robot
waisle
waisle
y
x
(W, L)
(1,1)
From drop-oﬀpoint to
loading station
From loading station to
drop-oﬀpoint
Detour path topology
ls8
ls7
ls6
Notes. (a) Shortest path topology. (b) Detour path topology.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1436
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

distribution U[tls,tls]. Other distributions can also be
examined in the queueing network, by specifying the
ﬁrst two moments of the operating time.
5. We assume that the robot returns to a loading sta-
tion based on some rules (such as random and dedicat-
ed). Such rules are also used in other robotic warehous-
ing systems, such as the RMFS (Lamballais, Roy, and
De Koster 2017, 2020) and the robotic compact storage
and retrieval system (Zou, De Koster, and Xu 2018). We
later relax this and also evaluate a dynamic shortest-
queue allocation rule.
6. Because of the mechanism constraint, a robot can
only release a load to its right side, which means the ro-
bot may need to rotate when the target drop-off point
is on the left. This takes a time tr.
7. To estimate the maximum throughput capacity of
a system with a given number of robots and loading
stations, we assume that the arrival rate of parcels is
sufﬁciently large to keep loading stations busy. Closed
queueing networks are built for performance analysis,
in which the robots represent the circulating resource.
Note that we do not intend to size the receiving area of
the cross-dock. We assume that the receiving area is
large enough, so that the parcels supplied by trucks
can wait on pallets, roll cages or airplane containers
(ULDs) in the receiving area, until they can be brought
to the loading stations (e.g., by conveyor). The through-
put capacity of a given system will then depend on the
number of loading stations and robots, and the control
rules deployed.
We present the main notations used in this paper in
Table 2.
3.2. System Layouts and Robot Path Topologies
We consider both a two-tier (Figure 3) layout and a
single-tier layout (Figure 4) for the RSS. The two-tier
layout can provide large throughput capacity for
many sorting destinations, whereas the single-tier lay-
out may be more suitable for a small size system and
better for maintaining and controlling of robots.
In an RSS, the robot path topology not only affects
the travel distance of the robot between a loading sta-
tion and a drop-off point, but also the congestion of
robots in the system. We consider both a shortest path
topology and a detour path topology for each layout.
In the two-tier RSS, we consider a design with short-
est path topology via dual-lane aisles and cross-aisles
(Figure 3(a)) and a design with detour path topology
via single-lane aisles and cross-aisles (Figure 3(b)). In
the system with the shortest path topology, each aisle
and cross-aisle has two uni-directional lanes that run
in opposite directions. A robot can take the shortest
Table 2. Main Notations
Notation
Description
Notation
Description
W, L
System width and length, by the
number of drop-off points in the
horizontal and vertical direction
waisle, wdp
Width of an aisle/cross-aisle and a
drop-off point (m)
na,nca
Number of aisles and cross-aisles in the
system
ne
ls,nn
ls
Number of loading stations on the east
and north side and bottom of the
system, total number of loading
stations is nls  2(ne
ls + nn
ls)
R
Number of robots
dx,y
The drop-off point with coordinate
(x,y),x  1,2, ⋯,W,y  1,2, ⋯,L
a
Acceleration/deceleration rate of a
robot (m=s2)
vm
Maximum velocity of a robot (m / s)
λx,y
Arrival rate of sorting orders (per
hour) to drop-off point
dx,y,x  1,2, ⋯,W,y  1,2, ⋯,L
pdx,y
Probability that an order goes to drop-
off point dx,y, we have
pdx,y 
λx,y
W
i1
L
j1λi,j
tlu
Time for a robot to drop off an item
into a drop-off point (s)
tt, tr
Time for a robot to take a 90
◦turn and
to rotate 180
◦, we have tr  2tt (s)
tls
Time for a worker to put an item onto
the robot (s), which follows a
uniform distribution U[tls,tls]
pidle
dx,y,pbusy
dx,y
Probability that drop-off point dx,y is
idle and busy, we have
pidle
dx,y + pbusy
dx,y  1
ai
Aisle i (i  1,2, ⋯,na)
caj
Cross-aisle j (j  1,2, ⋯,nca)
Tlsi,dx,y
Movement timeof a robot from loading
station lsi to drop-off point dx,y (s)
Tdx,y,lsi
Movement timeof a robot from drop-
off point dx,y to loading station lsi (s)
Th
lsi,dx,y
Horizontal movement time of a robot
from loading station lsi to drop-off
point dx,y (s)
Tv
lsi,dx,y
Vertical movement time of a robot
from loading station lsi to drop-off
point dx,y (s)
T
caj
ai,ai+1
Travel time from aisle ai to aisle ai+1
through cross-aisle caj (s)
T
aj
cai,cai+1
Travel time from cross-aisle cai to
cross-aisle cai+1 through aisle aj (s)
Trem
dx,y
Remaining service time at drop-off
point dx,y (s)
TC
Maximum throughput capacity of the
RSS (per hour)
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1437

path between a loading station and a drop-off point.
The shortest path from a loading station to a drop-off
point corresponds to the path with shortest Manhattan
distance between these two points and at most one
turn (red line in Figure 3(a)). In the shortest path from
a drop-off point back to a loading station, the robot
ﬁrst moves to a point from where it can then travel by
shortest Manhattan distance with at most one turn to
the loading station (green line in Figure 3(a)). In the
system with detour path topology, each aisle and
cross-aisle has one uni-directional lane. A robot can
take the shortest path from a loading station to a drop-
off point, which has shortest Manhattan distance with
at most one turn (red line in Figure 3(b)). Note that the
robot may need to rotate 180
◦(rotation time tr) to re-
lease the item, depending on the travel direction of the
robot in the aisles or cross-aisles. To move from the
drop-off point back to a loading station, the robot may
need to take a detour, depending on the position of the
loading station and drop-off point (see the green line
for an example). Online Appendix C includes the de-
tour path details. The shortest path topology design
provides more efﬁcient routing than the detour path
topology, but it occupies more ﬂoor space.
In a single-tier RSS, we consider a design with the
shortest path topology (Figure 4(a)) and a design with
a single-ring topology (Figure 4(b)). In the ﬁrst design,
a robot can take a similar shortest path between an in-
put point and an output point as that in the two-tier
layout with shortest path topology (see the red and
green lines as an example). In the second design, the
robot travels between loading stations and output
points on one unidirectional ring and the middle area
is designed for parking and charging of robots.
3.3. Robot-to-Loading-Station Assignment Rules
The robot-to-loading-station assignment rule applied
in the system determines to which loading station a
robot returns after ﬁnishing a sorting order. We con-
sider four robot-to-loading-station assignment rules in
an RSS:
• Random rule: The robots are shared by all loading
stations and they return to a loading station with prob-
ability plsi  1
nls ,i  1,2, ⋯,nls after ﬁnishing a sorting
order.
• Closest rule: The robots are shared by all loading
stations and return to the closest loading station after
ﬁnishing a sorting order. With this assignment rule, the
distance between a drop-off point and any loading sta-
tion is calculated to ﬁnd the closest loading station for
each drop-off point. We deﬁne the set of drop-off
points whose closest loading station is lsi as DPlsi. We
can then obtain the routing probability of a robot re-
turning
to
loading
station
lsi
by
plsi 

dx,y∈DPlsi
λx,y=
W
x1
L
y1λx,y.
• Dedicated rule: The robots are partitioned over the
loading stations. Thereby, a robot will return to one of
its dedicated loading stations randomly after ﬁnishing
an order. In this paper, we assume that all loading sta-
tions have their dedicated robots, and the robots serve
all drop-off points. The north-side loading stations
(lsn
1, ⋯,lsn
nn
ls) have Rn robots, the south-side loading sta-
tions (lss
1, ⋯,lss
ns
ls) have Rs robots, the west-side loading
stations (lsw
1 , ⋯,lsw
nw
ls) have Rw robots, and the east-side
loading stations (lse
1, ⋯,lse
ne
ls) have Re robots, with
Rn + Rs + Rw + Re  R.
• Shortest queue rule: The robots are shared by all
loading stations and they return to a loading station
with a minimum number of waiting robots.
The random assignment rule aims to balance the
working load of loading stations, by assigning robots
to all loading stations with the same probability. The
closest assignment rule aims to reduce the expected
travel distance from drop-off points to loading stations.
The shortest queue rule works based on the work load
of each loading station, ensuring the availability of ro-
bots at loading stations. Because of the intractability of
the robot queue status in the closed queueing network,
we investigate this rule by simulation.
To study the previous layouts and operating poli-
cies, the next section builds closed queueing networks
to estimate the maximum system throughput capacity.
4. Analytical Models for an RSS
Based on our assumption that the loading stations
will not overﬂow; that is, loads that have arrived by
trucks on pallets, roll cages, or ULDs wait in the re-
ceiving area, until they can be brought to the load sta-
tion, we focus on the most important issue in the de-
sign of the sorter and the examination of the effect of
the operating policies: its maximum capacity at a giv-
en cost level. The CQN is the preferred model for this
task because it releases a load to the system every
time a load leaves the system. We build a single-class
closed queueing network (Figure 5) for the two-tier
RSS that uses the random and closest assignment rule
and a multiclass closed queueing network (Figure 6)
for the two-tier RSS that uses the dedicated assign-
ment rule. We build a single-class closed queueing
network for the single-tier RSS with the shortest path
topology (Figure 7) and the single-tier RSS with the
single-ring path (Figure 8), respectively. Our models
can capture the robot operating policies by speciﬁc
travel processes between loading stations and drop-
off points (service nodes µls,d and µd,ls), and by specif-
ic visit ratios of robots to drop-off points (pdx,y) and
loading stations (plsi). It is also possible to obtain the
order cycle time and the parcel waiting time, but it re-
quires the extension of our CQN model into a semi-
open queuing network model (see Roy 2016 and Van
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1438
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

der Gaast et al. 2020 on how to do this). We validate
the performance of the SOQN in Online Appendix E
based on the additional measures.
4.1. CQN for Two-Tier RSS with Random and
Closest Robot-to-Loading-Station
Assignment Rules
In the two-tier RSS, an order enters the system after it ob-
tains access to a loading station, which corresponds to
the waiting process at service node µlsi,i  1,2, ⋯,nls.
Under the random and closest robot-to-loading-station
assignment rules, the CQN contains one order class that
may go to any loading station. The worker or an auto-
mated induct puts the item on a robot (service node µlsi)
and then the robot moves to the designated drop-off
point (service node µls,d). Because no waiting is incurred,
we model the movement process as an inﬁnite server
(IS). The robot reaches the drop-off point dx,y with prob-
ability pdx,y and then releases the item at service node
µdx,y,x  1,2, ⋯,W;y  1,2, ⋯,L. Because each drop-
off point can be accessed by one robot at a time, we mod-
el µdx,y as a single server. Finally, the robot returns to
loading station lsi with probability plsi,i  1,2, ⋯,nls,
corresponding to the service node µd,lsi. Under both ran-
dom and closest robot-to-loading-station assignment
rules, all robots are shared by all loading stations, there-
by, a robot may serve any loading station.
The robot path topology in the two-tier RSS (shortest
path topology and detour path topology) will affect the
travel time of a robot between drop-off points and load-
ing stations (service nodes µls,d and µd,lsi) and the release
time of a robot at a drop-off point (µdx,y). We estimate
the travel time of a robot between any two neighboring
drop-off points in Online Appendix A, including accel-
eration and deceleration of the robot and the expected
waiting at each drop-off point. To capture the effect of
path topology on release time (whether there is rota-
tion), we specify the cases that a robot rotates before re-
leasing an item into a drop-off point (see the service
time estimation for detour path topology). The robot-to-
loading-station assignment rule affects the visit ratios of
robots to loading stations (plsi,i  1,2, ⋯,nls).
Next, we calculate the ﬁrst two moments of the ser-
vice time of the nodes in the CQN based on the robot
path topology.
4.1.1. Service Time Estimation for the RSS with Short-
est Path Topology. In the service node µlsi, the ﬁrst
two moments of the service time are given by
µ−1
lsi  tls,cv2
lsi  0
(1)
Because all loading stations have the same service
time tls, which is constant, we have cv2
lsi  0.
After the robot receives the item to be sorted, it travels
on the platform to the designated drop-off point, follow-
ing the direction of aisles and cross-aisles. In the two-tier
RSS with the shortest path topology, the robot can al-
ways ﬁnd the shortest path to the destination by choos-
ing the correct lane.
To travel from either a west side or east side loading
station lsi to a drop-off point dx,y, the robot ﬁrst moves
horizontally along cross-aisle caylsi and then vertically
along aisle ax. The movement time from loading sta-
tion lsi to the drop-off point dx,y can be calculated by
Equation (2):
Tlsi,dx,y  Th
lsi,dx,y + Tv
lsi,dx,y


x−1
j1
T
caylsi
aj,aj+1 +

max{y,ylsi}−1
jmin{y,ylsi}
Tax
caj,caj+1 + g · tt,
(2)
where
x−1
j1 T
caylsi
aj,aj+1 is the movement time from aisle
a1
to
aisle
ax
along
the
cross-aisle
caylsi ,
and
Figure 5. Closed Queueing Network for the Two-Tier RSS That Uses Random and Closest Robot-to-Loading-Station Assign-
ment Rules
µls1
µls2
µlsnls
......
µd1,1
µd1,2
µdW,L
......
pd1,1
pd1,2
pd W,L
From loading station
to drop-oﬀpoint
Release the item
µd,ls1
µd,ls2
µd,lsnls
pw1
pw2
pwnw
......
From drop-oﬀpoint
to loading station
Loading station
R
µls,d
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1439

max{y,ylsi}−1
jmin{y,ylsi} Tax
caj,caj+1 is the movement time in cross-
aisle caylsi to the drop-off point dx,y (calculated in On-
line Appendix A). The binary variable g determines
whether the robot needs to change its direction to
drop off the item. If x ≠xlsi and y ≠ylsi, a 90
◦turn is re-
quired and we have g  1, otherwise, g  0. The travel
time between any two neighboring aisles (T
caylsi
aj,aj+1) or
cross-aisles (Tax
caj,caj+1) depends on the neighboring
Figure 6. (Color online) Closed Queueing Network for Performance Estimation of a Two-Tier RSS with Dedicated Robots
µls n
1
...
µls n
n n
ls
µls n,d
µls s
1
...
µls s
n s
ls
µls s,d
µlsw
1
...
µls w
n w
ls
µls w,d
µls e
1
...
µls e
n e
ls
µls e,d
...
...
...
...
µd,ls n
1
µd,lsn
n n
ls
µd,lss
1
µd,lss
n s
ls
µd,lsw
n w
ls
µd,ls e
n e
ls
µd,ls e
1
µd,ls w
1
Loading station
From drop-oﬀpoint
to loading station
µd
Release
the item
pls n
1
pls n
n n
ls
pls s
1
pls s
n s
ls
pls w
1
pls w
n w
ls
pls e
1
pls e
n e
ls
µd1,1
µd1,2
...
µdW,L
pd1,1
pd 1,2
pdW,L
µd
From loading station
to drop-oﬀpoint
Rls e
Rls w
Rls n
Rls s
Figure 7. Closed Queueing Network for the Single-Tier RSS with Shortest Path Topology
R
µI,O
From input points
to output points
µO,I
From output points
to input points
µO1
µO2
µOnO
......
pO1
pO2
pOnO
µI1
µI 2
µI nI
......
pI1
pI2
pIn I
Input points
Output points
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1440
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

drop-off points (Figure 1 in Online Appendix A). Spe-
ciﬁcally, the robot will travel freely (in constant veloci-
ty vm) if both drop-off points are idle. It will ﬁrst travel
by vm and then decelerate to zero if the ﬁrst drop-off
point is idle and the second one is busy. It will acceler-
ate to vm and then travel by vm if the ﬁrst drop-off
point is busy and the second one is idle and will accel-
erate and then decelerate if both drop-off points are
busy. We present the analysis of these cases and their
corresponding travel time in Online Appendix A.
To travel from a bottom loading station lsi to a
drop-off point dx,y, the robot ﬁrst moves in aisle axlsi to
cross-aisle cay and then moves in cross-aisle cay to the
drop-off point. The movement time can be calculated
by Equation (3):
Tlsi,dx,y  Tv
lsi,dx,y + Th
lsi,dx,y


y−1
j1
T
axlsi
caj,caj+1 +

max{x,xlsi}−1
jmin{x, xlsi}
T
cay
aj,aj+1 + g · tt,
(3)
Movement time from a top loading station lsi to a
drop-off point dx,y can be calculated in the same way
as in Equation (3). The travel time between two neigh-
boring drop-off points depends on the probability
pbusy
dx,y that drop-off point dx,y is occupied by another ve-
hicle. We design an iterative procedure (Algorithm 1
in Online Appendix A) to approximate pbusy
dx,y . Intuitive-
ly, more robots in the system will lead to larger pbusy
dx,y
and result in lower effective robot velocity.
The probability that a robot returns to loading sta-
tion lsi depends on the robot-to-loading-station assign-
ment rule applied (see Section 3.3). The ﬁrst two mo-
ments of the robot travel time from loading station lsi
to a drop-off point (mean value µ−1
ls,d and squared coef-
ﬁcient of variation cv2
ls,d) can now be calculated by
Equation (4);
µ−1
ls,d 

nls
i1

W
x1

L
y1
plsi · pdx,y · Tlsi,dx,y, cv2
ls,d

nls
i1
W
x1
L
y1plsi · pdx,y · T2
lsi,dx,y
µ−2
ls,d
−1:
(4)
Calculating the robot movement time from a drop-off
point to loading station lsi is similar to that from load-
ing station lsi to a drop-off point. Therefore, we can
obtain the ﬁrst two moments of the service time of the
node µd,lsi by Equation (5):
µ−1
lsi,d 

W
x1

L
y1
·pdx,y · Tlsi,dx,y, cv2
lsi,d

W
x1
L
y1pdx,y · T2
lsi,dx,y
µ−2
lsi,d
−1:
(5)
At
each
drop-off
service
node
µdx,y,
we
have
µdx,y  1
tlu ,cv2
dx,y  0.
4.1.2. Service Time Estimation for the RSS with Detour
Path Topology. In the two-tier RSS with the detour
path topology, a robot can travel from a loading sta-
tion to a drop-off point by the shortest path, whereas
it may ﬁrst take a detour ﬁrst to travel from a drop-off
point back to a loading station.
To travel from the loading station lsi to the drop-off
point dx,y, the robot ﬁrst moves into the aisle or the
cross-aisle facing the loading station, and then turns into
the aisle or cross-aisle that neighbors the drop-off point
(see the blue lines in Figure 3(b)). Thereby the movement
time Tlsi,dx,y can be calculated in the way as in Equations (2)
and (3) (see Online Appendix A for the travel time between
any two neighboring drop-off points).
To release an item into the drop-off point, the robot
may ﬁrst rotate 180
◦with probability of 0.5 that is in-
cluded in each drop-off service node µdx,y. Depending
on the position of the drop-off point and the the load-
ing station position, we have the following cases for
the service time at the service node µdx,y
Tlu
lsi,dx,y 
tlu,
x is odd and y is odd,
tlu + tr,
x is even and y is even,
tlu + tt,
otherwise,
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(6)
where rotation is not required for the ﬁrst case but al-
ways required for the second case. For the third case,
the drop-off point has two sides at which the item can
be directly released and two sides which require rota-
tion. Thereby, the expected rotation time is tr
2  tt.
Then, the ﬁrst two moments of the service time at
service node µdx,y can be calculated by Equation (7):
µ−1
dx,y 

nls
i1
plsi · Tlu
lsi,dx,y, cv2
dx,y 
nls
i1plsi · (Tlu
lsi,dx,y)2
µ−2
dx,y
−1:
(7)
Figure 8. Closed Queueing Network for Performance Estimation of a Single-Tier RSS with Single-Ring Topology Path
µI 1
R
µO1
I 1
µO1
µOnO
µI nI
µ
O n O
I n I
. . . . . .
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1441

To travel from the drop-off point dx,y to loading sta-
tion lsi, the robot may ﬁrst take a detour and then take
the shortest path to the loading station, depending on
the location of the loading station, the drop-off point
location, and the robot position. Online Appendix C
gives the details of detour path calculation.
With the ﬁrst two moments of the service time at all
service nodes and the visiting probabilities in the
CQN, we can estimate the system performance using
the AMVA method (Buitenhek, van Houtum, and
Zijm 2000).
4.2. CQN for the Two-Tier RSS with Dedicated
Robot-to-Loading-Station Assignment
For the two-tier RSS that uses the dedicated robot-to-
loading-station assignment rule, we assume that load-
ing stations at the same side of the system share robots,
that is, loading stations located at the north side of the
system share Rn robots, those located at the south side
of the system share Rs robots, those located at the west
side of the system share Rw robots, and those located at
the east side of the system share Re robots. This leads to
four classes of customers in the CQN. First, the worker
or an automated induct puts the item on a robot (ser-
vice nodes µlsn,µlss,µlsw,µlse for north side, south side,
west side, and east side loading stations). Then, the ro-
bot transports the item from the loading station to the
designated drop-off point (service nodes µlsn,d,µlss,d,
µlsw,d,µlse,d correspond to the robot movement from
north side, south side, west side, and east side loading
stations to drop-off points, respectively). Because no
waiting is required, we model this process as an IS.
The robot will reach the drop-off point dx,y with proba-
bility pdx,y and releases the item at service node
µdx,y,x  1,2, ⋯,W;y  1,2, ⋯,L. Under the dedicated
robot-to-loading-station assignment rule, each robot
can only move randomly to one of its dedicated load-
ing stations after it leaves service node µdx,y.
The service time of service nodes µls,µls,d,µd and
µd,ls can be obtained in the same way as in Section 4.1.
Because we assume random assignment among load-
ing stations located at the same side of the system, the
conditional visiting probability of a north-side loading
station is plsn
i  1
nn
ls ,i  1,2, ⋯,nn
ls, the conditional visit-
ing probability of a south loading station is plss
i  1
ns
ls ,
i  1,2, ⋯,ns
ls, the conditional visiting probability of a
west loading station is plsw
i  1
nw
ls ,i  1,2, ⋯,nw
ls, the con-
ditional visiting probability of an east loading station
is plse
i  1
ne
ls ,i  1,2, ⋯,ne
ls. The service nodes µd,ls share
the same visiting probabilities with service nodes µls,d.
Then, we can use the multiclass AMVA method (Bui-
tenhek, van Houtum, and Zijm 2000) to estimate the
system performance under the dedicated robot-to-
loading-station assignment rule.
4.3. CQN for the Single-Tier RSS with Shortest
Path Topology
For the single-tier RSS, we build a CQN for the design
with shortest path topology (Figure 7). In the system
with shortest path topology, the robot travels between
an input point and an output point by the shortest
path (service nodes µI,O and µO,I). Because no waiting
is required for the movement, we model service nodes
µI,O and µO,I as an inﬁnite servers. Each input point
and output point is modelled as a single server (service
nodes µI and µO). The number of input points is nI 
nls and the number of output points is nO  2(W + L).
The service rate of an input point is µIi  µlsi and the
service rate of an output point is µOi  µdx,y  1
tlu. No ro-
tation is required to release an item.
Next, we calculate the service time expression of the
service nodes in the CQN and give the solution ap-
proach. In the single-tier RSS, we ﬁrst specify the coordi-
nates of all input and output points. Then, we calculate
the ﬁrst two moments of movement time between input
and output points. Similar to the loading stations in the
two-tier RSS, we index the input/output points from the
top left in the clockwise direction. As we mentioned in
Section 3, the number of drop-off points between any
two neighboring loading stations is the same, that is,
both W
nn
ls and
L
nw
ls are integer. Then, we can calculate the
coordinates of input points by the Equations (8) and (9).
xIi 
i· W
nn
ls
+ 1


,
i  1,2,⋯,nn
ls,
W + nn
ls,
i  nn
ls+1,⋯,nn
ls+nw
ls,
(2nn
ls+nw
ls −i+1)· W
nn
ls
+1


, i  nn
ls+nw
ls +1,⋯,2nn
ls+nw
ls,
0,
i  2nn
ls +nw
ls + 1,⋯,nls:
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(8)
yIi 
L+nw
ls,
i1,2,⋯,nn
ls,
nw
2 −i+1


· L
nw
ls
+1


, inn
ls +1,⋯,nn
ls +nw
ls,
0,
i  nn
ls +nw
ls +1,⋯,2nn
ls +nw
ls,
(nls−i+1)· L
nw
ls
+1


,
i2nn
ls +nw
ls +1,⋯,nls:
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(9)
The coordinates of output points can be calculated by
the Equations (10) and (11):
xOi 
i+
 i·nn
ls
W

,
i  1,2,⋯,W,
W+nn
ls,
i  W+1,⋯,W+L,
(2W+L−i+1)
+

(2W+L−i+1))·nn
ls
W

, i  W+L+1,⋯,2W+L,
0,
i  2W+L+1,⋯,2(W+L):
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(10)
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1442
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

yOi 
L+nw
ls,
i  1,2,⋯,W,
(W+L−i+1)
+

(W+L−i+1))·nw
ls
L

, i  W+1,⋯,W+L,
0,
i  W+L+1,⋯,2W+L,
(i−2W−L)
+

(i−2W−L))·nw
ls
L

,
i  2W +L+1,⋯,2(W+L):
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
(11)
In the single-tier RSS with the shortest path topology,
the travel time between an input point (Ii) and an out-
put point (Oj) consists of two parts: width direction
distance Dw
Ii,Oj  |xIi −xOj| · (wdp + waisle) and length di-
rection distance Dl
Ii,Oj  |yIi −yOj| · (wdp + waisle). In cal-
culating the travel time, we take the acceleration and
deceleration of robots into account. Online Appendix
B explains the relationship between the travel time
and the travel distance. We then obtain the width di-
rection travel time Tw
Ii,Oj and the length direction travel
time Tl
Ii,Oj by Equation (2) in Online Appendix B. The
travel time between Ii and Oj is as Equation (12):
TIi,Oj  Tw
Ii,Oj + Tl
Ii,Oj + g · tt,
(12)
where g determines whether the robot needs to
change direction. We have g  1 for xIi ≠xOi and
yIi ≠yOi, otherwise, g  0.
Let pIi be the probability that the order enters the
system through input point Ii and pOj be the probabili-
ty that the order leaves the system through output
point Oj. pIi corresponds to plsi and pOj corresponds to
pdx,y. Then, we can get the ﬁrst two moments of the
travel time between input points and output points by
Equation (13).
µ−1
I,O 

nI
i1

nO
j1
pIi · pOj · TIi,Oj, cv2
I,O

nI
i1
nO
j1pIi · pOj · T2
Ii,Oj
µ−2
I,O
−1:
(13)
The service node µO,I has the same ﬁrst two moments
of µI,O.
With the ﬁrst two moments of service time at all ser-
vice nodes, we can use the AMVA method (Buiten-
hek, van Houtum, and Zijm 2000) to estimate the per-
formance of the single-tier RSS with the shortest
topology path.
4.4. CQN for the Single-Tier RSS with a Single-
Ring Path Topology
For the single-tier RSS with a single-ring path topolo-
gy, we build a CQN to estimate the system perfor-
mance and examine the operating policies (Figure 8).
In such a layout, the robot’s effective velocity may be
signiﬁcantly affected by robot congestion (Roy, Gupta,
and De Koster 2016). We estimate the effective velocity
of robots on the single ring by a travel ﬂow function
(Roy, Gupta, and De Koster 2016):
EV(R)  EVf · e−k(R)
k0 ,
(14)
where EVf is the free traveling velocity of robot, k(R) 
R−1
Lt is the travel density in the travel path with R ro-
bots, Lt is the length of the travel path shared by all ro-
bots, and k0 is the travel density at maximum ﬂow. We
will estimate k0 in a simulation model (see Section 5.2)
by increasing the number of robots used, until the ef-
fective velocity of robots is close to zero. For example,
if the maximum number of robots that can be used
is 250 and Lt  300m, then, k0  250
300 robots=m  0:83
robots=m.
In the CQN of the single-tier RSS with the single
ring topology path, each input and output point is
modelled as a single server (µIi and µOi) and the
movement between two neighboring points (either in-
put or output points) is modelled as an inﬁnite server
(µOi
Ii ). Both µIi and µOi are the same as in Section 4.3.
The travel time between any two neighboring input
and output point TIi,Oj depends on the effective veloci-
ty of robots in the ring. Speciﬁcally, we have
TIi,Oj 
wdp +waisle
EVR
. From this, we calculate the ﬁrst two
moments of the service node µOi
Ii . We then use the
AMVA method (Buitenhek, van Houtum, and Zijm
2000) to estimate the performance of the single-tier
RSS with a single ring path.
5. Analytical Model Validation
In this section, we ﬁrst investigate the degree of robot
congestion and blocking by simulation and examine
how they affect the system throughput. Then, we vali-
date our analytical models by both simulation and a real
case of Deppon Express. We build simulation models
for the robotic sorting system using Flexsim (Education
version 2017). For the two-tier RSS, we consider two sys-
tem scenarios: W × L  40 × 25 with nw
ls  3,nn
ls  9 and
W × L  30 × 30 with nw
ls  6,nn
ls  6. For the single-tier
RSS, we also consider two system scenarios: W × L 
80 × 48 with nw
ls  3,nn
ls  9 and W × L  56 × 56 with
nw
ls  6,nn
ls  6. For each system scenario, the number of
robots takes three values: R  80, 100, 120 and both ran-
dom robot-to-loading-station assignment rule and clos-
est robot-to-loading-station assignment rule are exam-
ined. Under the dedicated assignment rule, we apply
the closest robot-to-loading-station assignment rule in
each dedicated zone. Thereby, we only consider random
and closest assignment rules in simulation. In the single-
tier RSS with a single-ring path topology, the random
and closest assignment rules work similarly. Therefore,
we only consider the closest assignment rule for the path
topology. This leads to 42 system scenarios in total. The
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1443

arrival of sorting orders for each drop-off point is gener-
ated following a uniform distribution, and the mean
arrival rates are sufﬁciently large to make all loading sta-
tions and robots busy. The simulation models are de-
scribed in detail in Online Appendix D and the other
system parameters are presented in Table 3.
5.1. Congestion and Blocking Investigation
In this section, we ﬁrst check the allocation frequency
of a traveling point (a control point in the simulation)
to zero, one, and two robots to investigate the proba-
bility of robot blocking in the two-tier RSS with the
shortest and detour path topologies and the single-tier
RSS with the shortest path topology. Then, we mea-
sure the robot congestion by the robot’s effective ve-
locity in the simulation models. We use this to esti-
mate the key parameter k0 in the trafﬁc ﬂow function
in the single-tier RSS with a single-ring path topology.
In a two-tier RSS, each drop-off point has four con-
trol points at four sides. The robot loads/unloads
items at a control point. To collect the blocking fre-
quency and avoid circular waiting of robots that may
cause blocking, we set the allocation capacity of all
control points to two in the simulation model, that is,
two robots can claim a drop-off point at the same
time. Although this setting prevents the blocking of
robots to a large degree, it helps to capture the block-
ing frequency. Once a control point is allocated by
two robots at the same time, robots may be blocked.
For the single-tier RSS with a single-ring path topol-
ogy, we approximate robot congestion by a trafﬁc ﬂow
function. The random robot-to-loading-station assign-
ment rule and the random distribution of demands
among drop-off points are used. We consider the two-
tier RSSs (shortest path topology and detour path to-
pology) with R  120 robots and the single-tier RSS
with shortest path topology and R  120 robots. For
each system scenario, we ﬁrst collect the allocation fre-
quency of eight selected control points (six in the mid-
dle and two at perimeters), and then collect the alloca-
tion frequency of eight most congested control points.
The simulation model runs 100 hours with a warmup
period of 12 hours. We collect the number of times
these control points are allocated to zero, one or two
robots and present the frequency in Figures 9 and 10.
The results show that the frequency at which these
selected drop-off points are allocated by two robots is
less than 6%, and the mean value of this frequency is
2.83%. The frequency at which the eight most con-
gested control points are allocated to two robots is
less than 10%, and the mean value of this frequency is
8.37%. Therefore, although the robot blocking in the
most congested area is signiﬁcant, robot blocking in
the entire system occurs infrequently. In addition,
blocking duration is very short, as dropping off an
item take only tlu seconds. Therefore, simulating the
system without blocking is acceptable.
Next, we examine the robot’s effective velocity (de-
noted by EVR(m=s)) in the system. For both single-tier
and two-tier RSSs, we vary the number of robots R
from 80 to 200 with a stepsize of 20. We collect the
time percentage of empty traveling and loaded travel-
ing of robots and the total travel distance of a robot.
We obtain the effective velocity of robots by dividing
the total travel distance by the travel time. The results
are presented in Figure 11. The results suggest that
EVR decreases slightly with the number of robots R in
the two-tier RSS with either the shortest or detour
path topology and the single-tier RSS with the shortest
path topology, while it decreases signiﬁcantly with
the number of robots R in the single-tier RSS with the
single-ring path topology. This again suggests that we
can neglect the effect of robot blocking, except for the
single-tier layout with a single-ring path topology.
We use the method of capturing the expected occu-
pancy of drop-off points to approximate robot conges-
tion in the two-tier RSS (see Online Appendices B and
C), and adopt the trafﬁc ﬂow function to estimate robot
congestion in the single-tier RSS (see Equation (14)).
We ignore the level-k, k ≥2 blocking in our analytical
model, that is, a robot that is already blocked also
causes blocking, since we rarely ﬁnd these situations in
simulation.
5.2. Analytical Model Validation by Simulation
We also use the 42 system scenarios speciﬁed in the
last section to validate the accuracy and effectiveness
of our analytical models. The simulation model produ-
ces the topology path of robots, following the logic of
the AGVNetwork Navigator (see Online Appendix D).
It directs robots dynamically, based on the AGV path
properties and the current status of all robots. To avoid
robots congestion and deadlock, a robot may take
more turns than the static topology path proposed in
our analytical models. This will not only increase the
turning time but also decrease the effective velocity of
the robot (because of acceleration/deceleration).
For each scenario, we ran 30 replications with a
warm-up period of 12 hours and a run time of 100
hours per replication, leading to 95% conﬁdence inter-
vals where the half-width is within 2% of the average.
We collect four performance measures, including the
total throughput capacity TC (per hour), the travel
Table 3. System Parameters Used in Simulation
wdp
(m)
waisle
(m)
wca
(m)
vm
(m/s)
a
(m/s2)
tlu
(s)
tt
(s)
tls
(s)
0.6
0.6
0.6
2
1
2
1
[3,8]
Note. The parameters are obtained from the robotic sorting system of
Deppon Express, an express company in Shanghai, China.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1444
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

distance of robots (m), the time percentage of empty
robot traveling, and the time percentage of loaded ro-
bot traveling. The accuracy of the analytical models is
measured by the absolute relative errors of analytical
results to simulation results, denoted by δTC(%).
δTC  |TCA −TCS|
TCS
× 100%,
(15)
where TCA and TCS are the analytical throughput ca-
pacity and the average simulation throughput capaci-
ty, respectively.
Figure 12 presents the distributions of relative errors
between analytical and simulation results. Tables 4
and 5 presents the detailed results of δTC. The results
show that the relative errors between analytical results
and simulation results are acceptable, the maximum
relative error is about 13.2% and the average relative
error is 4.6%. We can also extend our CQN into an
SOQN to validate other performance measures, using
the method described by Roy (2016) or Van der Gaast
et al. (2020). Speciﬁcally, we validate the SOQN model
for order cycle time and expected waiting time of or-
ders for robots in Online Appendix D.
5.3. Analytical and Simulation Model Validation
by a Real Case
In this section, we investigate the real case of Deppon
Express, in Shanghai, China, to validate both our ana-
lytical model and a simulation model. The layout of
the real system is depicted in Figure 6(a) in Online Ap-
pendix F. The system uses six loading stations and 170
robots to serve the orders of 108 destinations (allocated
to W × L  18 × 6 drop-off points). Each aisle and
cross-aisle has at least two lanes that ensures the robot
can travel by the shortest path between loading sta-
tions and drop-off points. The system allocates the
largest demands to the drop-off points that are far
Figure 9. (Color online) Allocation Frequency of Eight Randomly Selected Control Points
Two-tier RSS with shortest path
Two-tier RSS with detour path
Single-tier RSS with shortest path
(a)
(b)
(c)
Notes. (a) Two-tier RSS with shortest path. (b) Two-tier RSS with detour path. (c) Single-tier RSS with shortest path.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1445

from loading stations to prevent robot congestion. It
also assigns a robot that ﬁnishes an order back to a fast
loading station. We approximate this robot-to-loading-
station assignment rule by setting plsi  µlsi=
nls
i1 µlsi in
both the analytical and simulation models. We use the
demands of drop-off points during peak hours in both
the analytical and simulation models. The simulation
model is similar to that of the previous section and also
implemented in Flexsim. The simulation runs for 100
hours with a warm up period of 12 hours. Table 6
presents the validation results, where TCD, TCA and
TCS represent the throughput capacity of the Deppon
system, the analytical model and the simulation mod-
el, respectively. δA
D  100% · TCD−TCA
TCD
is the relative error
between the throughput capacity of the real system
and that of the analytical model, δS
D  100% · TCD−TCS
TCD
is
the relative error between the throughput capacity of
the real system and that of the simulation model. Re-
sults
show
that
the
simulation
model
and
the
analytical model can provide an accurate performance
estimation of an RSS.
6. Numerical Experiments
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to
optimize system size, investigate operating policies,
and minimize system cost.
6.1. Optimal System Size of an RSS
In an RSS with Ndp drop-off points and nls loading sta-
tions, the system size W, L may affect throughput ca-
pacity. We conduct numerical experiments for both
the single-tier and two-tier RSS to optimize system
size, in terms of system throughput capacity. We con-
sider a series of scenarios by varying the number of
drop-off points Ndp, the number of loading stations
nls, the number of robots R, and the velocity of robot
vm,a. We present the details in Table 7. We allocate
Figure 10. (Color online) Allocation Frequency of Eight Most Congested Control Points
Two-tier RSS with shortest path
Two-tier RSS with detour path
(a)
(b)
Single-tier RSS with shortest path
(c)
Notes. (a) Two-tier RSS with shortest path. (b) Two-tier RSS with detour path. (c) Single-tier RSS with shortest path.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1446
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

the loading stations along the perimeter of the system,
based on nn
ls  ⌊nls·W
2L ⌋,nw
ls  nls
2 −nn
ls. In total, we have 240
system scenarios to investigate the optimal system
size. For each system scenario, we consider both sin-
gle-tier (shortest path topology and single-ring path
topology) and two-tier (shortest path topology and
detour path topology) RSSs, coupled with the ran-
dom, closest and dedicated robot-to-loading-station
assignment rules. To explore the optimal system size,
we vary the system width W from 0:15 · Ndp to 0:45 ·
Ndp with a stepsize of one for each system scenario.
We present the statistical results of optimal system
size in Table 8. We have the following observations
based on the results:
1. For the single-tier RSS and the two-tier RSS with
the shortest path topology, a square layout (r∗≈1) may
maximize system throughput capacity. For the two-tier
RSS with the detour path topology, the optimal length-
to-width ratio is L∗
W∗≈1:25. The results are stable under
the conﬁdence level α  0:05.
2. Although we can ﬁnd an optimal width-to-length
r∗, the maximum system throughput capacity TC de-
creases only slightly if we take a width-to-length ratio
that is different but still close to r∗. This means that the
designer of an RSS can take a width-to-length ratio of
around one, and it will not go wrong too much.
3. The optimal system layout is insensitive to the
number of robots R and the number of loading stations
nls, but can be signiﬁcantly affected by the allocation of
loading stations (nn
ls and nw
ls) and the robot-to-loading-
station assignment rule. We compare the performance
of robot-to-loading-station assignment rules in more
detail in next section.
6.2. Operating Policies in an RSS
One of the important decisions that needed to be tak-
en at Deppon Express was the assignment of robots to
loading stations. In peak hours, about 150 robots are
deployed (maximum 170 are available), whereas at
off-peak hours, only 80 robots are used. Therefore, in
Figure 11. (Color online) Relationship Between the Effective Velocity of Robots and the Number of Robots Used
Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology
Two-tier RSS with detour path topology
Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology
Single-tier RSS with single-ring path topology
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Notes. (a) Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology. (b) Two-tier RSS with detour path topology. (c) Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology.
(d) Single-tier RSS with single-ring path topology.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1447

this section, we investigate the operating policies ex-
amined in this paper by numerical experiments, in-
cluding the robot-to-loading-station assignment rule
and the path topologies.
We ﬁrst compare the performance of the random (Ra),
dedicated (De), closest (Cl), and shortest-robot-queue
(Sq) assignment rules in both two-tier and single-tier
RSSs. Under the dedicated assignment rule, we assign a
robot to the closest loading station in each dedicated
zone (see Section 4.2 for the determination of dedicated
zones). The shortest-robot-queue assignment rule can-
not be evaluated by a CQN model; instead, we use
Figure 12. (Color online) Distribution of Relative Errors Between Analytical and Simulation Results
Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Two-tier RSS with detour path topology
Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology
Single-tier RSS with single-ring path topology
Notes. (a) Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology. (b) Two-tier RSS with detour path topology. (c) Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology.
(d) Single-tier RSS with single-ring path topology.
Table 4. Simulation Validation Results of Two-Tier RSS
Topology path
Shortest path topology
Detour path topology
W × L
40 × 25
30 × 30
40 × 25
30 × 30
Assignment rule
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
Random
R  80
1,903.9
2,041.7
6.8
2,023.6
1,900.4
6.5
2,510.5
2,712.8
7.5
2,672.7
2,672.6
0.0
R  100
2,385.9
2,445.0
2.4
2,535.8
2,632.3
3.7
3,145.0
3,296.9
4.6
3,347.9
3,390.6
1.3
R  120
2,867.8
2,779.8
3.2
3,048.1
3,098.8
1.6
3,778.8
3,746.6
0.9
4,022.5
3,899.6
3.2
Closest
R  80
2,665.5
2,728.0
2.3
2,826.0
2,696.2
4.8
3,641.1
3,807.0
4.4
3,866.4
3,626.6
6.6
R  100
3,340.3
3,636.7
8.2
3,541.3
3,383.4
4.7
4,556.7
4,780.4
4.7
4,838.8
4,557.0
6.2
R  120
4,015
4,076.7
1.5
4,256.6
4,061.6
4.8
5,468.1
5,722.1
4.4
5,807.3
5,914.4
1.8
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1448
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

Flexsim simulation to evaluate it. For the two-tier
RSS, we consider the system with W  20,L  20 and
nn
ls  3,nw
ls  3. Both the detour path topology and the
shortest path topology are considered. We vary the
number of robots R from 0 to 250 with a stepsize of
10. For the single-tier RSS, we only consider the
shortest path topology, and the system scenario is
W  50, L  50,nn
ls  3,nw
ls  3. We vary the number of
robots R from 0 to 150 with a stepsize of 10. We pre-
sent the relationship between the throughput capaci-
ty TC and the number of robots in Figure 13.
We have the following observations based on the
comparison results:
1. For a small number of robots, the dedicated assign-
ment rule is superior for all conﬁgurations, for a large
number of robots, the random and shortest-queue as-
signment rules are superior, but differences are small.
The closest assignment rule is inferior for a large num-
ber of robots.
2. There exists an intersection between the random
assignment rule curve and the closest assignment rule
curve ( ¯RRa
Cl ). When R ≤¯RRa
Cl , the closest assignment rule
outperforms the random assignment rule in terms of
maximum throughput capacity, otherwise, the random
assignment rule performs better. This can be explained
as the closest assignment rule can reduce robot travel
time, but increases the expected waiting time of robots
at loading stations. When the number of robots is small,
the reduction in travel time dominates the time lost on
waiting, otherwise, the situation reverses.
3. We can ﬁnd a similar tradeoff between the short-
est-robot-queue assignment rule and the closest as-
signment rule or dedicated assignment rule. The
shortest-robot-queue assignment rule provides larger
throughput capacity than either the closest or dedicat-
ed assignment rules when the number of robots used
is larger than the intersection point (R
Ra
Sq or R
De
Sq ).
Based on these insights, Deppon tested both ran-
dom and closest assignment rules in its sorting system
and found that allocating robots randomly to loading
stations in peak hours (typically 150 robots are used)
outperforms the closest assignment by 12.4%, whereas
the closed assignment outperforms the random as-
signment in off peak hours (80 robots) by 8.9%. Dep-
pon has therefore adopted this dynamic allocation for
a sustained high performance.
Next, we analyze robot path topologies in both the
single-tier and two-tier RSSs. For the two-tier RSS, we
consider two system scenarios: Ndp  600,nls  16 and
Ndp  800,nls  20. The number of robots varies from
100 to 250 with a stepsize of 50. For the single-tier
RSS, we consider two system scenarios: Ndp  200,
nls  8 and Ndp  400,nls  16. The number of robots R
varies from 50 to 200 with a stepsize of 50. For each
system scenario, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the best robot-to-load-
ing-station assignment rule and the optimal system
size in the same way as in Section 6.1, and then com-
pare the maximum system throughput capacity under
different assignment rules. The results are presented
in Table 9. It shows that the detour path topology out-
performs the shortest path topology in terms of sys-
tem throughput capacity in the two-tier RSS, whereas
the shortest path topology dominates the detour path
topology in the single-tier RSS.
Table 6. Real Case Validation Result
Layout
W
L nls
R
TCD(=h) TCA(=h)
TCS(=h)
δA
D
δS
D
Two-tier 18 6
6
170
7,163
6,907
7,054
3.4% 1.5%
Table 5. Simulation Validation Results of Single-Tier RSS
Topology path
Shortest path topology
Single-ring path topology
W × L
80 × 48
56 × 56
80 × 48
56 × 56
Assignment rule
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
TCA (h)
TCS (h)
δTC (%)
Random
R  80
1,411.9
1,522.9
7.3
1,391.1
1,487.5
6.5
—
—
—
—
—
—
R  100
1,817.6
1,871.1
2.9
1,543.3
1,589.0
2.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
R  120
2,219.4
2,158.6
2.8
1,806.7
1,949.1
7.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
Closest
R  80
2,397.9
2,345.6
2.2
2,370.5
2,220.9
6.7
1,176.8
1,133.5
3.8
1,066.0
1,009.1
5.6
R  100
2,976.6
2,911.5
2.2
2,643.5
2,731.4
3.2
1,365.7
1,420.7
3.9
1,171.5
1,111.3
5.4
R  120
3,394.5
3,593.9
5.5
3,023.4
3,126.8
3.3
1,593.7
1,695.2
6.0
1,304.4
1,379.8
5.5
Note. The parameter k0 ≈0:56 in the single-tier RSS.
Table 7. System Scenarios for Optimal Size Investigation
Ndp
nls
R
vm(m=s),a(m=s2)
W
200
8,12,16,20
50,70,90,110
(3,1.5),(2,1),(1,0.5)
5–50
400
12,16,20,24
80,100,120,140
(3,1.5),(2,1),(1,0.5)
10–100
600
16,20,24,28
110,130,150,170
(3,1.5),(2,1),(1,0.5)
15–150
800
20,24,28,32
140,160,180,200
(3,1.5),(2,1),(1,0.5)
20–200
1,000
24,28,32,36
170,190,210,230
(3,1.5),(2,1),(1,0.5)
25–250
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1449

6.3. Sensitivity Analysis on the Arrival Rate of
Sorting Orders
This section conducts a sensitivity analysis on the ar-
rival rate of sorting orders, during both off-peak hours
and peak hours. We aim to investigate the effect of the
arrival rate of sorting orders on both the minimum
number of robots required (denoted as R) and the pre-
ferred assignment of robot-to-loading-station. The
system scenarios are the same as those in last section,
that is, W  L  20,nn
ls  nw
ls  3 in the two-tier layout
with 150 robots and W  L  50,nn
ls  nw
ls  3 in the sin-
gle-tier layout with 100 robots. In each layout, we use
three uniform distributions to generate the mean ar-
rival rate λx,y (per hour) of each drop-off point, corre-
sponding to a low-demand, a middle-demand and a
high-demand (Table 10). We obtain R and the pre-
ferred assignment rule by the following method: For a
given required throughput capacity TCmin, we ﬁrst
look for the minimum number of robots required for
the random, closest and dedicated assignment rule
(denoted as Rr,Rc,Rd) by increasing the number of ro-
bots R from a very small value until the system
throughput capacity TC ≥TCmin. Then, we choose the
assignment rule that provides the minimum number
Table 8. System Scenarios for Optimal Size Investigation
System
layout
Topology
path
Assignment
rule
r∗ W
L
(r∗, ¯r∗)(α  0:05)
Two-tier
Shortest path
Random
1.05
(0.91,1.18)
Closest
1.09
(0.91,1.26)
Dedicated
1.07
(0.95,1.20)
Detour path
Random
0.85
(0.77,0.94)
Closest
0.84
(0.79,0.88)
Dedicated
0.82
(0.79,0.88)
Single-tier
Shortest path
Random
1.07
(0.95,1.20)
Closest
1.09
(0.95,1.04)
Dedicated
0.94
(0.73,1.27)
Single-ring
Random
1.13
(0.85,1.30)
Figure 13. (Color online) Performance Comparison of Assignment Rules in an RSS
Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology
(a)
(b)
(c)
Two-tier RSS with detour path topology
Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology
Notes. (a) Two-tier RSS with shortest path topology. (b) Two-tier RSS with detour path topology. (c) Single-tier RSS with shortest path topology.
Ra, random assignment rule; Sq, shortest-robot-queue assignment rule; Cl, closest assignment rule; De, dedicated assignment rule.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1450
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

of robots R  min{Rr,Rc,Rd} as the preferred assign-
ment rule. The CQN particularly ﬁts such an explora-
tion, because it runs fast to estimate the maximum
throughput capacity of a system (less than one sec-
ond) with a given number of resources (loading sta-
tions, robots), for a given system size, layout, and con-
trol rules. It can therefore also be used in a reverse
form: to evaluate for a desired throughput capacity,
the desired number of resources required, both for
peak and nonpeak loads, or the effect of different con-
trol rules on throughput capacity.
The results show that the demand level signiﬁcantly
affects the number of robots needed to meet the re-
quired number of sorting orders. Moreover, the pre-
ferred assignment of robot-to-loading-station also de-
pends on the required system throughput capacity.
6.4. Cost Minimization of an RSS
In this section, we investigate the selection between
the shortest path topology and the detour path topolo-
gy in terms of system cost, considering the cost mini-
mization problem of an RSS with a requirement on
throughput capacity TC ≥TCmin.
The number of destinations (Ndp) and the correspond-
ing order arrival rate λx,y are both given. The system
throughput capacity should satisfy the requirement
TC ≥TCmin 
W
x1
L
y1λx,y, and the minimum number
of loading stations nls is ⌈TCmin
µls ⌉. The objective is to design
the system to minimize the system total annual cost TC,
comprising the cost of robots, loading stations, and ﬂoor
space. For each combination of layout with path topolo-
gy, we investigate the total annual cost minimization
model (Equations (16) and (17)):
min C(W, L, R, AR,nls)  CR · R + Cls · nls
+ CFS · W · L · (wdp + waisle)2
(16)
s:t:
NTT
dp ≤W · L,
(17a)
NST
dp ≤2 ∗(W + L),
(17b)
TC ≥TCmin,
(17c)
nls ≥

TCmin
µls

,
(17d)
W ≤W,L ≤L,
(17e)
Ndp,waisle,wdp are given
(17f)
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
where CR is the annualized cost per robot, Cw is the
annualized cost per loading station, and CFS is the
Table 10. Sensitivity Analysis on the Arrival Rate of Sorting Orders
λx,y
Two-tier with shortest path
Two-tier with shortest path
Single-tiers with shortest path
U[5,25]
U[10,30]
U[15,35]
U[8,30]
U[15,35]
U[20,40]
U[5,15]
U[7,17]
U[9,19]
R
48
72
145
51
92
142
34
48
96
AR
Dedicated
Dedicated
Random
Dedicated
Dedicated
Dedicated
Dedicated
Dedicated
Random
Note. AR, preferred assignment rule.
Table 9. Throughput Capacity Comparison Between Shortest Path Topology and Detour Path Topology
Layout
Ndp
nls
R
Shortest path topology
Detour path topology
W∗
L∗
AR
TC(=h)
W∗
L∗
AR
TC(=h)
Two-tier
600
16
100
25
24
Dedicated
8,623
23
26
Dedicated
8,945
150
25
24
Dedicated
10,113
23
26
Dedicated
10,869
200
25
24
Dedicated
11,764
23
26
Dedicated
11,835
250
25
24
Random
12,635
23
26
Dedicated
12,675
800
20
100
30
27
Dedicated
8,609
26
31
Dedicated
8,880
150
30
27
Dedicated
10,870
26
31
Dedicated
11,534
200
30
27
Dedicated
12,443
26
31
Dedicated
12,690
250
30
27
Dedicated
14,185
26
31
Dedicated
14,338
Single-tier
200
8
50
50
50
Random
2,338
53
47
Random
1,278
100
50
50
Random
2,776
53
47
Random
1,763
150
50
50
Random
2,907
53
47
Random
1,841
200
50
50
Random
2,950
53
47
Random
1,690
400
16
50
100
100
Dedicated
2,520
105
95
Random
851
100
100
100
Dedicated
3,892
105
95
Random
1,397
150
100
100
Random
4,552
105
95
Random
1,728
200
100
100
Random
4,827
105
95
Random
1,906
Notes. AR, optimal assignment rule. Because of the rounding problem, we may have W∗× L∗≈Ndp in the two-tier layout.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1451

annualized cost per square meter ﬂoor space. Con-
straints (17a) and (17b) ensure that the total number of
drop-off points in both the two-tier layout (NTT
dp ) and the
single-tier layout (NST
dp ) is adequate for all destinations.
Constraint (17c) ensures that the system throughput ca-
pacity meets the requirement TC ≥TCmin. Constraint
(17d) ensures that the capacity of all loading stations sat-
isﬁes the throughput capacity requirement. Constraints
(17e) limit the size of the platform. The decision varia-
bles are the system size (W, L), the number of robots R,
the number of loading stations nls, and the robot-to-
loading-station assignment rule.
As an example, we consider the cost minimization
of a two-tier RSS with Ndp  400 and a single-tier RSS
with Ndp  200. Moreover, we compare the perfor-
mance of an RSS with a conventional cross-belt sorter
(CBS; Online Appendix F). Considering the variation
on the price of warehouse ﬂoor space per square me-
ter (denoted as PFS), we vary PFS from e350 to e800
with a stepsize of 150, annualized in 30 years. The
price of a robot and a loading station is e20,000 and
e10,000, respectively, annualized in 10 years. We con-
sider an interest rate IR  0:5%. Then, the annual costs
of a robot, a loading station, and a square meter ware-
house ﬂoor space are
CR 

10
t1
20000(1 + IR)t−1
10
,
Cls 

10
t1
10000(1 + IR)t−1
10
,
CFS 

30
t1
PFS(1 + IR)t−1
30
Figure 14 presents the results of the two-tier RSS, and
Table 4 in Online Appendix F includes the detailed
costs. We have the following observations:
• A critical required throughput capacity exists for
the shortest path topology and the detour path topolo-
gy curves (denoted by TCDP
SP ). When TCmin ≤TCDP
SP , the
detour path topology outperforms the shortest path to-
pology in terms of system cost, otherwise, the shortest
path topology performs better. This can be explained
because the saving on ﬂoor space cost of the detour
path topology dominates the incremental investment
in robots when TCmin ≤TCDP
SP . Conversely, the saving
in robot investment dominates the incremental invest-
ment in ﬂoor space, when TCmin ≥TCDP
SP .
Figure 14. (Color online) Cost Minimization of Two-Tier RSS and CBS
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1452
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

• With the increase of PFS, TCDP
SP becomes larger. This
implies that the advantage of the detour path topology
will become less obvious with an increase in ﬂoor space
cost.
• We can also ﬁnd a critical throughput capacity
point for the RSS and the CBS curves (denoted by
TCCBS
SP
for the RSS with shortest path topology and
TCCBS
DP for the RSS with detour path topology). When
TCmin ≤TCCBS
SP , the RSS with shortest path topology
outperforms the CBS in terms of system cost, and when
TCmin ≤TCCBS
DP , the RSS with detour path topology out-
performs the CBS in terms of system cost. Otherwise,
the CBS is cheaper. This can explained since the invest-
ment in transporters (robots) in the RSS is lower than
in the CBS (sorter and outputs) when TCmin ≤TCCBS
DP or
TCCBS
DP (see Table 4 in Online Appendix F). Otherwise,
the situation reverses.
The results of the single-tier RSS are presented
in Figure 15, and the detailed costs are included in
Table 5 in Online Appendix F. We have the following
observations:
• The shortest path topology always outperforms the
single-ring path topology in terms of system cost. The
single-ring path topology has a much smaller maximum
throughput capacity compared with the shortest path
topology.
• A critical point of throughput capacity may exist
(denoted by TCCBS
DP for the detour path topology and
TCCBS
SP
for the shortest path topology). When TCmin ≤
TCCBS
DP or TCmin ≤TCCBS
SP , the RSS outperforms the CBS
in terms of system cost. Otherwise, the CBS is cheaper.
This can also be explained by the difference between the
investment in transporting capacity of the two systems.
7. Conclusions and Further Work
This study considers a new RSS. In such a system, ro-
bots run on a platform to transport items from loading
stations located at the perimeter of the system to the
drop-off points located in the middle or along the pe-
rimeter, depending on the system layout.
We focus on performance estimation and operating
policies of the RSS, considering robot congestion. We
examine both single-tier layout and two-tier layout. For
each layout, we investigate the shortest path topology
and the detour path topology and examine random,
closest, dedicated and shortest-queue-based robot-to-
loading-station assignment rules. Closed queueing
Figure 15. (Color online) Cost Minimization of Single-Tier RSS and CBS
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1453

networks are built to estimate the maximum through-
put capacity of an RSS under different combinations of
layout with robot path topology. We design an iterative
algorithm to approximate robot congestion in a two-
tier layout and use a trafﬁc ﬂow function to estimate
robot congestion in a single-tier layout. Maximum traf-
ﬁc density is obtained through simulation. We use sim-
ulation and a real case to investigate robot congestion
and to validate the analytical models. The results show
that robot congestion plays a signiﬁcant role in the sin-
gle-tier RSS with the single-ring path topology. The rel-
ative errors show that our analytical models can accu-
rately estimate the system performance.
We use the analytical model to optimize the system
size and analyze the operating policies in terms of
throughput capacity and operating cost. The results
show that a square layout is preferred for the shortest
path topology and a rectangular layout is beneﬁcial for
the detour path topology. The comparison among dif-
ferent robot-to-loading-station assignment rules shows
that assigning a robot to either a random loading sta-
tion or that with the shortest robot queue is superior in
throughput capacity when the number of robots is
smaller than a critical point, otherwise, the closest and
dedicated assignment rules perform better. These in-
sights are also implemented in the sorting system of
Deppon Express to improve the throughput capacity
in peak and off-peak periods. The cost minimization
results show that while the shortest path topology out-
performs the detour path topology in terms of
throughput capacity, the detour path topology is
cheaper when the required system throughput capaci-
ty is smaller than a critical point. Moreover, we com-
pare the RSS with a cross-belt sorter system in terms of
operating cost. Our results show that the RSS is cheap-
er than the cross-belt sorter system when the required
throughput capacity is smaller than this control point.
For future studies, it is interesting to analyze the dis-
tribution of demand among destinations, the tradeoff
between expected travel time saving by assigning large
demands to drop-off points that are close to loading sta-
tions, and robot congestion relief caused by assigning
large demands to drop-off points that are far loading
stations. Moreover, it may be interesting to study the as-
signment of parcels to loading stations, as this impacts
the load balance and the travel distance of robots, and
different robot battery recovery policies as these impact
throughput capacity and parcel throughput time.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Deppon Express for providing the
AGV sorting system data.
References
Airport RTH (2018) Innovatief ﬂeet systeem live op rotterdam the
hague airport. Accessed June 10, 2021, https://www.rotterdamthe
hagueairport.nl/innovatief-ﬂeet-systeem-live-op-rotterdam-
the-hague-airport/.
Ames B (2019) Amazon unveils xanthus and pegasus fulﬁllment ro-
bots. DC Velocity. Accessed June 10, 2021, https://www.
dcvelocity.com/articles/20190606-amazon-unveils-xanthus-and-
pegasus-fulﬁllment-robots/#.XP8tsesSJVs.twitter.
Azadeh K, De Koster R, Roy D (2019a) Robotized and automated
warehouse systems: Review and recent developments. Trans-
portation Sci. 53(4):917–945.
Azadeh K, Roy D, De Koster R (2019b) Design, modeling, and anal-
ysis of vertical robotic storage and retrieval systems. Transporta-
tion Sci. 53(5):1213–1234.
Becksch¨afer M, Malberg S, Tierney K, Weskamp C (2017) Simulating
storage policies for an automated grid-based warehouse sys-
tem. Internat. Conf. Computational Logistics (Springer, New
York), 468–482.
Boysen N, Briskorn D, Fedtke S (2019) Automated sortation convey-
ors: A survey from an operational research perspective. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 276(3):796–815.
Boysen N, Fedtke S, Weidinger F (2018) Optimizing automated sort-
ing in warehouses: The minimum order spread sequencing
problem. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 270(1):386–400.
Bozer YA, Sharp GP (1985) An empirical evaluation of a general
purpose automated order accumulation and sortation system
used in batch picking. Material Flow 2(2-3):111–131.
Bozer YA, Quiroz MA, Sharp GP (1988) An evaluation of alternative
control strategies and design issure for automated order accu-
mulation and sortation systems. Material Flow 4(4):265–282.
Briskorn D, Emde S, Boysen N (2017) Scheduling shipments in
closed-loop sortation conveyors. J. Scheduling 20(1):25–42.
Buitenhek R, van Houtum GJ, Zijm H (2000) Amva-based solution
procedures for open queueing networks with population con-
straints. Ann. Oper. Res. 93(1):15–40.
Cai X, Heragu SS, Liu Y (2014) Modeling and evaluating the avs/rs
with tier-to-tier vehicles using a semi-open queueing network.
IIE Trans. 46(9):905–927.
De Koster R (2018) Automated and robotic warehouses: Develop-
ments
and
research
opportunities.
Logistics
Transportation
38:33–40.
De Koster R, Le-Duc T, Roodbergen KJ (2007) Design and control of
warehouse order picking: A literature review. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
182(4):481–501.
Ekren BY, Heragu SS (2010) Simulation-based regression analysis for
the rack conﬁguration of an autonomous vehicle storage and re-
trieval system. Internat. J. Production Res. 48(21):6257–6274.
Ekren BY, Sari Z, Lerher T (2015) Warehouse design under class-
based storage policy of shuttle-based storage and retrieval sys-
tem. IFAC-Papers OnLine 48(3):1152–1154.
Ekren BY, Heragu SS, Krishnamurthy A, Malmborg CJ (2010) Simu-
lation based experimental design to identify factors affecting
performance of avs/rs. Comput. Indust. Engrg. 58(1):175–185.
Ekren BY, Heragu SS, Krishnamurthy A, Malmborg CJ (2014) Ma-
trix-geometric solution for semi-open queuing network model
of autonomous vehicle storage and retrieval system. Comput. In-
dust. Engrg. 68:78–86.
Fukunari M, Malmborg CJ (2008) An efﬁcient cycle time model for
autonomous vehicle storage and retieval systems. Internat J.
Production Res. 46(12):3167–3184.
Gallien J, Weber T (2010) To wave or not to wave? Order release
policies for warehouses with an automated sorter. Manufactur-
ing Service Oper. Management 12(4):642–662.
Gu J, Goetschalckx M, Mcginnis LF (2010) Research on warehouse
design and performance evaluation: A comprehensive review.
Eur. J. Oper. Res. 203(3):539–549.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
1454
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS

Heragu SS, Cai X, Krishnumarthy A, Malmborg CJ (2011) Analytical
models for analysis of automated warehouse material handling
systems. Internat. J. Production Res. 49(22):6833–6861.
Jia J, Heragu SS (2009) Solving semi-open queuing networks. Oper.
Res. 57(2):391–401.
Johnson ME (1997) The impact of sorting strategies on automated
sortation system performance. IIE Trans. 30(1):67–77.
Johnson ME, Meller RD (2002) Performance analysis of split-case
sorting
systems.
Manufacturing
Service
Oper.
Management
4(4):258–274.
Kumar A, Roy D, Tiwari MK (2014) Optimal partitioning of vertical
zones in vehicle-based warehouse systems. Internat. J. Produc-
tion Res. 52(5):1285–1305.
Lamballais T, Roy D, De Koster R (2017) Estimating performance in
a
robotic
mobile
fulﬁllment
system.
Eur.
J.
Oper.
Res.
256(3):976–990.
Lamballais T, Roy D, De Koster M (2020) Inventory allocation in ro-
botic mobile fulﬁllment systems. IISE Trans. 52(1):1–17.
Malmborg CJ (2002) Conceptualizing tools for autonomous vehicle
storage
and
retrieval
systems. Internat. J.
Production
Res.
40(8):1807–1822.
Marchet G, Melacini M, Perotti S, Tappia E (2012) Analytical model
to estimate performance of autonomous vehicle storage and re-
trieval systems for product totes. Internat. J. Production Res.
50(24):7134–7148.
Merschformann M (2018) Active repositioning of storage units in ro-
botic
mobile
fulﬁllment
systems.
Oper.
Res.
Production
2017:379–385.
Merschformann M, Lamballais T, De Koster R, Suhl L (2019) Deci-
sion rules for robotic mobile fulﬁllment systems. Oper. Res. Per-
spectives 6:1–15.
Mountz M (2012) Kiva the disrupter. Harvard Bus. Rev. 90:74–80.
Roy D (2016) Semi-open queuing networks: a review of stochastic
models, solution methods and new research areas. Internat. J.
Production Res. 54(5-6):1–18.
Roy D, De Koster R, Bekker R (2020) Modeling and design of con-
tainer terminal operations. Oper. Res. 68(3):686–715.
Roy D, Gupta A, De Koster RB (2016) A non-linear trafﬁc ﬂow-
based queuing model to estimate container terminal through-
put with agvs. Internat. J. Production Res. 54(2):472–493.
Roy D, Krishnamurthy A, Heragu SS, Malmborg CJ (2012) Perfor-
mance analysis and design trade-offs in warehouses with au-
tonomous vehicle technology. IIE Trans. 44(12):1045–1060.
Russell ML, Meller RD (2003) Cost and throughput modeling of
manual and automated order fulﬁllment systems. IIE Trans.
35(7):589–603.
Tappia E, Roy D, De Koster R, Melacini M (2017) Modeling, analy-
sis, and design insights for shuttle-based compact storage sys-
tems. Transportation Sci. 51(1):269–295.
Tappia E, Roy D, Melacini M, De Koster R (2019) Integrated stor-
age-order picking systems: Technology, performance models,
and design insights. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 274(3):947–965.
Tompkins (2020) t-Sort solution revolutionizing unit and parcel sor-
tation. Accessed June 10, 2021, https://www.tompkinsrobotics.
com/Solutions/t-Sort.
Van der Gaast JP, De Koster R, Adan IJBF, Resing JAC (2020) Ca-
pacity analysis of sequential zone picking systems. Oper. Res.
68:161–179.
Wang Y (2016) Companies set up robotic package sorting lines. Ac-
cessed June 10, 2021, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/
tech/2016-11/10/content_27329571.htm.
You Q (2019) Deppon logistic robots. Accessed June 10, 2021,
http://www.iqiyi.com/w_19s7ab1i4l.html#curid=34383573609_
b1e7ce8b7d105fe3541cf2de1b8e82e5.
Yuan Z, Gong Y (2017) Bot-in-time delivery for robotic mobile ful-
ﬁllment systems. IEEE Trans. Engrg. Management 64(1):83–93.
Zou B, De Koster R, Xu X (2018) Operating policies in robotic-
compact storage and retrieval systems. Transportation Sci.
52(4):788–811.
Zou B, Gong Y, Xu X, Yuan Z (2017) Assignment rules in robotic
mobile fulﬁllment systems for online retailers. Internat. J. Pro-
duction Res. 55(20):6175–6192.
Zou B, Xu X, Gong Y, De Koster R (2016) Modeling parallel move-
ment of lifts and vehicles in tier-captive vehicle-based ware-
housing systems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 254(1):51–67.
Zou B, Xu X, Gong Y, De Koster R (2018) Evaluating battery charg-
ing and swapping strategies in a robotic mobile fulﬁllment sys-
tem. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 267(4):733–753.
Zou et al.: RSS: Performance Estimation and Operating Policies
Transportation Science, 2021, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1430–1455, © 2021 INFORMS
1455