TITLE: Demand Steering in a Last-Mile Delivery Problem with Home and Pickup Point Delivery Options
JOURNAL: Transportation_Science
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.0287
---

Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem with home
and pickup point delivery options
Citation for published version (APA):
Galiullina, A., Mutlu, N. R., Kinable, J., & van Woensel, T. (2024). Demand steering in a last-mile delivery
problem with home and pickup point delivery options. Transportation Science, 58(2), 454-473.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.0287
DOI:
10.1287/trsc.2023.0287
Document status and date:
Published: 01/03/2024
Document Version:
Accepted manuscript including changes made at the peer-review stage
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 13. Jun. 2026

Submitted to Transportation Science
manuscript TS-2023-0287.R1
Authors are encouraged to submit new papers to INFORMS journals by means of
a style ﬁle template, which includes the journal title. However, use of a template
does not certify that the paper has been accepted for publication in the named jour-
nal. INFORMS journal templates are for the exclusive purpose of submitting to an
INFORMS journal and should not be used to distribute the papers in print or online
or to submit the papers to another publication.
Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem with
home and pickup point delivery options
Albina Galiullina, Nevin Mutlu
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
a.galiullina@tue.nl, n.r.mutlu@tue.nl
Joris Kinable
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
Middle Mile Planning, Research, and Optimization Sciences, Amazon, USA
j.kinable@tue.nl
Tom Van Woensel
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands,
t.v.woensel@tue.nl
To increase the eﬃciency of last-mile delivery, online retailers can adopt pickup points in their operations.
The retailer may then incentivize customers to steer them from home to pickup point delivery to reduce costs.
However, it is usually uncertain whether the customer accepts this incentive to switch to pickup delivery. This
setup gives rise to a new last-mile delivery problem with integrated incentive and routing decisions under
uncertainty. We model this problem as a two-stage stochastic program with decision-dependent uncertainty.
In the ﬁrst stage, a retailer decides which customers to incentivize. However, customers’ reaction to the
incentive is stochastic: they may accept the oﬀer and switch to pickup point delivery, or they may decline
the oﬀer and stick with home delivery. In the second stage, after the customers’ ﬁnal delivery choice is
revealed, a vehicle route is planned to serve customers via the delivery option of their choice. We develop an
exact branch-and-bound algorithm and propose several heuristics to improve the algorithm’s scalability. Our
algorithm solved instances with up to 50 customers, realizing on average 4% to 8% lower last-mile delivery
costs compared to the commonly applied approaches in the industry that do not use incentives or oﬀer
incentives to all customers. We also developed a benchmark policy, which gives very fast solutions with a
2% average optimality gap for small instances and up to 2% average cost increase compared to the heuristic
solutions.
Key words : last-mile delivery, pickup point, customer preference, demand management, two-stage
stochastic program, decision-dependent uncertainty, branch-and-bound
1

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
2
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
1.
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the demand for home deliveries in the retail sector (Adobe
Analytics 2021). Meeting this demand on time has been a signiﬁcant challenge for retailers, with
more than half identifying their logistics capabilities as the “limiting factor” (Accenture 2021).
This challenge is evident in the performance of retailers: data show that during the pandemic,
the average e-commerce delivery time increased by 1.5 days (DigitalCommerce360 2020), and 75%
of the e-commerce orders in Europe were delivered with a delay of more than ﬁve days (Bouaziz
2021). Such delays inevitably result in low customer satisfaction and negatively impact customer
retention for future sales (Institute Baymard 2020).
To overcome this challenge, retailers seek to adopt innovative fulﬁllment mechanisms. An example
of such a mechanism is pickup point delivery, where orders are delivered to an intermediate location,
e.g., a store, post oﬃce, or automated locker (to be picked up by the customer), rather than
individual customers’ homes. For retailers, pickup point delivery enhances the eﬃciency of delivery
operations via consolidation. Customers can also ﬁnd this delivery option more convenient than
waiting for the delivery at home, as the latter can be restrictive or uncertain regarding delivery
moments (RetailWire 2016).
Realizing the potential beneﬁts of this delivery option, online retailers embedded pickup points
in their delivery network. About half of the top 500 omni-channel retailers also leverage their
brick-and-mortar stores as pickup points for online orders (BigCommerce 2021). Yet, attracting
customers to pickup points remains a challenge: Accenture (2020) reports that three-quarters of
the customers indicate home delivery as their preferred delivery option in online purchases. Hence,
retailers have started to employ incentives to steer customers towards the pickup points via, for
example, shipping discounts.
Common incentive policies currently applied in practice are often simplistic: many companies
either oﬀer the same amount of incentive to all customers (e.g., Walmart, Target, Meijer in the US,
M&S in the UK, Praxis in the Netherlands) or do not use incentives at all (e.g., eBay, Asos, Zalando
in the UK) for choosing the pickup points. Several authors highlight the beneﬁts of employing
more elaborate demand management approaches that capture and quantify the trade-oﬀbetween
the marginal operational savings gained from steering demand and the incentive cost incurred
to achieve this (Agatz et al. 2013, Snoeck, Merchan, and Winkenbach 2020, Klein et al. 2020,
Fleckenstein, Klein, and Steinhardt 2023). However, to our knowledge, an approach for demand
steering across diﬀerent delivery channels (e.g., home and pickup point delivery) that considers
customers’ choices is not present.
To ﬁll this gap, we consider an online retailer that implements a monetary incentive to steer
customers from home delivery to pickup point delivery. During the ordering period, the customers

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
3
place their orders and enter their home locations for delivery. Once all the customer locations are
known, fulﬁllment planning starts. As part of fulﬁllment planning, the retailer ﬁrst oﬀers a selected
group of customers an incentive to have their packages delivered to a nearby pickup point instead of
their homes to save on the fulﬁllment cost. Determining which customers to oﬀer an incentive is far
from trivial for several reasons. First, the retailer must account for the possibility that customers
who are oﬀered an incentive might reject this oﬀer and stick with home delivery. Next, while pickup
point delivery may signiﬁcantly reduce the routing cost, the proﬁtability of this delivery choice
also hinges on the additional incentive cost incurred. Lastly, the decision to oﬀer a discount to a
speciﬁc customer also depends on the delivery choices of the other customers in the network. For
example, in a neighborhood where most customers prefer home delivery, providing pickup point
incentives to some customers could exceed the marginal cost of visiting those customers at home
since any remaining customers must still be visited at home. Considering these trade-oﬀs, the
retailer must determine a policy that dictates which customers to oﬀer an incentive. Customers
receiving this oﬀer may either reject the oﬀer and stick with home delivery or take the incentive
and choose pickup point delivery. Based on the ﬁnal delivery location realizations, the retailer plans
a delivery route that visits the pickup points chosen by the customers and the home locations of
the remaining customers. The retailer’s objective is to minimize the total expected fulﬁllment cost,
which includes both the incentive and routing costs.
This problem resembles the Ring Star (RS) problem (Labb´e et al. 2004), which aims to design
a route that visits a subset of nodes in a network while allocating the demand of non-visited
nodes to visited nodes at a cost. Our problem is similar to the RS problem in that the goal is
to design a route that visits a subset of the customers at home and allocates the demand of the
non-visited customers to pickup points at a cost. Yet, it is diﬀerent due to customers’ probabilistic
choices. In delivery applications, about half of the customers use pickup points for monetary reasons
(Retail Customer Experience 2019); hence, it is not guaranteed that all customers will switch to
pickup point delivery upon receiving an incentive. As a result, the solution techniques for the RS
problem (deterministic) do not immediately apply to our problem, where customer decisions are
probabilistic and depend on the retailer’s incentive decisions.
Therefore, we refer to our problem as the Decision-Dependent Ring Star (DDRS) problem. In
DDRS, each customer can be steered to a pickup point (from home delivery) with some probability,
depending on the retailer’s decision to oﬀer an incentive. Hence, the DDRS can be classiﬁed as
a stochastic problem with decision-dependent uncertainty due to the uncertain outcome of the
incentives provided by the retailer. Our contributions to the literature are as follows:
1. We introduce the novel decision-dependent Ring Star problem and model it as a two-stage
stochastic integer program with decision-dependent uncertainty.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
4
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
2. We develop an exact branch-and-bound (B&B) algorithm to optimally solve instances with
up to 19 customers and 5 pickup points. We also propose heuristic approaches to solve larger
instances with up to 50 customers and 5 pickup points.
3. We assess the monetary beneﬁts of using such a demand steering mechanism against alterna-
tive policies that are easier to derive: (i) not oﬀering any incentives, (ii) oﬀering incentives
to all customers, and (iii) solving the deterministic counterpart of the problem and oﬀering
incentives accordingly. In addition, building on our theoretical results and numerical insights,
we develop another easy-to-compute benchmark policy that provides close to optimal solu-
tions with a 2% average optimality gap for small instances and up to 2% average cost increase
compared to the heuristic approaches.
While the home delivery services inspire our study, the DDRS problem can be generalized to other
applications where demand steering can lower operational costs. One alternative problem arises
in hospital therapist scheduling, where patients can receive treatment either at a therapy center
or at their ward (Jungwirth et al. 2022). The ﬁrst option is more eﬃcient for therapists’ routing,
as they do not spend time traveling between wards. However, it requires investments to ensure
that available nurses can facilitate patients moving from their ward to the therapy center. Another
example arises in reverse logistics (e.g., in horticulture), where wholesalers return empty crates to
the manufacturer’s warehouses. In such a setting, an imbalance can arise, where warehouses have
excess or shortage of crates. The manufacturer can provide incentives to inﬂuence which warehouse
the wholesalers return their empty crates to. In such settings, our model and algorithms can serve
as a starting point to pursue these lines of research.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We review the related literature in Section
2. Section 3 deﬁnes the problem and presents the mathematical model. The exact B&B algorithm
and several heuristic variants are presented in Section 4. The instances are discussed in Section
5. Section 6 provides a computational evaluation of the proposed algorithms. Problem-oriented
insights, an evaluation of the DDRS policy against alternative policies, and an easy-to-compute
benchmark policy are presented in Section 7. Section 8 concludes our paper.
2.
Literature review
In this section, we discuss four research streams relevant to our study: the applications of incen-
tive mechanisms in logistics, the Ring Star problem, stochastic problems with decision-dependent
uncertainty, and stochastic routing problems relevant to the DDRS from a structural point of view.
The beneﬁts of implementing incentive mechanisms to inﬂuence customer preferences in last-mile
settings have received increasing attention in recent years (e.g., reviews by Agatz et al. (2013),
Klein et al. (2020), Snoeck, Merchan, and Winkenbach (2020), Fleckenstein, Klein, and Steinhardt

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
5
(2023)). An important line of research in this area focuses on time slot management, where retailers
incentivize customers to select a speciﬁc time slot by diﬀerentiated shipping fee, by oﬀering only a
limited selection of available time slots to customers in a speciﬁc area, or by dynamically pricing
diﬀerent delivery deadlines in same-day delivery. Thereby, retailers can smoothen the demand over
the delivery day and eﬀectively group customers that can be serviced during the same trip to reduce
the routing costs (Campbell and Savelsbergh 2006, Agatz et al. 2011, Yang et al. 2016, Klein et al.
2019, Ulmer 2020). Another incentive mechanism implemented by online retailers such as Amazon
involves compensating customers for rescheduled fulﬁllment times, which enables consolidation of
deliveries that are geographically close but initially scheduled in diﬀerent time windows. Estrada-
Moreno et al. (2019) examine this problem in a multi-period setting and propose a two-stage
metaheuristic approach. Furthermore, Yildiz and Savelsbergh (2020) demonstrate that the beneﬁts
of such geographic ﬂexibility can be further ampliﬁed by optimizing the value of the compensation
in addition to the rescheduling decisions. Alternatively, retailers may implement diﬀerentiated
shipping fees based on the customers’ geographic locations, thereby inﬂuencing demand in speciﬁc
areas to maximize the total service proﬁt. Afsar, Afsar, and Palacios (2021) and Afsar (2022)
investigate this problem, considering customers’ threshold values for acceptable delivery costs, and
propose exact algorithms to solve the problem in deterministic and stochastic settings. Furthermore,
retailers may use incentives that motivate customers to order larger basket sizes (Lewis, Singh, and
Fay 2006, Becerril-Arreola, Leng, and Parlar 2013), e.g., by waiving shipping fees on orders that
exceed a certain monetary value. To our knowledge, incorporating incentives to steer customers
with stochastic choices towards a speciﬁc delivery channel to decrease the routing cost has not been
studied. This leads to a substantially diﬀerent problem from modeling and algorithmic perspectives.
The DDRS bears structural similarities to the Ring Star (RS) problem, which aims to design a
route that visits a subset of nodes in a network while allocating the demand of non-visited nodes
to visited nodes (with certainty) at a cost (Labb´e et al. 2004). When stating this deterministic
RS problem within the last-mile context, one aims to split a set of customers into two subsets —
customers visited at home and customers allocated to pickup points, such that the sum of routing
and allocation costs is minimized. Vogt, Poojari, and Beasley (2007) and Zhou et al. (2018) study
the deterministic RS problem in a last-mile delivery context. The authors propose allocating some
orders to pickup points by paying a pickup service cost while the remaining orders are delivered to
the customers’ homes. While Vogt, Poojari, and Beasley (2007) uses a tabu search heuristic, Zhou
et al. (2018) employs a hybrid genetic approach to solve the problem. Motivated by Retail Customer
Experience (2019), in our work, we consider stochastic customer choice: given an incentive, the
customers can be steered to pickup point delivery with a certain probability. This relates our

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
6
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
problem to the class of stochastic programs with decision-dependent uncertainty. We devise an
exact algorithm for this problem and provide heuristic variants to solve larger instance sizes.
The DDRS problem studied in this paper can be categorized as a stochastic program with
decision-dependent uncertainty. In literature, this class of optimization problems is further subdi-
vided into two subclasses, commonly denoted as Type 1 and Type 2 decision-dependent uncertainty
(for a detailed taxonomy, refer to Hellemo, Barton, and Tomasgard (2018)). Type 1 decision-
dependent uncertainty deals with problems where the decisions alter the probability distribution
of an event, whereas Type 2 decision-dependent uncertainty pertains to the problems where the
probability distribution is exogenous but where the moment the uncertain information is revealed
is decision dependent. Our problem can be characterized as Type 1 decision-dependent uncertainty,
as the incentive decisions aﬀect customer decisions.
Despite its practical importance, solving methodology for Type 1 decision-dependent uncer-
tainty has received little attention in the research literature. Ahmed (2000) proposes an exact
mixed-integer reformulation and a customized B&B algorithm for 0-1 hyperbolic programs with
decision-dependency in a sales facility location problem (where the locational decision aﬀects the
probability of customers visiting a facility). Laumanns, Prestwich, and Kawas (2014) and Haus,
Michini, and Laumanns (2017) model a pre-disaster investment problem (where the investment
decision to strengthen certain road links increases their survival chance) as a two-stage stochastic
program. Their exact solving methodology, referred to as scenario bundling, exploits symmetry in
the problem whenever diﬀerent realizations of the uncertain parameters lead to the same second-
stage solution. As a result, the problem’s complexity reduces because only one solution needs to
be computed for all such realizations. We model the DDRS problem as a two-stage stochastic
program, and in our algorithms, we extend the scenario bundling approach. In DDRS, the second-
stage solution of diﬀerent realizations of uncertain parameters has the same upper bound, but all
second-stage solutions may be unique. In addition to exact methods, several heuristic approaches
have been proposed to tackle larger instances of the pre-disaster investment problem, including
multilinear approximation combined with heuristic sampling procedures (Peeta et al. 2010, Flach
2010), AI-based algorithms (Schichl and Sellmann 2015), and distributionally robust optimization
approach (Noyan, Rudolf, and Lejeune 2022). This study proposes a heuristic variant of our B&B
approach, employing sampling to handle larger instances.
The DDRS can be reduced to a well-known probabilistic traveling salesman problem (PTSP;
Jaillet 1988) under the assumption that the decision-maker provides incentives to all customers,
with the depot acting as the only pickup point. The objective of the PTSP is to construct an
a-priori tour through a known set of customers. Only after the tour is built, the subset of customers
requiring visiting is revealed.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
7
3.
Problem description and model
In the following, we ﬁrst describe our problem in Section 3.1; in Section 3.2, we introduce the
notation; and ﬁnally, in Section 3.3, we present the stochastic programming formulation.
3.1.
Problem description
The problem concerns an online retailer implementing a monetary incentive to steer customers from
home delivery to pickup point delivery. The process, illustrated in Figure 1, begins with customers
placing their orders and entering their home locations for delivery before the cut-oﬀtime to start
fulﬁllment planning. Once all customer locations are known, fulﬁllment planning starts. As part
of fulﬁllment planning, the retailer ﬁrst oﬀers a selected group of customers an incentive (i.e., a
shipping discount) to have their packages delivered to the nearest pickup point instead of their
homes to save on the routing cost. While oﬀering more pickup point alternatives with diﬀerent
incentive amounts can also be an option for the retailer, it would highly complicate the retailer’s
decision-making. Moreover, surveys indicate that the majority of customers (up to 79%) prefer
pickup points located near their homes (Lemke, Iwan, and Korczak 2016). As a result, we assume
that the retailer oﬀers the customer a single (nearest) pickup point, simplifying decision-making.
Customers
place orders
Stage 1:
incentive decisions
Customers choose
ﬁnal delivery locations
Stage 2:
routing decisions
•
•
Customer
locations are known
Final delivery
locations are known
Fulﬁllment planning period
Ordering period
Figure 1
Order of events in fulﬁllment planning
Thus, the ﬁrst stage decision in fulﬁllment planning is to create the incentive policy that speciﬁes
which customers are oﬀered a pickup incentive (for their nearest pickup point). Customers may
then reject/ignore the incentive and stick with home delivery, or accept the incentive and switch
to pickup point delivery until the cut-oﬀtime to start route planning (this approach is similar
to the real-life applications of DHL (2023) and PostNL (2023), which implement e-mail or mobile
application notiﬁcations to oﬀer customers the option to change their delivery locations before
a speciﬁc cut-oﬀtime after placing their orders). Once all customers indicate their ﬁnal delivery
locations, the retailer plans the delivery route, constituting the second stage decision in fulﬁllment
planning. The delivery route must service all customers who chose pickup point delivery and the
home locations of the remaining customers. The retailer’s objective is to minimize the total expected
fulﬁllment cost, which includes both the incentive and routing costs.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
8
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
3.2.
Model notation
The DDRS problem is formally deﬁned on an undirected graph G(V,E) with vertex set V and
edge set E = {{i,j}|i,j ∈V,i < j}. Vertex set V = {0} ∪N ∪P comprises of a depot vertex,
represented by vertex {0}, a set of n customer vertices N = {1,2,...,n}, and a set of p pickup
points P = {1,2,...,p}. A positive routing cost ce is associated with every edge e ∈E, where it is
assumed that the edge costs satisfy the triangle inequality.
All customers in set N place orders with their home location for delivery. Once the customer
locations are known, the retailer can oﬀer a monetary incentive di (e.g., a shipping cost discount)
to steer customer i ∈N from delivery at home to delivery at the nearest pickup point. In response,
customers may switch to pickup point delivery with a probability ∆i, which represents the eﬀec-
tiveness of the incentive. However, non-monetary factors may still cause customers to stick with
home delivery with a probability of 1 −∆i. The values of di and ∆i are assumed to be known.
They can be obtained from survey data or historical observations of customers’ delivery preferences
and sensitivity to diﬀerent monetary incentives (see, e.g., Haase (2009), Hood et al. (2020), and
Milioti, Pramatari, and Kelepouri (2020)). It is worth noting that extending the model to include
customers who select pickup point delivery when placing an order is trivial, as it would simply
require the delivery vehicle to visit the corresponding pickup points.
We model this problem as a two-stage stochastic program. In the ﬁrst stage, the retailer decides
on the incentive policy, which is represented by a binary decision vector y ≡(yi)i∈N. An element
of this vector, yi, for i ∈N, takes value 1 if customer i is oﬀered an incentive and 0 otherwise.
In the second stage, inﬂuenced by the incentive policy, customers’ ﬁnal delivery choices are
realized, and a vehicle is dispatched to deliver the orders based on these locations. The realization
for the customers’ ﬁnal delivery locations is represented by a binary scenario vector ω ≡(ωi)i∈N.
An element of this vector ωi, represents the ﬁnal delivery location for customer i ∈N, and equals
1 if the customer is served at the pickup point and 0 if the customer is served at home. Hence, if
no incentive is oﬀered to customer i, i.e., yi = 0, then this customer will be served at home with
certainty. On the other hand, if an incentive is oﬀered, i.e., yi = 1, then the customer is served at
the nearest pickup point with probability ∆i and at home with probability 1−∆i. Table 1 provides
an overview of the decision-dependent probabilities for the customers’ ﬁnal delivery locations,
where the probability that a customer i ∈N is served at the ﬁnal delivery location ωi given the
incentive decision yi is denoted by Pωi(yi). Hence, for a given policy y, 2n possible scenario vectors
exist in the worst case (i.e., when all customers are oﬀered an incentive, yi = 1,∀i ∈N). We let
Ωrepresent the set of all these scenario vectors. For simplicity, we assume that customer choices
for the ﬁnal delivery locations are mutually independent. Consequently, the probability that a
particular scenario ω ∈Ωrealizes under an incentive policy y is given by Pω(y) = Q
i∈N
Pωi(yi).

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
9
Table 1
Decision-dependent delivery choice probabilities
Retailer’s incentive decision
yi = 0
yi = 1
Customer’s ﬁnal delivery choice
ωi = 0
ωi = 1
ωi = 0
ωi = 1
Probability of customer’s ﬁnal delivery choice Pωi(yi)
1
0
1 −∆i
∆i
The fulﬁllment cost incurred for a particular scenario ω ∈Ωincludes both the incentive and
routing costs. The former depends on the retailer’s incentive policy y, and is denoted by Dω(y) =
P
i∈N ωiyidi. That is, di is incurred for each customer i ∈N who chose pickup point delivery (ωi = 1)
when oﬀered an incentive (yi = 1). Cω denotes the routing cost for a scenario ω, and it is determined
by solving an application-speciﬁc minimum-cost routing problem on a vertex-induced subgraph
Gω(Vω,Eω) of the graph G(V,E). The vertex set Vω of Gω contains the depot, all customers i ∈N
who require home delivery, and the pickup points to be visited. We assume that a single delivery
vehicle located at the depot performs all the necessary visits in a single trip. In this setting, the
routing problem reduces to a Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP), which an oﬀ-the-shelf solver can
solve. The routing cost Cω equals the cost of an optimal TSP solution for graph Gω (expressed in
terms of the edge routing costs ce). Table 2 summarizes the main notation for the DDRS problem.
Table 2
Main notation for the DDRS problem
Parameters
di
monetary value of incentive oﬀered to customer i ∈N
∆i
probability that customer i ∈N chooses pickup point delivery when oﬀered an incentive
ω = (ωi)i∈N
scenario vector indicating customers’ ﬁnal delivery locations, where ωi = 1 if the customer
i ∈N is served at a pickup point, and ωi = 0 otherwise
Ω
set of all potential scenarios
Cω
routing cost of a scenario ω ∈Ω
Decision variables
y = (yi)i∈N
the 1st-stage decision of incentive policy, where yi = 1 if an incentive is oﬀered to a customer
i ∈N, and yi = 0 otherwise
xω
e
the 2nd-stage routing variable, where xω
e = 1 if edge e ∈E is traversed by the delivery vehicle
in scenario ω ∈Ω
Endogenous variables
Pωi(yi)
probability that a customer i ∈N is served at the ﬁnal delivery location ωi given the
incentive decision yi
Pω(y)
probability of scenario ω given an incentive policy y
Dω(y)
incentive cost of scenario ω given an incentive policy y
Sω(y)
fulﬁllment cost of scenario ω given an incentive policy y, Sω(y) = Dω(y) + Cω
S(y)
expected fulﬁllment cost of an incentive policy y, S(y) = P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Sω(y)
The fulﬁllment cost Sω(y) of a particular scenario realization ω ∈Ωgiven an incentive policy y
can now be deﬁned as Sω(y) ≡Dω(y) + Cω. When deciding on the optimal incentive policy, the
retailer has to consider the expected fulﬁllment cost for all potential scenario realizations under
incentive policy y (see Table 1), which we denote by S(y) ≡P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Sω(y). After expressing

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
10
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
the expected incentive cost in closed form, the expected fulﬁllment cost can be stated as S(y) =
P
i∈N di∆iyi + P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Cω.
3.3.
Stochastic programming formulation
The DDRS problem is formulated as a two-stage stochastic program. The ﬁrst-stage variables
y determine the incentive policy. Then, for each scenario ω ∈Ω, second-stage routing variables
xω
e ,e ∈Eω, represent whether edge e is traversed by the delivery vehicle. Then, the optimization
model is stated as follows:
min
y∈{0,1}n
X
i∈N
di∆iyi +
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Cω,
(1)
where Cω =
min
X
e∈Eω
cexω
e
(2)
s.t.
X
e∈δω({i})
xω
e = 2
∀i ∈Vω
(3)
X
e∈δω(Q)
xω
e ≥2
∀Q ⊂Vω,|Q| ≥2
(4)
xω
e ∈{0,1}
∀e ∈Eω.
(5)
The objective function (1) minimizes the expected fulﬁllment cost considering all scenarios ω ∈
Ω. The routing cost associated with a second-stage scenario ω ∈Ωis deﬁned through routing
subproblem (2)–(5) where for some subset of vertices Q, we deﬁne δω(Q) = {{i,j} ∈Eω|i ∈Q,j /∈Q}
to simplify the exposition. Equations (2)–(5) comprise a standard formulation for the (symmetric)
TSP (see, e.g., Gutin and Punnen (2006)). Note that while the routing cost Cω is not dependent
on the ﬁrst-stage decision vector y, the probability of incurring this cost does depend on y through
Pω(y).
As observed in the above stochastic programming formulation, the model’s size grows exponen-
tially in the number of customers n. There exist 2n diﬀerent incentive policies. Further, for any given
incentive policy y, calculating the expected routing cost (the second summation in Equation (1))
is challenging, as this involves evaluating the costs and decision-dependent probabilities of 2
P
i∈N yi
diﬀerent scenarios, which leads to 2n diﬀerent possible scenarios in the worst case (i.e. when all
customers are oﬀered an incentive, yi = 1,∀i ∈N). As a result, the probability Pω(y) of each unique
choice scenario ω becomes progressively smaller as the number of incentives increases. As such,
expecting an oﬀ-the-shelf solver to solve the above formulation directly for reasonable instance
sizes is unrealistic. Consequently, one must evaluate many scenarios to reasonably approximate the
expected routing cost for any given incentive policy.
To overcome these issues, we propose an exact B&B algorithm to eﬃciently solve the DDRS
problem deﬁned in (1)–(5).

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
11
4.
Branch-and-bound algorithm
The B&B algorithm solves the DDRS problem by implicitly enumerating the incentive policies in a
binary search tree. Each branching node in the B&B tree represents a partial policy, and each leaf
node represents a complete policy. The former represents a policy where the incentive decisions are
ﬁxed for a subset of customers. In contrast, the latter represents a policy where incentive decisions
have been made for all customers. We denote a node of the search tree by vector L = (li)i∈N,
li ∈{0,1,#}, where li = 1 if an incentive is oﬀered to a customer i, li = 0 if no incentive is oﬀered,
and li = # if no decision has been made for this customer. Hence, if L is a partial policy, it can be
extended to several complete policies, denoted by the set D(L), via branching. At the root node
of the B&B tree, no incentive decisions have been made for any of the customers (li = # for all
i ∈N). Branching is performed on the incentive decisions. Each time a branching decision is made
for a node L, a customer i ∈N for whom no incentive decision has been made is selected (li = #),
and two new branches are created: one where customer i receives an incentive, and one where the
customer does not. After branching on a node L, two new child nodes L0 and L1 are obtained,
with l0
i = 0, l1
i = 1, l0
j = l1
j = lj for all j ̸= i. The B&B algorithm recursively continues until no nodes
are left to branch on.
To avoid enumerating all 2n alternative incentive policies, our B&B algorithm relies on two
diﬀerent techniques to prune parts of the search tree: (1) dominance and (2) bounding. Following
the deﬁnition of Papadimitriou and Steiglitz (1998), a node L′ of the search tree is said to be
dominated by another node L′′ if the best policy that can be derived from node L′ is not better than
the best policy that can be derived from L′′, i.e., miny∈D(L′) S(y) ≥miny∈D(L′′) S(y). By deﬁnition,
a search tree node dominated by another node can be safely discarded.
The second technique through which the search tree can be pruned is bounding. A standard
bounding approach involves computing a lower bound on the best solution that can be obtained
from a branching node L, i.e., LB(L) ≤miny∈D(L) S(y), and by comparing this bound against the
value S(y∗) of the current best solution y∗(the incumbent). A branching node L can then be pruned
if its lower bound exceeds the value of the incumbent, i.e., LB(L) ≥S(y∗). One complicating factor
in this bounding procedure is that it requires evaluating the true fulﬁllment cost S(y) of a policy
y, which is computationally expensive. To overcome this issue, we instead derive easier-to-compute
bounds LB(y) and UB(y), with LB(y) ≤S(y) ≤UB(y), on the true fulﬁllment cost of an incentive
policy y. We can extend this concept to compute bounds on the value of the complete policies
contained in the subtree of a branching node L, i.e., LB(L) ≤miny∈D(L) S(y), maxy∈D(L) S(y) ≤
UB(L). A branching node L can be pruned if LB(L) ≥UB(y∗). The eﬀectiveness of this bounding
procedure strongly depends on the tightness of the bounds: the smaller the gap between the upper
and lower bounds of a branching node or policy, the stronger the bounding procedure becomes.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
12
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. First, Section 4.1 discusses how dominance
between a pair of search tree nodes is established. Next, Section 4.2 derives the upper and lower
bounds on the fulﬁllment costs of a search tree node. Finally, Section 4.3 presents a complete
overview of the B&B algorithm and discusses implementation details.
4.1.
Dominance
A node L′ of the search tree is said to be dominated by another node L′′ if the best policy derived
from node L′ is not better than the one derived from L′′. Any node dominated by another node
can be safely discarded. The dominance rule is established between a pair of nodes L0 and L1
that share the same parent node L in the B&B tree. Since nodes L0 and L1 are obtained through
branching, they diﬀer only in the decision made for a single customer, namely the customer that
was branched on. In L1, this customer was oﬀered an incentive, whereas, in L0, this customer did
not receive an incentive. The dominance tests are based on the intuition that if we were to oﬀer
a customer an incentive, then the incentive cost that we incur must lead to a reduction in the
expected routing cost, which must be higher than the cost of the incentive itself.
Stated formally, let nodes L0 and L1 be the child nodes obtained from tree node L by branching
on customer k ∈N, where L0 represents the node where customer k does not receive an incentive
and L1 the node where customer k is incentivized. Node L1 is dominated by L0 if it holds that:
min
y∈D(L1)
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Sω(y) ≥
min
y∈D(L0)
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Sω(y).
(6)
Let y1 ∈arg miny∈D(L1)
P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Sω(y) be a policy that minimizes the left-hand-side of the Con-
dition (6). To prove the dominance of node L0, it suﬃces to show that there exists at least one
policy ˜y ∈D(L0) for which it holds that:
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y1)Sω(y1) ≥
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(˜y)Sω(˜y).
(7)
Using the deﬁnitions of Sω(y), Pω(y), and Table 1 from Section 3, we prove the existence of such
policy ˜y ∈D(L0) if the below condition holds (The derivations are relegated to Appendix A.):
dk ≥Fk(y1), where Fk(y1) ≡
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i )Cω −
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i )Cω.
(8)
If Condition (8) holds, then it is not beneﬁcial to give an incentive to customer k. That is, node
L0 dominates node L1; hence, node L1 can be pruned.
By conducting similar computations as in Inequalities (6)–(8) for the case when node L0 is
dominated by L1 and considering a policy y0 ∈arg miny∈D(L0)
P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Sω(y), we obtain the
following condition:
dk ≤Fk(y0), where Fk(y0) ≡
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y0
i )Cω −
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y0
i ) · Cω.
(9)

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
13
Unfortunately, applying Conditions (8) and (9) requires calculating Fk(y0) and Fk(y1), which
is computationally expensive. To circumvent this issue, in the next section, we will derive easier-
to-compute upper (F k(y)) and lower (F k(y)) bounds on Fk(y). Then, we derive a valid set of
dominance rules by replacing Fk(y1) in Condition (8) with max
y∈D(L)F k(y) and replacing Fk(y0) in
Condition (9) with min
y∈D(L)F k(y) since it holds that:
Fk(y1) ≤F k(y1) ≤max
y∈D(L)F k(y),
Fk(y0) ≥F k(y0) ≥min
y∈D(L)F k(y).
Bounds on Fk(y). For ease of notation, we denote each scenario by ω ≡(ω
¯k,ωk), where vector
ω
¯k = (ωi)i∈N\k represents the delivery choices of customers in set N \k and ωk is the delivery choice
of customer k. For a given vector ω
¯k, let C(ω¯k,0) and C(ω¯k,1) denote the optimal routing cost of
scenarios where customer k is served at home and the (nearest) pickup point, respectively. Then
the following holds from the deﬁnition of Fk(y), y ∈{y0,y1}, in Equations (8) and (9):
Fk(y) =
X
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1
Y
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (yi)C(ω¯k,0) −
X
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1
Y
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (yi) · C(ω¯k,1)
(10)
=
X
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1
Y
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (yi)(C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1)).
(11)
Let Vω¯k denote the vertex set containing the depot, all customers i ∈N \ k who require home
delivery (ω
¯k
i = 0), and the pickup points that are to be visited according to the vector ω
¯k. Let i∗
ω¯k
be the closest vertex to customer k in set Vω¯k: i∗
ω¯k ∈arg mini∈Vω¯k cki. Due to the triangle inequality,
the diﬀerence C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1) is at most the cost of a round trip between the customer k and the
closest visited vertex i∗
ω¯k:
C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1) ≤2cki∗
ω¯k.
(12)
Next, we reorder all the vertices i ∈V \ k such that a vertex i precedes a vertex j (denoted i ≺j)
if cki < ckj. Observe that, a given vertex i is the closest visited vertex to the customer k for any
vector ω
¯k whose vertex set Vω¯k includes vertex i but not vertices ∀j ≺i. We deﬁne the set of all
such vectors as Bi(k) = {ω
¯k ∈{0,1}n−1 : i ∈Vω¯k} \ ∪j≺iBj(k). Thus, the distance 2cki provides a
common upper bound on the diﬀerence C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1) for all vectors ω
¯k ∈Bi(k). As a result, we
compute sets Bi(k) for all vertices i ∈V \ {k}, and set an upper bound on Fk(y) as:
F k(y) ≡
X
i∈V \k


X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′)

2cki.
(13)
The term within the brackets can be computed without enumerating all scenarios. We give a
closed-form formulation for this expression in Appendix B. Similarly, we compute a lower bound
F k(y).

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
14
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
As a result, the upper and lower bounds F k(y) and F k(y) can be computed much faster com-
pared to the precise value of Fk(y) and can be replaced in Conditions (8) and (9) to get valid,
but weaker dominance conditions. Finally, to avoid computing y1 ∈arg miny∈D(L1) S(y) and y0 ∈
arg miny∈D(L0) S(y), we replace F k(y1) in Condition (8) with
min
y∈D(L)F k(y) and replace F k(y0) in
Condition (9) with max
y∈D(L)F k(y).
To derive the values maxy∈D(L) F k(y) and miny∈D(L) F k(y), we recall that the closest neighbors
of customer k are less likely to be visited if they are oﬀered an incentive to select a pickup point.
Therefore, the largest upper bound is attained by the policy y′ ∈D(L) which oﬀers the maximum
possible number of incentives (i.e., y′
i = 1 if li = #, and y′
i = li otherwise). Similarly, the smallest
lower bound on the insertion cost is attained by the policy y′′ ∈D(L) which oﬀers the least pos-
sible number of incentives (i.e., y′′
i = 0 if li = #, and y′′
i = li otherwise). This yields the following
dominance rule, which enables us to prune nodes in the search tree.
Dominance Rule 1 Let L0 and L1 be two child nodes created by branching on node L, such that
L1 oﬀers an incentive to customer k, and L0 does not. Then,
1. If maxy∈D(L) F k(y) ≤dk, then node L1 is dominated by node L0. Hence, L1 can be pruned.
2. If miny∈D(L) F k(y) ≥dk, then node L0 is dominated by node L1. Hence, L0 can be pruned.
Naturally, the value Fk(y) depends on decisions made for other customers near customer k. We
derive a second dominance rule which accounts for decisions made for neighboring customers (To
improve the exposition of the paper, the proof has been relegated to Appendix C.):
Dominance Rule 2 Let two customers j,k ∈N be located within a distance cjk ≤1
2 min(dj,dk).
Then, any node that oﬀers an incentive to exactly one of these customers is dominated by a node
that oﬀers an incentive to neither of these customers.
If the Dominance Rules 1 and 2 do not prune a node L, then the algorithm attempts to prune
the node by bounding. In the following, we detail our bounding procedure.
4.2.
Bounds on the fulﬁllment cost
In addition to dominance checks, the second technique we use to prune parts of the B&B search
tree is through bounding. As described in Section 4, to prune the search tree through bounding,
we need to compute UB(L) and LB(L), i.e., the upper and lower bounds, respectively, on the
expected fulﬁllment costs of a node L in the B&B tree. To compute these bounds, recall that the
fulﬁllment cost comprises of two components: the expected incentive cost and the expected routing
cost. The lowest expected incentive cost I(L) is realized by a policy y′ ∈D(L) that does not oﬀer
any incentives in addition to decisions that are already made in node L (y′
i = 0 if li = # for all

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
15
i ∈N). Similarly, the largest expected incentive I(L) cost is attained by a policy y′′ ∈D(L) that
oﬀers the maximum possible number of incentives in addition to the decisions already indicated in
the node (y′′
i = 1 if li = # for all i ∈N).
Similar to the bounds on the incentive costs, we can derive upper (R(L)) and lower (R(L))
bounds on the expected routing costs. However, computing these bounds eﬃciently is more involved
and will be explained in detail subsequently. Using the bounds on the incentive and routing costs,
the bounds on the total fulﬁllment cost of a node L can be expressed as:
LB(L) = I(L) + R(L) =
X
i∈N
li=1
di∆i + R(L),
(14)
UB(L) = I(L) + R(L) =
X
i∈N
li∈{1,#}
di∆i + R(L).
(15)
Lower bounds on the expected routing cost. A tight lower bound R(L) on the expected
routing cost of a node L in the B&B tree is given by:
R(L) = min
y∈D(L)
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Cω.
(16)
In practice, even for small problem instances, it is intractable to evaluate this expression as the
sets Ωand D(L) can be prohibitively large. To overcome this complexity, we propose the following
scenario bundling procedure. First, we partition Ωinto non-overlapping subsets, referred to as
bundles. Then, for all the scenarios in a bundle, a single lower bound is computed for the routing
cost. A valid lower bound on the expected routing cost can then be obtained by summing over
the bundles with their lower bound multiplied by the minimum possible cumulative probability
derived from L for the scenarios included in each bundle.
The partitioning of the scenarios is based on the subset of pickup points ˜P ⊆P visited in each
scenario. As there are p number of pickup points in P, we have 2p number of such subsets. Then,
for any subset ˜P, the bundle B( ˜
P) includes the scenarios where: (i) each of the pickup points in
˜P are visited, and (ii) the pickup points other than those in ˜P are not visited. We let ω( ˜P) denote
the scenario with the lowest routing cost among those in bundle B( ˜
P). This is the scenario where
all customers whose nearest pickup point is in set ˜P have chosen pickup point delivery. Hence,
Cω( ˜
P) gives the lower bound for the routing cost of any scenario in bundle B( ˜
P).
Given the lower bounds on the routing cost for the scenarios in each bundle, we calculate a
lower bound on the expected routing cost over all scenarios. For a given incentive policy y, the
cumulative probability of the scenarios in bundle B( ˜P), ˜P ⊆P, equals P
ω∈B( ˜
P) Pω(y). Then, for
policy y, a lower bound on the expected routing cost, R(y), is given by:

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
16
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
R(y) ≡
X
˜
P⊆P

Cω( ˜
P)
X
ω∈B( ˜
P)
Pω(y)

.
A valid lower bound R(L) on the expected routing cost of a branching node L can now be deﬁned
as R(L) ≡miny∈D(L) R(y). Computation of this bound is hard, as it requires minimization over an
exponential number of policies achieved by branching from L. Therefore we apply the property of
extremum, i.e., minx
P
i f i(x) ≥P
i minx f i(x) to obtain an easier-to-compute lower bound:
R(L) = min
y∈D(L)R(y) ≥
X
˜
P⊆P

Cω( ˜
P)
X
ω∈B( ˜
P)
min
y∈D(L)Pω(y)

.
(17)
To calculate the bundle probability P
ω∈B( ˜
P) miny∈D(L) Pω(y), for ˜P ⊆P, without enumerating all
scenarios ω ∈B( ˜P), we use an Algorithm 2, which is relegated to Appendix D for readability.
The lower bound (17) can be strengthened whenever the node L indicates not oﬀering an incentive
to a customer i ∈N, i.e., it is certain that this customer must be visited at home. By including
customer i as a required visit in the route, we can improve the routing cost lower bound for the
scenarios in bundles that contain the nearest pickup point to customer i. For such bundles, the
scenario ω( ˜
P) would be updated by the one where customer i requires a home visit instead of a
pickup point delivery (all other elements of ω( ˜
P) stay the same). Furthermore, solving additional
scenarios ω ∈Ωand using their exact routing cost instead of their lower bounds can also improve
the lower bound (17). Let W ⊆Ωdenote a subset of scenarios for which the routing cost Cω has
been computed exactly. Using the routing costs Cω of the scenarios ω ∈W and (17), a tighter lower
bound on the expected routing cost R(L) can be obtained as:
R(L) ≤
X
ω∈W

Cω min
y∈D(L)Pω(y)

+
X
˜
P⊆P

Cω( ˜
P)
X
ω∈B( ˜
P)
ω /∈W
min
y∈D(L)Pω(y)

.
(18)
Upper bounds on the expected routing cost. Let C be the cost of a scenario in which a
vehicle visits all vertices in V . An upper bound on the routing cost R(L) can trivially be obtained
by setting R(L) = C. Similar to the lower bound computations, this bound can be improved by
computing the exact routing costs of additional scenarios ω ∈Ω. Again, we use the set W ⊆Ωas
the set of scenarios for which the routing cost has been computed exactly. Using the routing costs
Cω of the scenarios ω ∈W, we obtain a tighter upper bound on the expected routing cost R(L):
R(L) ≡
X
ω∈W

Cω min
y∈D(L)Pω(y)

+ C
 
1 −
X
ω∈W
min
y∈D(L)Pω(y)
!
.
(19)

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
17
4.3.
The B&B algorithm
An overview of the B&B algorithm in pseudocode is given in Algorithm 1. The B&B algorithm
maintains a queue L of open (unexplored) tree nodes. This queue is initialized with the root node of
the search tree, which represents a partial policy where no incentive decisions have been made for
any customers. We also compute the exact routing cost of the scenarios in set W = {ω( ˜P), ∀˜P ⊆P}.
This allows us to initialize the scenario bundling procedure for computing a lower bound on the
expected fulﬁllment cost of a node L, i.e., LB(L). To warm-start the B&B algorithm, the policy
where no incentive is oﬀered to any customer is provided as an initial solution y∗.
At each iteration of the B&B algorithm, an unexplored node L is taken from the queue (line 2).
In our implementation, we use a best-ﬁrst-search strategy where we always take the node with
the smallest lower bound LB(L) from the queue. After removing node L from the queue, it is
checked whether some other node dominates node L. If node L is dominated, the node gets dis-
carded (line 4). Otherwise, lower and upper bounds, LB(L) and UB(L), are calculated (line 7)
using Equations (14) and (15). Node L is then compared against the incumbent solution y∗. This
comparison could yield three possible outcomes:
(i) The lower bound LB(L) exceeds the upper bound UB(y∗) of the incumbent (LB(L) ≥
UB(y∗)) in which case L can be safely discarded (line 8) as the fulﬁllment cost of any solution
in D(L) exceeds the fulﬁllment cost of the incumbent,
(ii) If UB(L) < LB(y∗) then every solution in D(L) improves upon the incumbent. If D(L) is a
singleton, we found a new improving solution that becomes the new incumbent (line 12),
(iii) The bounds of L and y∗overlap, which renders the nodes incomparable. This case is handled
diﬀerently depending on whether L is a tree node or a leaf node.
If node L is a leaf node, and its bounds overlap with the bounds of the incumbent, it is impossible
to state which node constitutes the better solution. To resolve this issue, we reﬁne the bounds of
both nodes until it can be decided which of the two nodes is better, after which the incumbent is
updated accordingly (line 15). To reﬁne the bounds of L and y∗, we use a simple iterative procedure
which, at each iteration, tightens the bounds of the node L′ ∈{L,y∗} with the largest gap between
its lower and upper bound until the bounds no longer overlap or the gaps between the bounds
have closed. Tightening the bounds of a node L′ is performed through Equations (18) and (19)
by progressively adding additional scenarios to W. Speciﬁcally, when adding a scenario to W, we
select the scenario ω ∈Ω\ W with respect to L′ that has the highest probability of realizing, i.e.,
ω ∈arg maxω∈Ω\W
Q
i∈N
l′
i=0,1
Pωi(l′
i).
When node L is a tree node, and its bounds overlap with the bounds of the incumbent, we can
either choose to improve the bounds of L or y∗or branch on L. Computing tight bounds for tree
nodes is computationally expensive, particularly for nodes high up in the B& B tree, where most

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
18
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Algorithm 1: Branch-and-bound algorithm for the DDRS problem
Input: root node L◦= (#)i∈N, queue of open nodes L = {L◦}, initial solution y∗= (0)i∈N, set
of solved routing subproblems W = {ω( ˜P), ∀˜P ⊆P}
Output: an optimal solution for problem (1)–(5)
1 while L ̸= ∅do
2
L ∈arg minL∈L LB(L)
3
L ←L \ L
4
if
L is dominated then
// pruning by dominance
5
prune L
6
else
7
LB(L),UB(L) ←bounds (14), (15)
8
if LB(L) ≥UB(y∗) then
// pruning by bounds
9
prune L
10
else
11
if L is a leaf node then
12
if UB(L) < LB(y∗) then
// new incumbent
13
y∗←L
14
else
// overlapping bounds
15
while LB(L) < UB(y∗) and UB(L) ≥LB(y∗) do
// tighten bounds
16
L′ ←arg max˜L∈{L,y∗}(UB(˜L) −LB(˜L))
17
ω ∈arg maxω∈Ω\W
Q
i∈N
l′
i=0,1
Pωi(l′
i)
18
W ←W ∪ω
19
LB(L′),UB(L′) ←bounds (14), (15)
20
y∗←arg min˜L∈{L,y∗} LB(˜L)
21
else
22
while UB(y∗) −LB(y∗) > UB(L) −LB(L) do
// tighten bound
23
ω ∈arg maxω∈Ω\W
Q
i∈N Pωi(y∗
i )
24
W ←W ∪ω
25
LB(y∗),UB(y∗) ←bounds (14), (15)
26
if LB(L) < UB(y∗) then
// branch
27
select a customer i ∈arg maxi∈N,li=# ci0 + cij, j ∈P
28
create nodes L1 that oﬀers an incentive to customer i, and L0 that does not
29
update ω( ˜P), ˜P ⊆P
30
L ←L ∪{L0,L1}
31 return y∗
incentive decisions are yet to be made. Therefore, we opt to improve the bounds only for node y∗
until the gap between its lower and upper bounds is smaller than the gap between the lower and
upper bounds of L (line 22) and then proceed with branching on L.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
19
Branching is required if a tree node cannot be discarded based on dominance or bounds (line 26).
When the algorithm branches on a node L, a customer i ∈N is selected for whom no incentive
decision has been made (li = #). When there are multiple such customers, we select the customer
with the largest sum of distances to the nearest pickup point t ∈P and the depot, as serving such
a customer will likely yield the largest impact on the routing and incentive costs. This selection
rule aims to produce the most signiﬁcant change in the objective function. For a branching node
that does not oﬀer an incentive to the customer i, it is known with certainty that customer i will
be visited at home. Hence, we update the routing cost lower bound for bundles that contain the
pickup point that is closest to customer i. For such bundles, the scenario ω( ˜
P) would be updated by
the one where customer i requires a home visit instead of pickup point delivery (all other elements
of ω( ˜
P) stay the same). After branching, we obtain two new child nodes, L0 and L1, which are
added to the queue L of open nodes (line 30). The B&B algorithm terminates when the queue has
no open nodes left to explore (line 1).
4.4.
Heuristic variants
The number of incentive policies and potential scenarios grows exponentially with the number
of customers. This limits the scalability of our exact B&B algorithm. To solve larger problem
instances, some of the exact components in the B&B algorithm can be replaced by heuristic alter-
natives, leading to more scalable but non-exact approaches. We propose two such heuristic variants.
Estimation of the expected routing cost through sampling. For an exact evaluation of
the expected routing cost P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Cω of a complete policy y obtained at a leaf node of the B&B
tree, one would need to solve |Ω| = 2
P
i∈N yi routing problems, i.e., one for each possible scenario
realization. This is computationally intractable. As a heuristic alternative, we apply Monte Carlo
sampling. In this approach, we repeatedly generate a random scenario ω, where for each customer
i ∈N, the ωi component is a random binary value determined by the probability Pωi(yi). After
obtaining M random scenarios ω1,...,ωM, we calculate the arithmetic mean of the routing costs,
i.e.,
1
M
PM
j=1 Cωj, and use it as an estimate for the expected routing cost of policy y.
Limit on the number of oﬀered incentives. We add a heuristic pruning rule, where a node
is pruned if it oﬀers more incentives than a pre-deﬁned limit. We set this limit equal to the number
of incentives oﬀered by the deterministic counterpart of the DDRS problem. The deterministic
counterpart, also known as the Ring Star problem, assumes that a customer selects pickup point
delivery with certainty when an incentive is oﬀered; otherwise, the customer selects home delivery
(see, e.g., Labb´e et al. (2004) for the exact formulation of this problem).

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
20
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
5.
Instance design
The instances used in our experiments are derived from benchmark instances for a two-echelon
last-mile delivery problem published in Zhou et al. (2018). In this problem, a supply chain network
is partitioned into two echelons: in the ﬁrst echelon, vehicles departing from a central depot supply
regional satellites; in the second echelon, vehicle routes are created to serve customers from nearby
satellites via home or pickup point delivery. To accurately represent an urban spatial distribution,
the customers are grouped in clusters, the pickup points are located within the customers’ clusters,
and the satellites are scattered across a larger area.
To generate instances for our DDRS problem, we use the largest problem instance I1-12-30-200
from Zhou et al. (2018) containing 200 customers. First, we randomly select n ≤50 customers from
the available customers. We generate two sets of instances: set A contains 100 small instances (n =
10,11,...,19; 10 instances for each size n), and set B contains 70 large instances (n = 20,25,...,50;
10 instances for each size n). Next, we randomly select one of the satellites and designate it as the
depot. Finally, out of the remaining satellites, we identify the nearest satellite to each customer
and randomly select ﬁve of them to include in the model. We experiment with p = 1,3,5 pickup
points. Speciﬁcally, we arrange the pickup points in a sequence and select the ﬁrst pickup point
when p = 1, the ﬁrst three pickup points when p = 3, and all ﬁve pickup points when p = 5. Lastly,
we scale up all the nodes’ coordinates by a factor of 1000, compute the Euclidean distance between
all the vertex pairs, and round these distances to the nearest integer to obtain the routing costs
between the vertex pairs. For all the instances that we generated, this procedure ensured that the
integer routing costs adhere to the triangle inequality.
For ease of exposition, we assume incentive eﬀectiveness ∆= ∆i for all customers i in our
experiments. We rely on McKinsey&Company (2016) and UPS (2018) to set ∆. These sources
report that about 50%-63% of customers indicate “reduced shipping fee” as the primary motivator
to select an alternative delivery location, such as a pickup point. Accordingly, we set ∆= 0.6. We
also experiment with ∆= 0.3 and ∆= 0.9 for incentive eﬀectiveness, i.e., the probability that a
customer will switch to pickup point delivery given an incentive di.
To achieve the same incentive eﬀectiveness ∆, it is realistic that the retailer needs to pay a
higher incentive to a customer who is farther away from the pickup point than a customer who
is closer by. To reﬂect this relationship, the incentive value di, i ∈N, is set equal to di = ci
Cω
n u,
where ci is the distance of customer i to the nearest pickup point, Cω is the routing cost incurred
when all customers would be serviced at home, and u is the scaling factor. In other words, the
incentive oﬀered to a customer i depends on how close the customer is to the pickup point (a
customer receives a lower incentive if the pickup point is very close). It scales with the average
routing cost incurred for servicing a customer at home and the scaling factor u. In the experiments,

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
21
we evaluate u = 0.03,0.06,0.12. When u = 0.06, the maximum incentive costs (i.e., if all customers
were oﬀered an incentive and all the incentives were accepted) would be roughly a third of the
maximum routing costs (i.e., if all customers requested home delivery).
To structure the computational evaluation, we created the following ﬁve parameter combinations:
C1 base case: ∆= 0.6, u = 0.06,
C2 low incentive eﬀectiveness: ∆= 0.3, u = 0.06,
C3 high incentive eﬀectiveness: ∆= 0.9, u = 0.06,
C4 low incentive value: ∆= 0.6, u = 0.03,
C5 high incentive value: ∆= 0.6, u = 0.12.
All experiments are conducted on a single thread of an AMD EpycTM (2GHz) CPU with 24 GB of
memory (3200MHz DDR4). The B&B algorithm is implemented in Python 3.6. The scenario sub-
problems are solved using the Concorde TSP solver (Applegate et al. 2015), and the deterministic
Ring Star model is solved using Gurobi solver (Gurobi Optimization, LLC 2021).
6.
Algorithm performance
We ﬁrst evaluate the computational performance of the exact B&B algorithm and then evaluate
the heuristic variants.
6.1.
Exact B&B algorithm
To assess the performance of the exact B&B algorithm, we solve each of the 100 instances in Set
A with each of the ﬁve parameter combinations (C1–C5) and 3 pickup points. We compare the
eﬀectiveness of our B&B algorithm to an enumeration approach, where the routing costs of all the
scenarios for a speciﬁc n are calculated once and then used for computing the expected fulﬁllment
cost of all the available policies. We also evaluated two other benchmark approaches, which were
less eﬃcient than enumeration: 1) using Gurobi to ﬁnd an optimal incentive policy after calculating
the routing costs of all the scenarios, which resulted in similar solution times as enumeration for
small size problems, but faced memory issues for instances with n > 17; and 2) reformulating the
problem as a single-stage nonlinear mixed-integer program and solving it with oﬀ-the-shelf solver
SCIP (Gamrath et al. 2020), which performed very poorly compared to enumeration in terms of
solution time.
Table 3 shows, for each problem size n, the mean, minimum, and maximum solution times for
all the instances across all parameter combinations C1–C5 with p = 3, both for enumeration and
the B&B algorithm (We provide a more detailed analysis across diﬀerent parameter combinations
C1–C5 and pickup points p in Section 7). The solution times include solving the necessary scenario
subproblems (i.e., a subset of scenarios for the B&B algorithm while all scenarios for enumeration)
and the time for all other operations.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
22
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Table 3
Solution time via enumeration versus B&B algorithm
(instances of Set A with parameter combinations C1–C5)
Enumeration (sec)
B&B (sec)
n
mean
min
max
mean
min
max
10 2.0
1.8
2.4
0.9
0.0
2.0
11 4.9
4.3
6.5
1.8
0.0
4.6
12 12.3
10.1
15.3
4.3
0.0
11.6
13 33.3
28.5
41.7
10.5
0.1
27.2
14 92.6
78.7
122.4
24.4
0.1
80.1
15 268.5
239.1
326.9
56.1
0.1
221.9
16 830.9
760.2
960.3
162.9
0.1
807.7
17 2714.1 2567.6
2919.2
574.5
0.1
2775.5
18 9243.7 8826.9
9737.5
1526.8
0.1
7967.6
19 -
-
-
4221.9
0.1
19860.6
Table 3 shows that enumeration is not a viable approach to solving larger instances. All instances
with n = 18 require over two hours, while instances with n = 19 or more cannot be solved due to
memory limitations. The B&B algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms the enumeration approach. For
example, for instances with n = 18, the B&B algorithm is on average 6.1 times faster, with some
instances being solved almost instantaneously. Interestingly, in terms of the computation time, we
ﬁnd that the enumeration approach spends 20% of its running time on solving the scenario sub-
problems on average while the rest is spent on enumerating and computing the expected fulﬁllment
cost of all available policies. In contrast, the B&B approach devotes most of its running time (77%)
to solving the scenario subproblems. The remaining parts of the algorithm, including scenario
bundling for calculating the lower bound of the expected routing cost (17), tightening the lower
and upper bounds of the expected routing cost (18)–(19), and branching account for an average of
2%, 14%, and 7% of running time, respectively. Dominance checks are almost instantaneous.
Given the time spent on various bounding and dominance procedures in the B&B algorithm,
we next evaluate the eﬀectiveness of these procedures in terms of the overall solution time and
pruning. The ﬁrst set of results in Table 4 shows the number of pruned nodes via bounding versus
each dominance rule in our exact B&B algorithm. As the results indicate, bounding is responsible
for most of the pruned nodes (more than 50% of all the pruned nodes). To understand the eﬀect
of dominance rules on the solution time, we then run the algorithm by removing each one at a
time. A comparison of the ﬁrst set of results with the last set (where the algorithm is run without
any dominance rules) highlights the strength of the dominance rules. One can observe that for
large problems, the solution time increases by more than six-fold when the dominance rules are
completely removed from the algorithm (e.g., n = 18). This is because the nodes pruned by the
dominance rules are usually higher up in the tree than those pruned via bounding, which are
mostly leaf nodes. As the dominance rules prevent costly procedures to explore more nodes and

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
23
are performed almost instantaneously, they considerably reduce solution time even though fewer
nodes are pruned. To evaluate which dominance rule brings the most beneﬁt regarding the solution
time, we present the results where only one dominance rule is implemented along with bounding
in the algorithm. The second and third sets of results show the algorithm’s performance with only
Dominance Rule 1 (DR1) and Dominance Rule 2 (DR2), respectively, along with bounding. The
results show that DR2 is the strongest (e.g., twice as fast as the case where only DR1 is implemented
along with bounding). As a result, the exact B&B algorithm enables us to solve instances with up
to 19 customers (we run into memory issues for some of the instances larger than n = 19).
Table 4
Eﬀect of Dominance Rule 1 (DR1) and Dominance Rule 2 (DR2) on the mean solution time and the number of
pruned nodes (instances of Set A with parameter combination C1)
Bounding + DR1 + DR2
Bounding + DR1
Bounding + DR2
Bounding
n
Time
Bounding
DR1
DR2
Time
Bounding
DR1
Time
Bounding
DR2
Time
Bounding
(sec)
(nodes)
(nodes)
(nodes)
(sec)
(nodes)
(nodes)
(sec)
(nodes)
(nodes)
(sec)
(nodes)
10
1
261
116
69
2
576
89
1
309
187
2
834
11
2
359
191
77
4
985
110
2
434
281
5
1450
12
5
810
310
181
10
1893
257
6
1092
483
12
2982
13
13
1265
504
499
24
2972
640
15
1764
1039
31
5562
14
28
1817
731
854
62
4846
1131
34
2838
1732
86
10159
15
58
3162
1219
1286
160
8180
2294
75
4963
2650
262
19000
16
191
6704
2073
3173
486
14650
5558
250
10721
4881
848
35895
17
653
15829
4952
5235
1795
32030
6988
894
23279
9808
3147
68148
18
1684
21577
7314
10393
5295
49902
13142
2429
34615
18121
10323
121040
19
5501
36434
10631
15422
18557
87154
19492
8033
58928
29736
33028a
213040a
a Results based on 6 out of 10 instances; 4 instances unsolved due to memory issues.
Figure 2 investigates the convergence behavior of the B&B algorithm for a problem instance with
n = 19. The ﬁgure plots the best upper and lower bounds over time. As is typical for many B&B
algorithms, high-quality solutions are discovered quite early in the search, and most computation
time is spent on proving optimality. Motivated by this observation, in Table 5, we show the opti-
mality gap when we run the B&B algorithm with a one-hour time limit. We also report time to best
solution if the algorithm was run without a time limit. Time to best solution is when an optimal
solution is discovered but not proven optimal. Our ﬁndings are consistent with the convergence
behavior shown in Figure 2. For example, even though an optimal solution has been reached on
average in 53.3 seconds for instances with n = 16, it takes 162.9 seconds to prove optimality (as
shown in Table 3). For the largest problem instances (n = 19), 32 out of 50 instances were solved to
proven optimality within 1 hour; for the remaining instances, the optimality gap averaged 0.05%.
This indicates that the algorithm can ﬁnd near-optimal solutions within a reasonable computation
time, even for larger instances.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
24
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1







   



 



#      
 ! ! 
 "      " "   Figure 2
Convergence rate of the exact B&B
algorithm for a problem instance with n = 19 (instance
of set A with parameter combination C1)
B&B (3600 sec)
B&B without time limit
time to best solution (sec)
n
opt gap (%)
solved
mean
min
max
10
0.00
50
0.3
0.0
1.4
11
0.00
50
0.7
0.0
3.8
12
0.00
50
1.7
0.0
9.3
13
0.00
50
3.4
0.0
23.5
14
0.00
50
8.6
0.0
60.9
15
0.00
50
22.1
0.0
144.6
16
0.00
50
53.3
0.0
408.2
17
0.00
50
220.0
0.0
1107.4
18
0.00
42
574.2
0.0
3474.3
19
0.05
32
1496.0
0.0
14181.4
Table 5
Performance of the exact B&B algorithm
with a time limit of 3600 sec (instances of Set A with
parameter combinations C1–C5)
6.2.
Heuristic variants
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the heuristic B&B variants. Computations are
performed on instance sets A and B, with parameter combination C1 (base case). We ﬁrst evaluate
the quality of the B&B algorithm with an integrated sampling heuristic, where the expected routing
cost for a policy y is estimated via Monte Carlo sampling (see Section 4.4). We test three diﬀerent
sample sizes M = 20, 100, and 200 for the number of scenarios drawn from set Ω. We run the
heuristic B&B algorithm for a maximum of 1 hour per instance. The results are compared to those
obtained from the exact B&B algorithm with the same time limit (Table 5). Table 6 presents the
mean run time and the gap between the heuristic solution and the exact B&B algorithm’s solution
within 1 hour. A negative gap is reported in Table 6 when the exact B&B algorithm cannot ﬁnd
an optimal solution within the given time limit, but the heuristic can provide a better solution
within the same computational time.
Table 6 shows that as the sample size M increases, so does the algorithm’s run time; however,
the gap between the solutions provided by the heuristic and the exact approach becomes smaller
as expected. Since all the instances with problem sizes up to 17 can be solved to optimality within
3,600 seconds, the “gap” column represents the optimality gap for these problem sizes. We observe
that the optimality gap is less than 0.9% for the heuristics with M = 200 and M = 100, yet the
time savings are considerable. Even with a sample size of M = 20, good results are obtained for
instances with n = 15–17 customers: computation times are reduced by around 30% while solution
quality drops by only 2.2%. We observe that for large problem sizes of 30 to 50, the sample size
does not greatly impact the solution quality. Since these problems would have many scenarios to
evaluate, the explored sample sizes would be limited. Yet, in general, the heuristic B&B variant

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
25
gives better quality solutions compared to the exact B&B algorithm within the same amount of
time. For example, for problem sizes of 30 to 50, the B&B algorithm with a sampling heuristic of
M = 200 can give solutions that are up to 16.7% better than those provided by the exact algorithm.
Table 6
Run time and gap provided by heuristic variants (instances of Set A and Set B with parameter combination C1)
Exact B&B
M=200
M=100
M=20
Limit # of incentives
n
time (sec)
time (sec)
gapa (%)
time (sec)
gap (%)
time (sec)
gap (%)
time (sec)
gap (%)
10
1
4
0.2
3
0.4
2
1.6
1
0.2
11
2
8
0.4
4
0.5
3
0.8
2
0.1
12
5
17
0.3
11
0.3
7
1.4
4
0.0
13
13
38
0.1
25
0.8
15
1.7
10
0.1
14
28
75
0.6
48
0.6
28
1.3
22
0.0
15
58
147
0.6
84
0.6
50
2.2
44
0.1
16
191
318
0.6
227
0.9
141
2.2
144
0.0
17
653
944
0.8
615
0.5
364
1.0
473
0.0
18
1496
1664
0.5
1451
0.8
828
2.2
1179
0.0
19
2373
2363
0.7
2294
1.1
1734
2.5
2044
0.0
20
3600
3209
-0.4
3103
-0.1
2731
1.1
3476
0.0
25
3600
3600
-4.3
3600
-4.2
3600
-2.8
3600
-1.5
30
3600
3600
-10.3
3600
-10.6
3600
-10.8
3600
-5.4
35
3600
3600
-13.2
3600
-13.2
3600
-12.9
3600
-3.1
40
3600
3600
-16.4
3600
-16.6
3600
-15.5
3600
-0.6
45
3600
3600
-16.7
3600
-16.6
3600
-16.5
3600
0.0
50
3600
3600
-15.4
3600
-15.4
3600
-15.0
3600
-1.0
a Deviation between the heuristic solution and the solution of the exact B&B obtained within 3600 seconds.
We also test the heuristic variant where we limit the number of oﬀered incentives by the number
provided by the deterministic RS problem. To evaluate this variant, we run the heuristic with
a time limit of 1 hour per instance. Column “Limit # incentives” in Table 6 reports the mean
run time and the gap between the heuristic solution and the solution obtained by the exact B&B
algorithms within 1 hour. We observe that for small problem sizes up to 20, this heuristic reduces
the run time by up to 18% with a negligible deterioration in solution quality. For larger problem
sizes, the heuristic solution is up to 5.4% better, while solution times are similar to those obtained
via the exact algorithm.
7.
Problem-oriented insights
We ﬁrst study how solution time, expected fulﬁllment cost, and the number of incentives vary with
parameters ∆, u, and p. Then, we provide insights on the locations of the incentivized customers
based on these parameters. Finally, we benchmark the DDRS policy against alternative policies.
7.1.
Impact of parameters ∆, u, and p
Table 7 shows the solution time, number of pruned nodes, fulﬁllment cost, and number of oﬀered
incentives per parameter combination C1–C5 at diﬀerent numbers of pickup points p.
The ﬁrst interesting observation is related to the impact of incentive eﬀectiveness ∆on the
solution time. All else kept the same, the solution time ﬁrst increases and then decreases in ∆

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
26
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
(comparing the instances of C1, C2, and C3 with the same number of pickup points p). For example,
considering p = 1, when incentive eﬀectiveness ∆is the lowest (C2), the worst-case solution time is
2061 seconds. When ∆increases (C1), the worst-case solution time increases by ﬁve-fold to 10165
seconds, yet it drops to mere 213 seconds when ∆increases even further (C3). A similar observation
prevails for the mean and best-case solution times at diﬀerent values of p. The reasoning for this
behavior is as follows. If ∆is close to 0 (C2), the scenarios where more customers select home
delivery have large probabilities. Due to these scenarios with large probabilities, fewer subproblems
must be solved to have good bounds on the expected routing cost. Similarly, as ∆approaches 1
(C3), the scenarios that match the incentive policy have large probabilities, leading to a similar
reduction in the number of subproblems to solve. Pruning is more eﬃcient with better bounds;
hence, optimality is achieved much faster when ∆is very high or very low (C2 and C3). However,
when ∆nears 0.5 (C1), all scenarios have similar realization probabilities. Hence, more scenarios
need to be solved to achieve good bounds. This leads to higher solution times as pruning gets less
eﬃcient. Other ﬁndings are more straightforward: as the incentive eﬀectiveness ∆increases, more
incentives are oﬀered, and fulﬁllment becomes less costly.
Table 7
Impact of parameters ∆, u and p (instances of Set A with n = 18 customers)
Time (sec)
# of pruned nodes
Fulﬁllment costa
# of incentives
instances ∆
u
p
mean min
max
mean
min
max
mean
min max
mean min max
C1
0.6 0.06
1
5585
893
10165
26616 13313
58514
69
53
82
3.9
0
7
3
1684
289
5480
39284 12397
88198
69
58
82
4.9
1
10
5
3406
71
16121
59151
5521
184675
69
58
83
6.1
4
11
C2
0.3 0.06
1
414
13
2061
12583
2863
38077
71
64
83
2.0
0
5
3
882
12
2745
22833
2154
54856
70
62
82
4.0
1
7
5
3907
69
15142
66241
5677
179230
70
62
82
4.9
3
9
C3
0.9 0.06
1
89
41
213
7665
4270
9999
60
53
77
13.0
10
18
3
161
59
456
12642 6343
37358
61
53
76
10.8
8
16
5
417
31
1246
21971
2022
51849
63
53
79
8.8
5
12
C4
0.6 0.03
1
8358
3243 13583
38284 13897
92023
65
58
79
11.8
0
18
3
4460
1266 7968
58133 23007
97859
66
57
79
11.5
5
16
5
7515
811
17560
91924 32565
179527
66
57
79
10.1
5
13
C5
0.6 0.12
1
1
0
2
142
19
390
71
63
82
1.1
0
3
3
6
1
16
879
84
2759
69
59
82
2.4
1
4
5
32
18
62
2260
1112
4915
69
59
82
3.1
2
4
a Fulﬁllment cost is presented in thousands of cost units.
Next, we observe that the solution time gets shorter as the incentive amount increases, i.e.,
higher u (comparing the instances of C1, C4, and C5 with the same number of pickup points p).
Considering p = 3, when the incentive amount is the lowest (C4), the solution time is at least 1266
seconds. When the incentive amount increases (C5), however, most instances are solved almost
instantaneously, with a maximum time of 16 seconds. Hence, the lowest solution times across all

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
27
the parameter combinations are observed when the incentive amount is the highest. The reason
for such improvement lies in the eﬃciency of dominance and bounding procedures. The dominance
rules get stronger as the incentive amount increases. The intuition is that if the incentive amount is
higher, the nodes with more incentives become much costlier. Hence, they can be identiﬁed earlier
and pruned more easily by the dominance rules, which are very quick to execute, as discussed
in Section 6.1 (note that the number of pruned nodes is also very low since they were identiﬁed
earlier in the exploration process). This is conﬁrmed by the number of incentives in the optimal
policy provided by the B&B algorithm: Table 7 shows that among all the parameter combinations,
the least number of incentives is oﬀered when the incentive amount is highest. A lower number
of incentives corresponds to a lower number of potential scenarios (i.e., 2
P
i∈N yi). Since fewer
subproblems are solved to obtain good bounds on the expected routing cost, the solution times
improve even further. The rationale for a lower number of incentives as u increases is due to the
trade-oﬀbetween incentive costs and expected routing savings. As u increases, incentive costs rise
while expected savings gained by oﬀering an incentive remain constant. As a result, we observe a
reduction in incentive use and a noticeable increase in fulﬁllment cost as incentives become costlier.
Lastly, we observe that the solution times vary greatly across diﬀerent values of p for a given
parameter combination C1–C5. This is surprising because the fulﬁllment costs and the number
of oﬀered incentives stay relatively similar. The reasoning is as follows. With a larger number of
pickup points: (i) the variability in the routing costs across diﬀerent scenarios is smaller as there are
many scenarios where most pickup points are visited, and (ii) the incentive costs are also smaller as
the customers are generally closer to the pickup points. As a result, the expected fulﬁllment costs
of diﬀerent policies are also similar when there are more pickup points. Hence, more exploration
is needed to arrive at an optimal solution. This is reﬂected in the number of pruned nodes, which
consistently increases in p. Since we can achieve more precise bounds on scenarios routing costs
through our bundling procedure when p is larger, more exploration does not necessarily lead to
more scenarios to be solved exactly. For example, in C1, even though more nodes are explored,
much fewer subproblems are solved when p = 5 (92,314 TSPs) compared to p = 1 (196,082 TSPs).
In such cases, solution times do not necessarily increase in p.
7.2.
Location of the incentivized customers
Figure 3 indicates where the incentivized customers are located in their distance to the nearest
pickup point.
The intuition is that providing incentives to the most remote customers would bring the highest
beneﬁts. Yet, we observe the opposite: customers who live nearby the pickup points consistently
receive incentives, while those who live farther away receive incentives only under certain parameter

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
28
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
settings. For example, Figure 3 shows that customers closest to the pickup points (light grey bar)
receive a signiﬁcant percentage of the incentive oﬀers in all parameter settings. In C1, C2, and C5,
more than 70% of the incentive oﬀers go to these customers. Only in C3 and C4 do customers who
live farther away start receiving more incentive oﬀers.





 




 

  
   
  
   
  
  
Figure 3
The average number of incentive oﬀers depending on customers’ location (instances of Set A with
n = 18, and p = 3). The average number of customers located within the distance of 0 −4, 4 −8, and
> 8 to the nearest pickup point is 6.6, 6.1, and 5.3, respectively (distances are in thousands of units).
The reasoning is as follows. Remote customers require higher incentives to switch to pickup
point delivery due to longer travel distances, as discussed in Section 5. In addition, it is uncertain
whether the customers will accept the oﬀer (due to ∆). Hence, if ∆is small, it is risky to oﬀer
remote customers incentives because it is highly likely that there is at least another customer in
the vicinity who would request home delivery, forcing the vehicle to visit this remote area anyway.
As a result, there would be minimal routing savings with a big incentive cost incurred, leading to
a higher fulﬁllment cost. However, this risk is lower with customers who are near the pickup points
since smaller incentive costs are incurred.
Consequently, oﬀering incentives to remote customers is worth it only when it is almost certain
that they will accept the oﬀer (incentive eﬀectiveness ∆is high) or when the oﬀer amounts are
rather small to start with (u is small). The former eﬀect becomes clear by comparing the instances
of C1, C2, and C3. When the incentive eﬀectiveness ∆is low (C2), almost none of the medium
or far-range customers receive incentive oﬀers. This number grows as ∆is higher (C1), reaching
its peak when ∆is the highest (C3), where the oﬀers are distributed almost equally across the
customers within diﬀerent distances.
The impact of incentive amounts (parameter u) is also visible by comparing the instances of C1,
C4, and C5. When the incentive amount is low (C4), the customers who receive incentive oﬀers
are more uniformly spread based on their distance. However, as the incentives get costlier (C1),

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
29
remote customers receive a signiﬁcantly lower number of oﬀers, and the number of oﬀers drops
to almost zero when the incentives are the costliest (C5). As expected, the increase in u has a
minimal eﬀect on decisions for nearby customers, as the incentive amounts required to persuade
them remain relatively small. In contrast, the decisions for farther away customers are the most
aﬀected since the routing savings may not be as signiﬁcant as for these customers, but the required
incentive value increases noticeably.
7.3.
Benchmarking against alternative policies
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the DDRS policy against some simple policies.
This allows us to quantify the beneﬁt of implementing the DDRS policy in terms of cost savings.
We then develop a benchmark policy based on the insights gained.
First, we consider the following three policies:
• Policy NOI (yNOI): the policy where no incentives are oﬀered, i.e., yNOI ≡(0)i∈N.
• Policy ALL (yALL): the policy where all customers are oﬀered an incentive, i.e., yALL ≡(1)i∈N.
• Policy RS (yRS): the deterministic policy obtained by solving a Ring Star problem (Labb´e
et al. 2004), which assumes that customers choose pickup point delivery whenever an incentive
is oﬀered, i.e., ∆i = 1, for all i ∈N.
The ﬁrst two policies are commonly applied in practice, while the third one disregards the stochas-
ticity in customer choice, but it is easy to compute.
Let y∗be the DDRS policy with expected fulﬁllment cost S(y∗), and let yz for z ∈
{NOI,ALL,RS} denote the alternative policies with expected fulﬁllment cost S(yz). The increase
in the expected fulﬁllment cost incurred by implementing an alternative policy instead of the
DDRS policy is calculated as follows:
increase in cost (%) = S(yz) −S(y∗)
S(y∗)
× 100, where z ∈{NOI, ALL, RS}.
Computing the exact value of S(y) for a policy y requires solving a subproblem for each possible
scenario realization. Since this is hard to compute, we estimate S(y) via sampling. We draw 10,000
random scenarios ω from set Ωbased on the probability Pω(y) (this sample size allowed a less than
0.1% standard deviation of the expected fulﬁllment cost for all problem sizes).
Figure 4 depicts the increase in the expected fulﬁllment cost, averaged over instances with the
same size n, if an alternative policy NOI, ALL or RS is implemented instead of the DDRS policy
(which is computed via the exact B&B algorithm for the instances in Set A and via the sampling
heuristic with M = 200 for the instances in Set B). We observe that the average cost increase due
to implementing no incentives (i.e., NOI) or oﬀering incentives to all customers (i.e., ALL) are
similar and range between 4% to 8%. Moreover, for individual instances, the cost increase of the
NOI and ALL policies can reach 16% and 22%, respectively.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
30
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Importantly, Figure 4 highlights the importance of diﬀerentiation between customers via the RS
policy: this policy performs better than the NOI and ALL policies, where no such diﬀerentiation
between the incentive decisions across diﬀerent customers exists. The average cost increase of the
deterministic RS policy compared to the DDRS policy ranges between 2% to 6%.






 
 


  " 




 




    ! 



Figure 4
Average increase in the expected fulﬁllment cost of alternative policies compared to DDRS (instances
of Set A and Set B with parameter combination C1 and p = 3).
Next, we develop a benchmark policy. Our goal is to develop an easy-to-compute policy by
using the insights we gained from the DDRS policy, thereby obtaining a policy that is computed
fast and performs better than the aforementioned simple policies. For that purpose, we take the
deterministic RS policy as a start since (i) it is computed almost instantly, (ii) performs better
than NOI or ALL policies, and (iii) gives an optimal policy for ∆= 1. Then, we improve upon
this policy by using the dominance rules and numerical insights obtained on the DDRS policy.
The benchmark policy is constructed as follows:
1. We solve the deterministic RS problem to obtain an initial incentive policy (policy RS).
2. We use Dominance Rule 2, which states that any pair of customers j,k ∈N that satisfy the
condition cjk ≤1
2 min(dj,dk) should have the same incentive decision. Suppose a customer j
satisﬁes this condition with more than one other customer, e.g., customer k and customer k′.
This implies that all customers j,k or k′ must have the same incentive decision. As a result,
we group such customers and randomly select one to determine the incentive decision (the
decision is then extended to the remaining customers in the group).
3. For each selected customer, we check whether the RS policy oﬀers an incentive. If the RS
policy does not oﬀer an incentive, then the benchmark policy also does not oﬀer an incentive.
Otherwise, the incentive decision is determined as follows:
3.1. Our numerical results show that the customers near the pickup points generally receive
more incentives. Hence, we deﬁne two distance ranges: the ﬁrst includes the closest one-
third of customers, and the second includes the remaining customers.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
31
3.2. Dominance Rule 1 relates the incentive cost of a customer (di) to the increase in the
expected routing cost if this customer was served at home instead of the pickup point. As
a proxy of the latter for each selected customer, we compute the average distance to the
⌈0.15 · n⌉nearest vertices and denote this average distance by fi.
3.3. Then, the incentives are oﬀered in line with Dominance Rule 1, albeit with a stricter
criterion for the customers who are farther away (as observed numerically):
i. Customers in the closest range receive incentives if di < fi, and
ii. Customers outside the closest range receive incentives if di < ∆fi.
The benchmark policy is computed almost instantaneously, yet it provides solutions with fulﬁll-
ment costs that are very close to that of the DDRS policy (mean improvement is always better
than the NOI, ALL, and RS policies that we evaluated earlier). Figure 5 shows that for small-size
problems, the fulﬁllment cost incurred by the benchmark policy is on average 2% above the fulﬁll-
ment cost of the optimal DDRS policy provided by the exact B&B algorithm. Most importantly,
we observe that even though our benchmark policy relies on the numerical insights of small-size
instances, which we can solve exactly, extending these observations to large-size problems also
provides good solutions. This is especially valuable since we can mainly provide heuristic solutions
to these large-size problems. Compared to the heuristic variant of the DDRS policy for larger
instances, the benchmark policy only exhibits up to 2% increase in fulﬁllment cost on average
with the advantage of its fast speed. Remarkably, in some large instances, it even outperforms the
heuristic variant of the DDRS policy. Hence, it can be used as a fast-solving approach for these
problems.




 
 






 
 






Figure 5
Increase in fulﬁllment cost of benchmark policy compared to DDRS (instances of Set A and Set B
with parameter combination C1 and p = 3). The whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum values.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
32
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
8.
Conclusions
Our study introduces a new last-mile delivery problem where the retailer aims to minimize costs
by incentivizing customers to switch to pickup point delivery. Customers have the option to accept
or decline the incentive, which leads to a stochastic decision-dependent outcome and renders the
problem computationally extremely hard. To tackle the problem, we develop an exact B&B algo-
rithm, enabling us to solve instances with up to 19 customers optimally. We also propose heuristic
variants within the proposed B&B framework to ﬁnd near-optimal solutions for instances with up
to 50 customers. Lastly, we assess the monetary beneﬁts of using such a demand steering mecha-
nism against alternative policies and develop an easy-to-compute benchmark policy based on our
theoretical results and numerical insights.
Computational experiments are performed on a set of modiﬁed instances from the literature.
The experiments demonstrate the eﬃciency of our proposed algorithm, which can provide optimal
or near-optimal solutions (with a 0.05% average optimality gap for the largest instances solved to
optimality) within 3,600 seconds of run time or less. The heuristic variants provide faster solutions
with small optimality gaps for small-size problems (0.8% for the best variant) and good solutions for
large-size instances for which the exact solutions are unknown. The experiments also demonstrate
the power of the proposed demand steering mechanism to exploit the relation between the routing
savings and the cost of incentives to reduce the fulﬁllment costs signiﬁcantly. We ﬁnd that the
policies commonly applied in practice incur, on average 4% to 8% higher fulﬁllment costs than the
policy proposed in this study. The easy-to-compute benchmark policy that we developed produces
a 2% average optimality gap for small instances and shows up to a 2% average increase in cost
compared to the solution of the heuristic variant of B&B for larger instances. Our ﬁndings provide
a starting point for discussing implementing more advanced demand steering mechanisms in their
operations.
As our work provides one of the ﬁrst papers focusing on demand steering in the multichannel
delivery context, it opens up several directions for future research. A natural extension of the
problem is considering settings with multiple capacitated vehicles and pickup points. Another
direction would be to consider settings when the requests of customers are stochastic and their
locations are unknown in advance. In line with this, we see great potential for research on the
demand steering for the dynamic arrival of customer’s requests, where incentive decisions are based
on the opportunity routing cost associated with the order (see, e.g., Klein et al. (2018)). Finally,
the proposed demand steering mechanism is based on the assumptions regarding customers’ choice
behavior and the impact of the incentives, which suggests a research direction towards a more
complete understanding of customers’ behavior and investigating more advanced discrete choice
models within the last-mile delivery context.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
33
Acknowledgments
This project received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program
under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 765395. The authors thank the associate editor and
the three referees for their very constructive feedback and valuable support.
References
Accenture, 2020 Holiday research 2020. URL https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/retail/
holiday-research-2020, accessed Apr. 2021.
Accenture, 2021 Can you deliver on the promise of online delivery? URL www.accenture.com/us-en/blogs/
business-functions-blog/can-you-deliver-on-the-promise, accessed Aug. 2021.
Adobe Analytics, 2021 2021 digital economy index. URL https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2021/03/
15/adobe-digital-economy-index-covid-19-report, accessed Mar. 2021.
Afsar HM, 2022 Traveling salesperson problem with unique pricing and stochastic thresholds. Computers &
Industrial Engineering 173:108696.
Afsar HM, Afsar S, Palacios JJ, 2021 Vehicle routing problem with zone-based pricing. Transportation research
part E: logistics and transportation review 152:102383.
Agatz N, Campbell A, Fleischmann M, Savelsbergh M, 2011 Time slot management in attended home deliv-
ery. Transportation Science 45(3):435–449.
Agatz N, Campbell AM, Fleischmann M, Van Nunen J, Savelsbergh M, 2013 Revenue management oppor-
tunities for internet retailers. Journal of Revenue and Pricing Management 12(2):128–138.
Ahmed S, 2000 Strategic planning under uncertainty: Stochastic integer programming approaches (University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign).
Applegate DL, Bixby RE, Chv´atal V, Cook W, Espinoza DG, Goycoolea M, Helsgaun K, 2015 Concorde
TSP solver. URL http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/concorde/index.html, accessed Aug. 2021.
Becerril-Arreola R, Leng M, Parlar M, 2013 Online retailers promotional pricing, free-shipping threshold,
and inventory decisions. European Journal of Operational Research 230(2):272–283.
BigCommerce,
2021
BOPIS.
https://www.bigcommerce.com/articles/offline-to-online/bopis/,
accessed Mar. 2021.
Bouaziz D, 2021 Covid-19: delivery times are getting longer. URL www.ecommercemag.fr/Thematique/
retail-1220/Breves/Covid-delais-livraison-allongent-fortement-348517.htm, accessed May
2021.
Campbell AM, Savelsbergh M, 2006 Incentive Schemes for Attended Home Delivery Services. Transportation
Science 40(3):327–341.
DHL, 2023 Notiﬁcation services. www.dhlparcel.nl/en/consumer/change-delivery, accessed Feb. 2023.
DigitalCommerce360, 2020 Delivery During a Crisis. www.sclogistics.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/
09/June_2020_IRM_Fullfillment_SaddleCreekLogistics.pdf, accessed Mar.2023.
Estrada-Moreno A, Savelsbergh M, Juan AA, Panadero J, 2019 Biased-randomized iterated local search
for a multiperiod vehicle routing problem with price discounts for delivery ﬂexibility. International
Transactions in Operational Research 26(4):1293–1314.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
34
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Flach BdC, 2010 Stochastic programming with endogenous uncertainty: an application in humanitarian logis-
tics. Ph.D. thesis, Departamento de Engenharia El´etrica, PUC–Rio.
Fleckenstein D, Klein R, Steinhardt C, 2023 Recent advances in integrating demand management and vehicle
routing: A methodological review. European Journal of Operational Research 306(2):499–518.
Gamrath G, Anderson D, Bestuzheva K, Chen WK, Eiﬂer L, Gasse M, Gemander P, Gleixner A, Gottwald
L, Halbig K, Hendel G, Hojny C, Koch T, Le Bodic P, Maher S, Matter F, Miltenberger M, M¨uhmer
E, M¨uller B, Pfetsch M, Schl¨osser F, Serrano F, Shinano Y, Tawﬁk C, Vigerske S, Wegscheider F,
Weninger D, Witzig J, 2020 The SCIP Optimization Suite 7.0. ZIB-Report (Zuse Institut Berlin).
Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2021 Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual. URL https://www.gurobi.com.
Gutin G, Punnen AP, 2006 The traveling salesman problem and its variations, volume 12 (Springer Science
& Business Media).
Haase K, 2009 Discrete location planning. Working paper 1832-570X.
Haus UU, Michini C, Laumanns M, 2017 Scenario aggregation using binary decision diagrams for stochastic
programs with endogenous uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.04055 .
Hellemo L, Barton PI, Tomasgard A, 2018 Decision-dependent probabilities in stochastic programs with
recourse. Computational Management Science 15(3):369–395.
Hood N, Urquhart R, Newing A, Heppenstall A, 2020 Sociodemographic and spatial disaggregation of e-
commerce channel use in the grocery market in Great Britain. Journal of Retailing and Consumer
Services 55:102076.
Institute
Baymard,
2020
Cart
Abandonment
Rate
Statistics.
URL
www.baymard.com/lists/
cart-abandonment-rate, accessed May 2021.
Jaillet P, 1988 A priori solution of a traveling salesman problem in which a random subset of the customers
are visited. Operations research 36(6):929–936.
Jungwirth A, Desaulniers G, Frey M, Kolisch R, 2022 Exact branch-price-and-cut for a hospital therapist
scheduling problem with ﬂexible service locations and time-dependent location capacity. INFORMS Jour-
nal on Computing 34(2):1157–1175.
Klein R, Koch S, Steinhardt C, Strauss AK, 2020 A review of revenue management: Recent generalizations
and advances in industry applications. European Journal of Operational Research 284(2):397–412.
Klein R, Mackert J, Neugebauer M, Steinhardt C, 2018 A model-based approximation of opportunity cost for
dynamic pricing in attended home delivery. OR Spectrum 40(4):969–996.
Klein R, Neugebauer M, Ratkovitch D, Steinhardt C, 2019 Diﬀerentiated time slot pricing under routing
considerations in attended home delivery. Transportation Science 53(1):236–255.
Labb´e M, Laporte G, Mart´ın IR, Gonz´alez JJS, 2004 The ring star problem: Polyhedral analysis and exact
algorithm. Networks: An International Journal 43(3):177–189.
Laumanns M, Prestwich S, Kawas B, 2014 Distribution shaping and scenario bundling for stochastic programs
with endogenous uncertainty (Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin).
Lemke J, Iwan S, Korczak J, 2016 Usability of the parcel lockers from the customer perspective–the research
in polish cities. Transportation Research Procedia 16:272–287.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
35
Lewis M, Singh V, Fay S, 2006 An empirical study of the impact of nonlinear shipping and handling fees on
purchase incidence and expenditure decisions. Marketing Science 25(1):51–64.
McKinsey&Company, 2016 Parcel delivery: The future of last mile. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/
mckinsey/industries/travel%20logistics%20and%20infrastructure/our%20insights/how%
20customer%20demands%20are%20reshaping%20last%20mile%20delivery/parcel_delivery_the_
future_of_last_mile.pdf, accessed Mar. 2021.
Milioti C, Pramatari K, Kelepouri I, 2020 Modelling consumers acceptance for the click and collect service.
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 56:102149.
Noyan N, Rudolf G, Lejeune M, 2022 Distributionally robust optimization under a decision-dependent ambi-
guity set with applications to machine scheduling and humanitarian logistics. INFORMS Journal on
Computing 34(2):729–751.
Papadimitriou CH, Steiglitz K, 1998 Combinatorial optimization: algorithms and complexity (Courier Cor-
poration).
Peeta S, Salman FS, Gunnec D, Viswanath K, 2010 Pre-disaster investment decisions for strengthening a
highway network. Computers & Operations Research 37(10):1708–1719.
PostNL, 2023 PostNL Notiﬁcation services. URL https://www.postnl.nl/zakelijke-oplossingen/
pakket-versturen/verzendopties/notificatie-service/, accessed Mar. 2023.
Retail Customer Experience, 2019 Click and collect concept. URL www.retailcustomerexperience.com/
blogs/a-deep-dive-into-the-click-and-collect-concept/, accessed Aug. 2021.
RetailWire, 2016 Will drop-oﬀpoints boost online sales?
URL www.retailwire.com/discussion/
will-drop-off-points-boost-online-sales/, accessed Aug. 2021.
Schichl H, Sellmann M, 2015 Predisaster preparation of transportation networks. Twenty-Ninth AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Snoeck A, Merchan D, Winkenbach M, 2020 Revenue management in last-mile delivery: state-of-the-art and
future research directions. Transportation Research Procedia 46:109–116.
Ulmer MW, 2020 Dynamic pricing and routing for same-day delivery. Transportation Science 54(4):1016–
1033.
UPS, 2018 UPS Pulse of the Online Shopper 2018. URL www.ups.com/assets/resources/media/
knowledge-center/ups-pulse-of-the-online-shopper.PDF, accessed Apr. 2021.
Vogt L, Poojari CA, Beasley JE, 2007 A tabu search algorithm for the single vehicle routing allocation
problem. Journal of the Operational Research Society 58(4):467–480.
Yang X, Strauss AK, Currie CSM, Eglese R, 2016 Choice-Based Demand Management and Vehicle Routing
in E-Fulﬁllment. Transportation Science 50(2):473–488.
Yildiz B, Savelsbergh M, 2020 Pricing for delivery time ﬂexibility. Transportation Research Part B: Method-
ological 133:230–256.
Zhou L, Baldacci R, Vigo D, Wang X, 2018 A Multi-Depot Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem with
Delivery Options Arising in the Last Mile Distribution. European Journal of Operational Research
265(2):765–778.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
36
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Appendix
A.
Derivation of Inequality (8)
In the following, we ﬁrst recall Inequalities (6), (7), and (8), and notation used. Recall that nodes L0 and
L1 denote the child nodes obtained from tree node L by branching on customer k ∈N, where L0 represents
the node where customer k does not receive an incentive and L1 the node where customer k is incentivized.
Node L1 is dominated by L0 if Inequality (6) holds:
min
y∈D(L1)
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Sω(y) ≥
min
y∈D(L0)
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y)Sω(y).
(6)
Let y1 ∈arg miny∈D(L1)
P
ω∈ΩPω(y)Sω(y) be a policy that minimizes the left-hand-side of the Inequality (6).
To prove the dominance of node L0, it suﬃces to show that there exists at least one policy ˜y ∈D(L0) for
which Inequality (7) holds:
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(y1)Sω(y1) ≥
X
ω∈Ω
Pω(˜y)Sω(˜y).
(7)
In the following, we prove the existence of such policy ˜y ∈D(L0) if Inequality (8) holds:
dk ≥Fk(y1), where Fk(y1) ≡
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i )Cω −
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i )Cω.
(8)
Proof. To prove the dominance of L0, it suﬃces to show that there exists at least one policy ˜y ∈D(L0) for
which Inequality (7) holds. Consider the policy ˜y ∈D(L0), with ˜yi = y1
i for all i ∈N \ k, and ˜yk = 0. Then,
Inequality (7) is equivalent to:
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Pω(y1)Sω(y1) +
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Pω(y1)Sω(y1) ≥
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Pω(˜y)Sω(˜y) +
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Pω(˜y)Sω(˜y).
(A.1)
Using the deﬁnitions of Sω(y), Pω(y), Dω(y) and Table 1 from Section 3, we have for policies y1 and ˜y:
Pω(y1)Sω(y1) =





(1 −∆k) · Q
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · (P
i∈N\k wiy1
i di + Cω)
ω ∈Ω,ωk = 0
∆k · Q
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · (P
i∈N\k wiy1
i di + dk + Cω)
ω ∈Ω,ωk = 1
(A.2)
Pω(˜y)Sω(˜y) =



Q
i∈N\k
Pωi(˜yi) · (P
i∈N\k wi˜yidi + Cω)
ω ∈Ω,ωk = 0
0
ω ∈Ω,ωk = 1.
(A.3)
Substituting Equations (A.3) and (A.2) into Inequality (A.1) yields:
(1 −∆k) ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) ·
X
i∈N\k
wiy1
i di + (1 −∆k) ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · Cω+
(A.4)
∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) ·
X
i∈N\k
wiy1
i di + ∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · (dk + Cω) ≥
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(˜yi) ·
X
i∈N\k
wi˜yidi +
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(˜yi) · Cω.

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
37
By deﬁnition of policies ˜y and y1, it holds that ˜yk = 0, y1
k = 1, and for all i ∈N \ k we have ˜yi = y1
i , which
implies Pωi(y1
i ) = Pωi(˜yi). Thus, (A.4) can be simpliﬁed as:
−∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) ·
X
i∈N\k
wiy1
i di −∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
 Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · Cω

+
(A.5)
∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) ·
X
i∈N\k
wiy1
i di + ∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
 Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · Cω

+ dk∆k ·
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) ≥0.
We observe that the expression
Q
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · P
i∈N\k wiy1
i di does not depend on ωk. Consequently, the ﬁrst
and the third terms in (A.5) are identical and can be eliminated. Moreover, as the probability of all realiza-
tions of the ﬁnal delivery locations for customers i ∈N \k add up to 1, it follows that P
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Q
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) = 1
in the last term of (A.5). As a result, we obtain from (A.5):
dk ≥
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=0
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · Cω −
X
ω∈Ω:
ωk=1
Y
i∈N\k
Pωi(y1
i ) · Cω,
which is equivalent to Inequality (8). Hence, we have proven that if Inequality (8) holds, then there exists
at least one policy ˜y ∈D(L0) (i.e., with ˜yi = y1
i for all i ∈N \ k, and ˜yk = 0), which satisﬁes Inequality (7),
implying that node L0 dominates node L1.
□
B.
Cumulative probability of scenarios in set Bi(k) given a policy y
In this appendix, we derive a closed-form expression for the cumulative probability of scenarios in set Bi(k)
given a policy y:
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′).
(B.1)
Recall, that we consider a customer k, and a set of all vertices excluding this customer, V \ k, ordered
such that a vertex i precedes a vertex j (denoted i ≺j) if cki < ckj (if cki = ckj, then lexicographic order is
followed). For each pickup point t ∈P, N(t) denotes the set of customers whose nearest pickup point is t.
For a given vertex i ∈V \{k} set Bi(k) = {ω¯k ∈{0,1}n−1 : i ∈Vω¯k}\∪j≺iBj(k) includes all vectors ω¯k whose
vertex set Vω¯k includes vertex i but not vertices ∀j ≺i.
To compute the probability given in expression (B.1), we consider 4 collectively exhaustive and mutually
exclusive cases with respect to the type of vertex i ∈V and its position relative to other vertices:
1. The depot precedes vertex i (i.e., 0 ≺i) or there exists a pickup point t ∈P and a customer j ∈N(t),
such that t ≺i and j ≺i.
If the depot vertex precedes vertex i, then the set Bi(k) is empty, as no scenarios exist where vertex
i is visited but the depot is not. Similarly, if the distance from customer k to a pickup point t ∈P
and a customer j ∈N(t) is less than that to vertex i, then the set Bi(k) is also empty. This is because
customer j needs to be served either at home or at the nearest pickup point; hence, no scenarios exist
where vertex i is visited but one of the vertices j or t is not. Consequently, we trivially derive:
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) = 0.
(B.2)

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
38
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
2. Vertex i is either a depot or a customer, and the conditions of Case 1 are not satisﬁed (depot vertex
does not precede vertex i, and there is no pickup point t ∈P and a customer j ∈N(t) such that t ≺i
and j ≺i).
Given that customer choices are independent, the events of visiting each customer are also independent.
Similarly, the event of visiting each pickup point is independent of the event of visiting other pickup
points. Moreover, by the criteria of Case 2 there is no pickup point t ∈P and a customer j ∈N(t) such
that both of them precede vertex i (i.e., t ≺i and j ≺i). Therefore the event of visiting any pickup point
t ≺i preceding vertex i depends on the choice of customers j ∈N(t) none of whom precedes vertex i.
As a result, the probability given in Equation (B.1) is deﬁned by independent events to not visit the
vertices preceding vertex i and the event of visiting vertex i.
Hence, for the situation when i is a depot vertex, the expression given in Equation (B.1) is equal to the
probability to visit the depot (equal to 1, as the depot is always visited), multiplied by the probability
that customers preceding vertex i do not require visit (equal to P1(yj) for each customer j ∈N, j ≺i),
and multiplied by the probability that pickup points preceding vertex i do not require visit (equal to
Q
j∈N(t) P0(yj) for each pickup point t ≺i, as in these scenarios all customers for whom pickup point t
is the closest must opt for home delivery):
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) = 1 ·
Y
j∈N
j≺i
P1(yj)
Y
t∈P
t≺i
Y
j∈N(t)
P0(yj).
(B.3)
We derive a similar expression for the case when vertex i is a customer, but in this case the probability
to visit vertex i is P0(yi):
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) = P0(yi) ·
Y
j∈N
j≺i
P1(yj)
Y
t∈P
t≺i
Y
j∈N(t)
P0(yj).
(B.4)
3. Vertex i is a pickup point and there exists a customer j ∈N(i) preceding this pickup point (j ≺i), and
the conditions of the Case 1 are not satisﬁed (depot vertex does not precede vertex i, and there is no
pickup point t ∈P and a customer j ∈N(t) such that t ≺i and j ≺i).
As there exists a customer j ∈N(i) preceding pickup point i (j ≺i), by deﬁnition of set Bi(k), customer
j must be served at the pickup point i, which imposes the condition that pickup point i must be visited
(i.e., the probability to visit this pickup point is 1 in these scenarios). Thus, the expression given in
Equation (B.1) is equal to the probability to visit the pickup point i (equal to 1, as this pickup point
must be visited in these scenarios), multiplied by the probability that customers preceding vertex i do
not require visit (equal to P1(yj)), and multiplied by the probability that other pickup points preceding
vertex i do not require visit (equal to Q
j∈N(t) P0(yj) for each pickup point t ≺i):
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) = 1 ·
Y
j∈N
j≺i
P1(yj)
Y
t∈P\{i}
t≺i
Y
j∈N(t)
P0(yj).
(B.5)
4. Vertex i is a pickup point and there is no customer j ∈N(i) satisfying j ≺i, and the conditions of the
Case 1 are not satisﬁed (depot vertex does not precede vertex i, and there is no pickup point t ∈P

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
39
and a customer j ∈N(t) such that t ≺i and j ≺i).
In this case, the probability that pickup point i is visited depends only on the choice of customers
j ∈N(i) who are not preceding vertex i, and equals to 1 −Q
j∈N(i) P0(yj). Similarly to the previous
case, we obtain:
X
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Y
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) = (1 −
Y
j∈N(i)
P0(yj)) ·
Y
j∈N
j≺i
P1(yj)
Y
t∈P\{i}
t≺i
Y
j∈N(t)
P0(yj).
(B.6)
Equations
(B.2)–(B.6)
provide
the
closed-form
expression
for
the
cumulative
probability
P
ω¯k∈Bi(k)
Q
i′∈N\k
Pω¯k
i′(yi′) of scenarios in set Bi(k) given a policy y, for all potential cases.
C.
Proof for Dominance Rule 2
In the following, we present the proof for Dominance Rule 2, which is restated below for convenience:
Dominance Rule 2 Let two customers j,k ∈N be located within a distance cjk ≤1
2 min(dj,dk). Then, any
node that oﬀers an incentive to exactly one of these customers is dominated by a node that oﬀers an incentive
to neither of these customers.
Proof. Consider a node L such that (i) the incentive decisions have been made for all customers except for
customer k and (ii) no incentive is oﬀered to customer j, i.e., lj = 0. By branching on customer k, two child
nodes can be obtained from node L. As the child nodes are complete policies, they are leaf nodes, hence,
the best policy that can be obtained from each node is itself. Let y1 is the leaf node where customer k is
oﬀered an incentive. Then, to prove that y1 is dominated by the child node which does not oﬀer an incentive
to customer k, it is suﬃcient to have (by Condition (8) and Equation (11)):
dk ≥Fk(y1), where Fk(y1) =
X
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1
Y
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (y1
i )(C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1)).
(C.1)
Since y1
j = 0, customer j is certainly visited at home; hence, Inequality (C.1) is equivalent to:
dk ≥
X
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1
ω¯k
j =0
Y
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (y1
i )(C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1)).
(C.2)
For any ω¯k where customer j is visited at home, it holds that C(ω¯k,0) −C(ω¯k,1) ≤2cjk. Further, as the
probability of all realizations of the ﬁnal delivery locations for customers i ∈N \ k add up to 1, it follows
that P
ω¯k∈{0,1}n−1:
ω¯k
j =0
Q
i∈N\k
Pω¯k
i (y1
i ) = 1. As a result, the right hand side of (C.2) has an upper bound of 2cjk.
Therefore, to prove that y1 is dominated, it is suﬃcient to have:
dk ≥2cjk.
(C.3)
That is, if Condition (C.3) holds, the policy that oﬀers an incentive to customer k but not to customer j
is dominated by the policy which oﬀers neither of these customers an incentive. By symmetry, we can prove
that the policy that oﬀers an incentive to customer j but not to customer k is dominated by the policy which
oﬀers neither of the customers an incentive if:
dj ≥2cjk.
(C.4)

Galiullina, Mutlu, Kinable, Van Woensel: Demand steering in a last-mile delivery problem
40
Article submitted to Transportation Science; manuscript no. TS-2023-0287.R1
Conditions (C.3) and (C.4) together imply that any node that oﬀers an incentive to exactly one of the
customers k or j is dominated by a node that oﬀers an incentive to neither of these customers if:
min(dj,dk) ≥2cjk.
(C.5)
This completes the proof.
□
D.
Algorithm for calculating the bundle probability
In the following algorithm, we denote the set of all h-size subsets of a given set of pickup points ˜P with
{A ⊆˜P : |A| = h}. For each pickup point t ∈P, N(t) denotes the set of customers whose nearest pickup
point is t. A pseudocode of the recursive algorithm for computing bundle probability
P
ω∈B( ˜
P)
miny∈D(L) Pω(y)
is given in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Bundle probability
Input: Subset of pickup points ˜P, node L = (li)i∈N
Output: bundle probability
P
ω∈B( ˜
P)
miny∈D(L) Pω(y)
1 Function Probability( ˜P,L)
2
π ←1 · Q
t∈P\ ˜
P
Q
i∈N(t): li̸=0(1 −∆i)
3
for h ←| ˜P| −1 to 0 do
4
for P′ ∈{A ⊆˜P : |A| = h} do
5
π ←π−Probability(P′,L)
6
return π
7 return π =Probability( ˜P,L)
As the base case, the algorithm computes the cumulative probability of scenarios, in which only pickup
points from a subset of ˜P are visited. This probability equals the probability that home delivery is selected
by all customers i ∈N for whom the non-visited pickup points t ∈P \ ˜P are the closest, while the choice of
other customers is not restricted:
1·
Y
t∈P\ ˜
P
min
y∈D(L)
Y
i∈N(t)
P0(yi) = 1·
Y
t∈P\ ˜
P
Y
i∈N(t)
li=0,1
P0(yi = li)
Y
i∈N(t)
li=#
min
yi∈{0,1}P0(yi) = 1·
Y
t∈P\ ˜
P
Y
i∈N(t):li̸=0
(1−∆i), (D.1)
where minyi∈{0,1} P0(yi) is obtained from Table 1 in Section 3.2.
Equation (D.1) includes the probabilities of scenarios, where not all pickup points of set ˜P are visited.
To subtract their probability, in the next step we calculate the bundle probability for all subsets P′ ⊂˜P.
Calculating the probability of the bundle π(P′,L) is the base case of the algorithm.